
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal no: AA/10682/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31.10.2016                        |On 10.11.2016                        |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                  Amir YARI
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr TDH Hodson (working under the supervision of
Elder Rahimi)
For the respondent:    Mr Keith Norton

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Isobel Wylie), sitting at Hatton Cross on  20  November
    2015, to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen of Iran,  born
    8 January 1991. The appeal was allowed on 15  February  2016  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hugo Storey,  to  the  extent  which  appears  from  his
    decision, set out below: Mr Hodson appeared for  the  appellant  before
    Judge Storey, as  before  me;  but  before  Judge  Wylie  he  had  been
    represented by different counsel, Mr Bonavero.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

    "3.  The two main grounds of appeal advanced by the SSHD were that  the
         FtT judge had erred in failing to give  adequate  reasons  for  her
         finding that the claimant had left  Iran  illegally  and  had  also
         erred in assessing risk to  him  arising  from  his  Facebook  post
         without regard to her earlier finding that  the  claimant  had  not
         given a credible account of being a political agitator.

      4. I consider the SSHD's first ground is made out. The principal basis
         of the claimant's claim for asylum was that he had become  involved
         in demonstrations in support of the opposition  Green  Movement  in
         2009 and 2011 and in October 2013 he  had  been  apprehended  along
         with two  fellow  students  for  posting  his  views  on  an  anti-
         government weblog. He had been tortured and after release  summoned
         to appear before the revolutionary court who  gave  him  a  3  year
         suspended sentence.  In  around  September  2014,  when  he  opened
         another  anti-government  weblog  and  after  attending  an   anti-
         government event at a university  where  he  was  recognised  by  a
         Basiji member, the security forces visited his family  home  on  11
         December 2014 with a search warrant and took away  his  laptop  and
         then served a summons on him on 16  December  2014.  He  then  fled
         Iran. In the UK he had started a weblog in May 2015, had attended a
         demonstration in June 2015 and had posted certain comments  on  his
         Facebook page.

      5. The judge accepted that the claimant was  likely  to  have  been  a
         supporter of the Green Movement in  2009  and  2011  but  otherwise
         comprehensively disbelieved his account of what had happened to him
         in Iran. The judge also found that there was nothing concerning the
         weblog the claimant said he opened in September  2014  to  identify
         him as its author and, as regards other posts on a  website  called
         "Stop executions in Iran" and  on  his  Facebook  page,  the  judge
         considered that there was no evidence the Iranian authorities would
         be able to identify them as posts by the claimant.

      6. The reason why the judge allowed the appeal nonetheless was because
         she considered if he was interrogated on return  to  Iran  and  was
         required to provide his Facebook password,  the  authorities  would
         see the above noted posts and a photograph of the claimant  at  the
         London demonstration in opposition to the regime on  16  June  2015
         and as a result he would face a real risk of persecution.  In  this
         regard the judge  relied  on  the  assessment  made  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in the reported case of AB and Others (Internet  activity-
         state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 467. That assessment  at  [457]
         and  [467]  was  that  if  "any  internet  activity  is  less  than
         flattering of the government" it is likely  to  lead  at  the  very
         least to a real  risk  of  persecution.  Before  setting  out  this
         assessment  the  judge  noted   in   [40]   that   the   claimant's
         representative, Mr Bonavero, had submitted that the claimant's  on-
         line activities would pose a specific risk. The  judge  noted  that
         part of this submission was the following proposition: "As he  left
         Iran illegally and would not be returning on an ordinary  passport,
         he would be interrogated about his internet  activity.  This  would
         put him at a real risk of persecution".

      7. In the SSHD's reasons for refusal letter reliance had been  placed,
         inter alia, on the Tribunal country guidance case of  SB  (risk  on
         return-illegal exit) Iran CG (2009) UKAIT  00053  which  held  that
         illegal exit was not in itself sufficient to create a real risk  of
         persecution but that  it  was  a  factor  that  would  add  to  the
         difficulties an applicant would face  if  they  had  attracted  the
         adverse attention of the authorities for  another  reason.  It  was
         noted that the SSHD's assessment of the situation in November  2014
         remained that it was unlikely that the  Iranian  authorities  would
         interrogate ordinary returnees except in isolated cases.

      8. When one peruses the judge's determination it is clear  he  assumed
         the claimant would be interrogated on return  and  the  only  basis
         identified for considering that would be the case was that  he  was
         someone who had exited Iran illegally and who  would  be  returning
         without a passport - i.e. the proposition advanced by Mr  Bonavero.
         Yet no reason whatsoever was given by  the  judge  for  making  the
         assumption that  the  claimant  had  left  Iran  illegally  and  no
         examination made of whether he would  in  fact  be  unable  in  the
         ordinary course of events to  obtain  an  Iranian  passport  before
         returning to Iran. It has to  be  said  that  the  SSHD's  decision
         letters were  somewhat  confused  about  this  topic,  but  on  the
         claimant's own account, he had been issued in Teheran with a  valid
         Iranian passport which was still valid at the date of  the  hearing
         before the judge and he had obtained an exit visa  before  he  left
         Iran (q114) although (as the SSHD accepted at para 25) he  had  not
         used this to enter the UK. It was also known that in June  2014  he
         had made an application in Turkey for a student visa to come to the
         UK which was refused and a further  application  on  17  June  2014
         which he withdrew; these actions indicated that he had his  Iranian
         passport with or available to him at this  stage.  Given  that  the
         judge had comprehensively disbelieved the claimant's account of his
         past experiences in Iran, there was at the very least a need for  a
         reasoned assessment of whether or not the claimant  would  in  fact
         have  a  valid  Iranian  passport  available  to  him  if  he  took
         reasonable steps to obtain one.

      9. Mr Hodson sought to argue that  the  judge's  assumption  that  the
         claimant had exited illegally did not matter because  in any event,
         the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AB at [457] and [467] did not
         consider that those interrogated on return  would  be  confined  to
         those who had exited illegally.  However, that  overlooks  that  AB
         was not country guidance and its  headnote  expressly  acknowledged
         that the evidence was uncertain in relation to risks  arising  from
         internet activities. That headnote stated:

          i) "The material put before  the  tribunal  did  not  disclose  a
             sufficient  evidential  basis  for  giving  country  or  other
             guidance upon what, reliably, can be expected in terms of  the
             reception in Iran for those returning otherwise  than  with  a
             "regular" passport in relation to whom interest may be excited
             from the  authorities  into  internet  activity  as  might  be
             revealed by an examination of blogging activity or a  Facebook
             account. However, this determination is reported so  that  the
             evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal is available in  the
             public domain."

     10. That headnote makes clear that AB was a relevant source of evidence
         on  issues  relating  to  internet  activity,  but  insofar  as  it
         constituted evidence, it remained the task  of  any  judge  dealing
         with any particular case subsequently  to  evaluate  that  evidence
         alongside any further evidence presented by the  parties.  Further,
         for reason given earlier, it is not apparent why the judge, if  she
         regarded AB as  governing the claimant's case, did not explain  why
         she did not consider the claimant to  come  within  [470]  of  that
         decision which states that for those relying on sur place  internet
         activity there would be a "small number  of  people  who  would  be
         returning on an ordinary passport having left Iran  lawfully  ...";
         in respect of them the Tribunal said "we do not think  there  would
         any risk to them at all".

     11. By contrast, the case of SB was country guidance  which  the  judge
         was obliged to apply unless he considered there was significant new
         evidence casting a different light. The judge  failed  to  identify
         any such evidence.

     12. In light of my conclusion that  the  SSHD  succeeds  on  her  first
         ground, it is unnecessary to address her second ground

     13. For the above reasons I conclude  that  the  FtT  judge  materially
         erred in law and the nature of  her  error  necessitates  that  her
         decision is set aside.

     14. Mr Hodson has argued by reference to  the  late-submitted  Rule  24
         notice and a subsection headed "Cross Appeal", that if  I  were  to
         find a material error of law, I should not  seek  to  preserve  any
         findings made by the FtT judge. However,  as  recorded  earlier,  I
         have not  admitted  that  application.  In  any  event,  I  am  not
         persuaded that that notice identifies any  errors  in  the  judge's
         adverse findings of fact regarding the claimant's past  experiences
         in Iran.

     15. I do accept, however, that the judge's findings on  the  claimant's
         sur place activities lack clarity due in part to  her  reliance  on
         the uncertain findings made by the Tribunal in AB.  Hence  I  would
         accept that no findings of the judge should be preserved in respect
         of the claimant's sur place activities, which include of course his
         claims concerning internet activity since arrival  in  the  UK  and
         attendance at a demonstration,

     16. It remains that the adverse findings regarding the claimant's  past
         experience in Iran are to be preserved. The only  positive  finding
         the  claimant  is  entitled  to  invoke  in  regard  to  his   past
         experiences in Iran is that the judge did accept that he had been a
         supporter of the Green Movement in 2009 and 2011."



FRESH HEARING

 2. It follows that the hearing before me was only  about  the  appellant's
    claim on the basis of his sur place activities in this  country.  These
    involved posting  on  his  blog,  and  on  his  Facebook  account,  and
    attending demonstrations, mainly outside the Iranian Embassy: the  main
    subject of all three activities was  a  campaign  against  the  Iranian
    authorities' use of capital, and also corporal  punishment,  with  some
    references to political prisoners who had not so far suffered either of
    these fates.

 3. I should make it clear at the outset that I  am  not  concerned,  as  a
    matter of law, with the good faith or otherwise in which the  appellant
    pursued these activities: it is clear from Danian [1999] EWCA Civ  3000
    that the only relevant question is whether they expose him, in whatever
    spirit they were undertaken, to a real risk of  Convention  persecution
    on return to Iran. However, it may be relevant, as a matter of fact, to
    consider the light in which the appellant's activities would be  likely
    to be seen by the Iranian authorities themselves.

 4. History in Iran   I start from the point where Judge  Storey  left  the
    case, by upholding Judge Wylie's negative findings on  the  appellant's
    history in Iran. While, in common with many others,  he  had  supported
    the Green Movement in 2009 and 2011, he had not, as  he  claimed,  been
    arrested, detained and ill-treated in 2013 as a result of  distributing
    leaflets with fellow-students; nor was he given what he described as  a
    suspended sentence by the Revolutionary Court in April 2014  for  that,
    nor suspended by his university; nor, consequently, was his family home
    raided by the basij as a result of an unauthorized return to the campus
    in December that year, nor a summons served or his computer  seized  on
    any such occasion.

 5. In the absence of any other accepted facts in the appellant's  history,
    it must follow that, when he left Iran in January 2015, he did so as  a
    matter of choice: he had of course left the country  once  already,  in
    June 2014, when he had made applications for  a  student  visa  at  the
    British Consulate-General in Istanbul on his own Iranian passport.  The
    appellant says in his original statement [A7, 20  November  2015]  that
    this had been confiscated when he had to go to the intelligence service
    office in Isfahan in August or September  2014.  However,  while  Judge
    Wylie made no specific finding of fact about that, it  is  quite  clear
    from her rejection of the rest of  the  appellant's  history  in  Iran,
    apart from taking part in the Green demonstrations in  2009  and  2011,
    that she did not accept this either.

 6. Mr Hodson suggested on the appellant's behalf that he would have had to
    give up that passport to the agent he used to get him into this country
    by some other means. If that was so, then again  it  was  a  matter  of
    choice; but that account did not appear  in  the  appellant's  evidence
    before Judge Wylie, or at the point  in  his  original  statement  [A8]
    where he dealt with his departure. That passport was valid  till  2018,
    and there is nothing in  the  judge's  findings  to  suggest  that  the
    Iranian authorities had reason to take any particular interest in  this
    appellant up to the time he left the country in early  2015.  If  there
    were any real risk on return for him now, then it could only  be  based
    on the view the authorities would be likely to take of  his  activities
    in this country, whether known to them already, or likely to  be  found
    out if he were sent back.

 7. Activities in United Kingdom    Judge Wylie  recorded  the  appellant's
    evidence about his Internet postings in this country at  paragraph  41:
    in January and March 2015 he had posted items calling for  the  release
    of political prisoners, the end of 'dictatorship' and the '198 steps to
    non-violent revolution'. In May, August and September last year he  had
    posted items on his blog 'Stop execution in Iran', calling for  an  end
    to the use of capital punishment. It is not disputed that the appellant
    has gone on taking part in such activities, which  are  in  the  public
    domain, at least for anyone in possession of his Facebook password,  so
    far as his  postings  on  that  are  concerned.  In  his  supplementary
    statement [23 September 2016, bundle C, F1-5], he says  he  attended  a
    'Green Wave' demonstration, commemorating the events  of  2009,  on  16
    June 2015, and another, calling for an end to  the  use  of  the  death
    penalty, and for justice to  political  prisoners,  on  1  April  2016,
    opposite the Iranian Embassy. Photographs  showing  him  at  the  April
    demonstration (by the state of the leaves on the trees) were  produced,
    and I shall return to them.

 8. The appellant goes  on  to  say  that,  despite  Judge  Storey's  clear
    indication (see his paragraph 8 above)  that  the  appellant  could  be
    expected to take reasonable steps to replace his Iranian  passport,  if
    he were no longer in possession of it,  he  is  not  prepared  even  to
    approach the Iranian Embassy in order to do so, owing to the nature  of
    his activities in this country. Even if  he  were,  he  would  need  to
    produce the old one,  which  he  cannot  do,  or  the  other  documents
    required, such as his Iranian ID card. The  result  would  be  that  he
    would have to be removed, if it came to that,  on  a  temporary  travel
    document, which would show he  had  never  had  leave  to  be  in  this
    country, and lead on return to the inference that he had claimed asylum
    here, and so to his being stopped and questioned on arrival.

 9. In oral evidence, the appellant confirmed his statement,  and,  dealing
    with his activities up to that time produced full colour print-outs  of
    his postings on his blog [X1] and his Facebook page [X2], and  also  of
    photographs showing him on the 'Green Wave' demonstration [X3]. He made
    it clear that he had gone on with similar activities: X6 shows him on a
    subsequent  demonstration,  and  X7  his   campaign   against   capital
    punishment, going back to 2015. Some pages  of  this  material  contain
    text in Persian, with translations, to which I shall return.

10. The appellant was briefly cross-examined, and confirmed that  he  would
    be able to control or take down his blog and Facebook page: as  I  made
    clear, that is not something that could be expected of  him,  since  he
    has a right protected by the Convention to express political  opinions,
    apparently (see Danian) whether sincerely held and manifested or not.

11. One other witness gave evidence for the appellant: this was his  friend
    Rouhollah Ameri [statement 25 October  2016,  D/F70  -  73].  Mr  Ameri
    produced evidence that he had been recognized  as  a  refugee  in  this
    country, after claiming asylum here in February 2016, as  a  result  of
    his blogging activities in Iran being found  out  by  the  authorities.
    Since that was by way of a Home Office grant, it gives no  reasons  for
    the decision. However Mr Ameri gives details of his activities in Iran,
    and makes clear that he has gone on blogging over here.

12. Mr Ameri says he and the  appellant  met  at  a  demonstration  against
    capital punishment outside the Iranian Embassy on 1 April  2016:  after
    that, they had kept in touch by phone, and read each  other's  Facebook
    posts. He suggested that the appellant would be at real risk on  return
    as a result of his activities. He was not cross-examined.

13. Country guidance etc.  Much of this was referred to  by  Judge  Storey;
    but since his decision, there has also been SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker Iran  (CG)  [2016]  UKUT  308  (IAC):  once  again
    (following SB  in 2009) it has been declared that

         "An Iranian male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.  No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time   of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have  been  established.  In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment."

14. The question remains as to whether this appellant  would  face  a  real
    risk in the particular circumstances of his return,  if  that  were  to
    happen. The remaining relevant country guidance decision on Iran is  BA
    (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36
    (IAC), which was referred to in rather more  detail  before  me,  so  I
    shall deal with it as I go through the submissions made.

15. Finally there is AB and others (internet activity - state of  evidence)
    [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC): as Judge Storey pointed out at paragraphs 9  and
    10, its authors expressly declared it not to  be  country  guidance  at
    all, and only had it 'reported' so that the evidence reviewed could  be
    in the public domain. While I shall  deal  with  those  parts  of  that
    evidence on which I heard submissions, and am prepared to consider  the
    views expressed by the panel, I decline to consider them  as  amounting
    to general guidance, which they never intended them to be.

16. Submissions for appellant It is convenient to take the  submissions  in
    the order made: at my invitation, Mr Hodson went first, and then had an
    opportunity to reply to Mr Norton, though I shall  deal  with  all  his
    submissions together. He suggested that  the  appellant's  conduct,  in
    Iran and in this country, had been all of a piece, in that his Internet
    activities had continued what he had been doing in 2009 and 2011. There
    is however nothing in Judge Wylie's findings of fact to support this at
    all. At best the  appellant's  accepted  participation  in  mass  Green
    Movement demonstrations in those years in Iran was consistent with  his
    taking part in the very much smaller affairs shown in  the  photographs
    taken in this country in 2015 - 16; but there  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that his part in that earlier activity ever became known to the Iranian
    authorities.

17. Mr Hodson went on to refer to the  risk  likely  to  be  faced  by  the
    appellant on return, in terms of AB and others: first  there  was  this
    passage

         "455.    We do reject [counsel  for  the  respondent]'s  submission
             that a  high  degree  of  activity  is  necessary  to  attract
             persecution. It is probably the  case  that  the  more  active
             persons are the more likely they are to be persecuted but  the
             reverse just does not apply. We find that the  authorities  do
             not chase everyone who just might be an opponent but  if  that
             opponent comes to their attention for some  reason  then  that
             person might be in quite serious trouble for conduct which  to
             the  ideas  of  western  liberal  society  seems   of   little
             consequence."

    So far as I am concerned, that is no more or less than common sense.

18. The same applies to what the panel said at 460:  of  course  blogs  and
    similar electronic activities can  as  well  be  monitored  outside  as
    inside Iran. Mr Hodson's main submission on  AB  and  others,  however,
    turned on what they said about the existence  of  a  'pinch  point'  on
    return, at paragraph 457 (repeated at 467):

         "... the act of returning someone creates a "pinch point"  so  that
         returnees are brought into direct contact with the  authorities  in
         Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them. We
         think it likely that  they  will  be  asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to a real risk of persecution."

19. While I am quite prepared to accept the passage at 455 as common sense,
    and making the important point that the activities of someone  who  may
    be returned need to be seen through the eyes of the authorities  there,
    when it comes to assessing risk, in my view Mr Hodson was misusing  the
    passage at 457, for the reasons  already  given,  to  suggest  that  it
    effectively amounted to country guidance declaring that anyone found to
    have  been  involved  in  Internet  or  other  activities  'less   than
    flattering' of  the  Iranian  government  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution. Once again, it is necessary to  consider  such  activities
    through the eyes of the potential persecutors.

20.  Next Mr Hodson turned to the question  of  the  appellant's  passport,
    effectively repeating what he had said in his  supplementary  statement
    (see 8 above),  with  the  support  of  an  extract  from  the  Iranian
    government  web-site,  showing  what  documentary  evidence  would   be
    required to get a replacement. However I am not prepared (see 5 - 6 for
    my reasons) to accept on the evidence before me, in the light of  Judge
    Wylie's upheld findings of fact, that this appellant  has  ever  parted
    with the valid Iranian passport he used to travel to  Turkey  in  2014.
    Nor am I  prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant  could  reasonably
    maintain that it was too risky for him, whatever he may  have  done  in
    this country, to approach the Iranian  Embassy  for  that  purpose:  if
    necessary, he could have  done  so  in  the  first  place  through  his
    solicitors.

21. At this point Mr Hodson referred to BA  at  paragraph  40,  giving  the
    examples of two travellers who had been arrested on  arriving  in  Iran
    after the June 2009  protests,  and  questioned  about  their  Facebook
    accounts. This may be of some historical interest, but  does  not  form
    part of the country guidance in  that  decision,  as  set  out  in  the
    judicial head-note.

22. The next citation was of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker
    Iran) (CG) [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC), containing this passage at  paragraph
    15, referring to:

         "... an Amnesty International Report of February  2012,  quoting  a
         report issued by a Swiss refugee agency, quoting an  unnamed  judge
         as saying that asylum seekers are interrogated on return whether or
         not they have been political activists in Iran  or  abroad  and  if
         they have  tried  to  conduct  propaganda  against  Iran  they  are
         culpable and are detained until a judge decides the sentence."

    At to removals from an  anonymous  source,  this  is  not  a  piece  of
    evidence to which I can attach any significant weight.

23. Mr Hodson went on to refer to BA at pp 25 - 26, where the panel  listed
    under

         "(iii) Factors triggering inquiry/action on return

           . Profile - is the person  known  as  a  committed  opponent  or
             someone with a significant political  profile;  does  he  fall
             within a category  which  the  regime  regards  as  especially
             objectionable?

           . Immigration history - how did the  person  leave  the  country
             (illegally; type of visa); where  has  the  person  been  when
             abroad; is the timing and method of return more likely to lead
             to inquiry and/or being detained for more than a short  period
             and ill-treated (overstayer; forced return)?"

24. Mr Hodson's submission on this was that  this  appellant  would  be  at
    particular risk of questioning on  return  as  someone  returned  on  a
    laissez-passer, who it would be clear had never had leave to remain  in
    this country, and would be suspected to have claimed  asylum  here.  He
    suggested that the same questions would arise if the appellant  applied
    for a fresh Iranian passport.

25. At this point Mr Hodson referred to another passage from AB and others,
    repeating what had already been said at 457 and 467  about  the  'pinch
    point' :

         "470.    The main concern is the pinch point of  return.  A  person
             who was returning to Iran after a reasonably short  period  of
             time on an ordinary passport having left Iran illegally  would
             almost certainly not attract any particular attention  at  all
             and for the small number of people who would be  returning  on
             an ordinary passport having left lawfully we do not think that
             there would be any risk to them at all.

         471. However, as  might  more  frequently  be  the  case,  where  a
             person's  leave  to  remain  had  lapsed  and  who  might   be
             travelling on a special  passport,  there  would  be  enhanced
             interest. The more active they had been the  more  likely  the
             authorities' interest could lead to persecution."

26. Once again, this was  not  intended  as  country  guidance,  but  to  a
    considerable extent is common sense. What I am not prepared to  accept,
    however, is that it is open to this appellant, or anyone else,  to  put
    himself in that position by refusing, if necessary, to  apply  for  the
    Iranian passport to which he is entitled, regardless of the documentary
    evidence he might have to produce to get it. Contrary to  the  position
    with the expression of  a  political  opinion,  by  Internet  or  other
    activity, no-one has a Convention right to refuse to avail  himself  of
    his right to a national passport, unless the  act  of  doing  so  would
    expose him to a real risk of persecution.

27. Submissions for respondent      Mr Norton made a number of points  with
    which I have already dealt in reviewing the evidence and jurisprudence.
    He also made the point that the effect of the  appellant's  activities,
    with whatever motive they  may  have  been  undertaken,  needed  to  be
    assessed from the point of view of the Iranian authorities. Mr  Hodson,
    unsurprisingly, suggested that they would be  ill  received,  and  also
    made the entirely uncontroversial point that the appellant could not be
    expected to lie about them to protect himself.

CONCLUSIONS

28. What Mr Hodson did not refer me to, but I have considered, as it is  in
    the appellant's own interests, is the following passage in BA:

         "65. As regards the relevance of these factors to the instant case,
             of  especial  relevance  is  identification  risk.    We   are
             persuaded that the Iranian  authorities  attempt  to  identify
             persons participating in demonstrations  outside  the  Iranian
             Embassy in London.  The  practice  of  filming  demonstrations
             supports that.  The evidence suggests that there may well have
             been persons in the crowd to assist in the process.  There  is
             insufficient evidence to establish that the regime has  facial
             recognition technology in use in the UK, but  it  seems  clear
             that the Iranian security apparatus attempts to match names to
             faces of demonstrators from photographs. We believe  that  the
             information gathered here is available in Iran. While  it  may
             well be that an appellant's participation in demonstrations is
             opportunistic, the evidence suggests that this is  not  likely
             to be a major influence  on  the  perception  of  the  regime.
             Although, expressing dissent  itself  will  be  sufficient  to
             result in a  person  having  in  the  eyes  of  the  regime  a
             significant political profile, we consider that the nature  of
             the level of the sur place activity will clearly heighten  the
             determination of  the  Iranian  authorities  to  identify  the
             demonstrator while in Britain and to identify him  on  return.
             That, combined with the factors which  might  trigger  enquiry
             would lead to an increased likelihood of  questioning  and  of
             ill treatment on return."

29. There is clear reference at various points in the decision to  evidence
    about  filming  of  demonstrations  here,   including   some   from   a
    Metropolitan Police officer, and I am prepared to accept that  it  does
    happen, perhaps routinely. The level  of  someone's  activity  will  of
    course be relevant, as the panel go on to say.

30. On the other hand, the panel give no source, and none is  obvious,  for
    the evidence they say makes the question of whether activity was likely
    to be seen as opportunistic one not of great  concern  to  the  Iranian
    government. The passage I have just cited does not form any part of the
    country guidance set out in the judicial head-note, and on this  point,
    without any reference to the evidence said to  support  it,  I  do  not
    regard  it  as  of  particular  persuasive  value.  While  the  Iranian
    government might regard any expression of  dissent  by  their  citizens
    overseas as disloyal, in my view they need to be credited at least with
    enough common sense to take  less  seriously  activities  they  saw  as
    pursued for opportunistic reasons, rather than on principle.

31. This is not of course going against  the  principle  in  Danian  :  the
    appellant would not in any way be disqualified from getting asylum if I
    were to take the view that his activities had been  opportunistic,  and
    so it has not been relevant for me to  consider  whether  or  not  they
    actually were so. On the other hand, for reasons I have already  given,
    I do consider it relevant to decide whether they would be likely to  be
    seen  in  that  light  by  the  Iranian  authorities,  and  it  is  the
    authorities' likely view of them to which I shall now turn.

32. The appellant's blog postings all call for an end to  the  use  of  the
    death penalty in Iran: some might  be  seen  as  mocking  an  ayatollah
    figure  shown,  who  obviously  represents  the  r�gime.  His  Facebook
    postings are more various, also complaining about the use  of  torture,
    and the detention and treatment of political prisoners,  including  the
    British/Iranian charity worker Nazanin Zaghari-Radcliffe.

33. The photographs of the 1 April 2016  demonstration  show  part  of  the
    scene, with demonstrators holding a banner, which must  read  in  fully
    'DEMOCRACY - JUSTICE IN IRAN'. Judging from how much of the text can be
    seen, there can be no more than 40 - 50 people, at  the  very  outside,
    present, a far cry from the mass demonstration in Iran shown at  p  136
    of bundle A. Photographs of  a  slightly  larger  demonstration  on  26
    September 2016 show a banner with the words 'FREE  Iran',  and  smaller
    placards showing slogans such as [presumably: No to ...] ...  THEOCRACY
    - YES TO DEMOCRACY. It is accepted that the appellant  is  identifiable
    in all of these.

34. The appellant also went on  posting  on  his  blog  while  the  present
    hearing was pending: at F2 in bundle D there is a  translation  of  two
    items. The first is a comment on the 26 September demonstration, posted
    the next day. The second is headed 'The horrendous number of executions
    under the government of Hassan Rohani', and refers to the politician in
    question "... with his humanitarian promise, his smile and  his  utmost
    demagoguery ... with glamourous [sic] slogans like "I am not a colonel,
    I am a lawyer  ...".  Further  Facebook  postings  from  September  and
    October are similar to those which had gone before. I do not  think  Mr
    Ameri's evidence adds anything to the appellant's case, since it is not
    disputed that he took part in the demonstration and made the postings.

35. This appellant, on the judge's upheld findings, is, in the words of SSH
    and HR , 'An Iranian male in respect of whom no  adverse  interest  has
    previously been manifested by the Iranian State ...', and  consequently
    faces no real risk of questioning on return to  Iran,  even  if  it  is
    discovered that he left  the  country  illegally,  at  least  for  that
    reason: as I have made clear at 5, he remained in possession of his own
    passport at that time, and any irregular departure from Iran  can  only
    have been a matter of choice. That decision post-dates AB and others  ,
    which is in any case not a country guidance  decision,  and  I  do  not
    accept that there is any general risk at what is there described as the
    'pinch-point'.

36. Nor do I accept that there is any real risk, on the  country  guidance,
    of the appellant's activities, set out  at  32  -  34,  coming  to  the
    attention of the authorities on his return, unless he were to volunteer
    details of them. While he cannot be  obliged  to  lie  about  them,  if
    asked, he is equally not obliged to offer an unsolicited confession.

37. If, contrary to my view, those activities did come to  light,  then  no
    doubt they would be capable of annoying the authorities. While some  of
    the postings might be  seen  as  mocking  them,  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that any would be seen as overtly  blasphemous;  and,  if  the
    appellant's asylum claim also came to light, it could  easily  be  seen
    that his activities in this country have been contemporaneous with  its
    progress. The Iranian authorities cannot be unaware that  a  number  of
    their citizens have used evidence of such activities,  incontrovertible
    because in the public domain,  to  gain  asylum  here,  whatever  their
    actual motive: one example is of course Mr Ameri. While there would  be
    a possibility of the appellant's activities, if  they  came  to  light,
    being seen in a way which would expose  him  to  adverse  attention  on
    return, I should not regard it as amounting to a real risk.

38. For all of these  reasons,  separately  and  together,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.



Appeal
                               [pic]
                                    (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
