
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10860/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 July 2016                               |On 11 August 2016             |
|Prepared 28 July 2016                         |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     sr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on [ ]  1985  appeals  with
    permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant
    who in a determination promulgated  on  21  March  2016  dismissed  his
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  grant
    asylum.

2.   The appellant had entered Britain on 1 June 2009 as a  student  with  a
    visa valid until 31 December 2010.  His leave  was  extended  until  12
    April 2013.  A further application for leave as a student was  refused.
    The appellant was granted a right of appeal which he did not  exercise.
    He overstayed and in October 2014 was served with notice  of  liability
    to removal.  On 1 November that year he claimed asylum and  was  placed
    in the detained fast track procedure.  His application was refused  and
    he appealed.

3.   His appeal then came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Maxwell
    who in a determination promulgated  on  11  March  2015  dismissed  his
    appeal.

4.   The appellant was given permission to appeal  further  and  the  appeal
    then came before me on 27 March 2015.  I found that there  were  errors
    of law in  the  determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Maxwell.  I ordered that the appeal be removed from the fast track  and
    remitted the appeal for a hearing afresh. The appeal then  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E V Grant who heard the  appeal  on  1
    February 2016.  She dismissed the appeal and by chance the appeal  came
    before me again.  I again found that there were errors of  law  in  the
    determination of Judge Grant.  I ordered that the appeal proceed  to  a
    further hearing afresh and that it remain in the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    these circumstances the appeal came back for hearing before me.

5.   Before the hearing Mr Haywood and Mr Tarlow agreed the  facts  in  this
    case as set out in Mr  Haywood's  skeleton  argument.   These  were  as
    follows:-

         "7.  So far as relevant, and in outline:

         (a)  The appellant comes originally from  Palali  in  the  northern
             province of Sri Lanka.  His family were displaced from  Jaffna
             in 1994/5;

         (b)  The appellant's older brother  Suseelan  joined  the  LTTE  in
             approximately 2001;

         (c)  The appellant, along with others, went to Mullaitivu to assist
             in the wake of the tsunami.  While trying to return  home,  he
             was forcibly recruited by the  LTTE.   He  underwent  training
             with the LTTE, who gave him the codename 'Neelavan' [scr 1.3];

         (d)  He was detained by the army in 2007, questioned, and held  for
             3 days, and then released on payment of a bribe by his father;

         (e)  He was detained again in 2009, from home (so the detention was
             a targeted one), when he was  held  for  3  weeks,  questioned
             about his brother and connections with the LTTE,  required  to
             sign blank papers, and ill-treated before  being  released  on
             the basis of a bribe.  When  detained,  he  was  fingerprinted
             [scr. 2.13];

         (f)  The appellant's national identity card (NIC)  was  taken  from
             him when he was arrested by the army in 2009 [scr 2.6];

         (g)  The appellant initially came to the UK with tier 4 leave.   He
             arrived in  the  UK  on  28  January  2009.   That  leave  was
             subsequently extended, to 12 April 2013.

         (h)  The appellant sent money from the  UK  in  2013  to  fund  the
             'release' of  his  cousin  from  detention.   The  appellant's
             cousin  had  been  a  'high  level'  member   of   the   LTTE.
             Afterwards, the army came looking for his cousin at  the  home
             of the appellant's aunt.  They  came  across  the  appellant's
             father as a result, and  took  him  away.   They  found  money
             transfer  receipts,  and  connected  the  appellant   to   the
             'releases' and now seek the appellant [scr.4.2];

         (i)  In this country, and although  he  has  not  become  a  formal
             member  of  any  organisation,  the  appellant  has   attended
             demonstrations, including Martyr's day."

6.   These agreed facts were in line with what the  appellant  said  in  his
    witness statement  dated 26 January 2016.

7.   The reason that I had  set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Grant  was
    because I considered it necessary to have  further  and  more  detailed
    consideration of the appellant's mental  health  issues  including  his
    suicidal ideation and the difficulties which he would face on return to
    Sri Lanka - I had paid particular note to  the  medical  report  of  Dr
    Dhumad - and, as the medical evidence had indicated that it  would  not
    be either appropriate or possible for the appellant to  give  evidence,
    it was agreed by Mr Haywood and Mr Tarlow that the appellant would  not
    give evidence and that I would deal with the appeal  on  the  basis  of
    submissions made to me.

8.   It was considered  appropriate  that  Mr  Tarlow  should  set  out  his
    submissions first.   His  concise  submissions  were  that  taking  the
    appellant's claim at its highest and accepting his account of  scarring
    and the fact that he was  mentally  unwell  he  would  not,  under  the
    provisions of the country guidance case of GJ & Others (post civil war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319  (IAC),   face  persecution  on
    return as he was clearly not a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka nor
    would he be on a stop list   and in any event there were mental  health
    facilities in Sri Lanka.  Mr Tarlow pointed  out  that  in  her  report
    dated 24 July 2016 Dr Rachel Thomas had stated that the  appellant  was
    not currently on a suicide risk, although he had been in the  past  and
    that his mental health problems were less severe because  of  the  fact
    that he was living with family here. Moreover, Mr  Tarlow  pointed  out
    that on any objective  basis  treatment  would  be  available  for  the
    appellant in Sri Lanka and therefore he could be returned.

9.   In his submissions Mr Haywood, having emphasised that  it  is  accepted
    that the appellant had scarring and that the  treatment  which  he  had
    suffered in Sri Lanka had led to his mental illness, stated that it was
    not conceded that the appellant would not be  on  the  stop  list.   He
    referred to the fact that the appellant came  from  a  family  who  had
    supported the LTTE and that he had been detained on  two  occasions  by
    the army and questioned by them.  He went on to  say  that  the  second
    detention was a "targeted" detention as the appellant  had  been  taken
    from his home and that he had been  fingerprinted.   Moreover,  he  had
    signed a blank sheet of paper and it was not clear therefore what would
    have been contained therein. Also his national ID card had  been  taken
    from him.  Mr Haywood argued that this was  a  potentially  significant
    factor as the appellant would have to say why he did not have the  card
    if he returned to Sri Lanka. The card  was  a  necessary  document  for
    daily living in  Sri  Lanka  and  should  the  appellant  apply  for  a
    replacement he would have to say how it had been taken  away  from  him
    and he could not be expected to lie about this.

10.  He referred to a report from Dr Nadarajah, a Lecturer at the Centre  of
    International Studies and Diplomacy at SOAS dated 27 January 2016 which
    emphasised that in 2005 the  security  forces  continued  practices  of
    harassment, intimidation and arrest of those who were or were suspected
    of being former LTTE members and supporters and  said  that  there  was
    evidence that those who had been former members of  the  LTTE  who  had
    gone through the government's "rehabilitation" programme  continued  to
    be harassed and threatened.  In his skeleton argument  he  referred  to
    instances of arrests on return at the airport of  former  LTTE  members
    and a report that the MP for Batticaloa district, Mr  P  Ariyanenthiran
    had stated that it was not yet safe for Tamils who had fled  abroad  to
    return.  There was a reference also to  the  Attorney  General,  Senaka
    Perera who had stated that those who had sought political asylum abroad
    were being victimised on their return, contrary to assurances given  by
    the President and also the fact that release from custody on payment of
    a bribe did not alter the level of interest the security  forces  would
    have in those returning. Moreover, there is evidence that the appellant
    was known to have sent money from Britain to Sri Lanka  and  that  this
    had led to his father being detained.   It  was  also  known  that  his
    cousin had been a high ranking member of the LTTE and it  was  believed
    that the money which the appellant had sent to Sri Lanka  had  been  to
    secure his release.  Mr Haywood pointed out that the appellant was  too
    afraid  to  have  contacted  his   family   since   2016.    Therefore,
    notwithstanding the fact that he was at a low level cadre of  the  LTTE
    the appellant would, he argued, be at risk on return.

11.  In any event, he pointed out that it was accepted  that  the  appellant
    had a subjective fear of return and  that  that  would  impact  on  the
    assessment of the effect of return on the appellant.   He  referred  to
    the Court of Appeal judgment in Y (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA  Civ  362  in
    this regard.

12.  He referred to the various medical  reports  which  included  not  only
    that from Dr Martin which dealt with the scarring which  the  appellant
    had which was consistent with his claimed ill-treatment  but  also  the
    psychiatric reports and the  medical  notes  from  Harmondsworth.   All
    doctors agreed that the appellant  was  suffering  from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder - an assessment not disputed by Mr Tarlow and  moreover
    the appellant was still on extremely strong medication - he was on  the
    maximum dose of Citalopram.

13.  Mr Haywood referred to the fact that  it  was  Dr  Thomas's  view  that
    while the appellant was not at a high risk of suicide  now  that  would
    change if he were forcibly removed.

14.  He took me through the relevant passages in GJ and in  MP  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and asked me to find not only  that  the  appellant
    would suffer because of his profile on return as  a  supporter  of  the
    LTTE but also that he would face Article 3 ill-treatment because of the
    suicide risk and the inability of the appellant to access mental health
    care in Sri Lanka. He emphasised that each case should be considered on
    its own merits: this was the clear guidance in paragraph 436 of GJ.  He
    referred to the UNHCR guidance.

Discussion

15.  It is clearly  the  case  that  when  considering  whether  or  not  an
    applicant will face persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return it
    is necessary to take  into  account  the  particular  make  up  of  the
    claimant including his own particular vulnerabilities.  What  may  well
    not be persecution for a robust  man  in  good  health  might  well  be
    persecution for a more vulnerable individual.

16.  In this case I am grateful to Mr Tarlow for accepting the basis of  the
    appellant's claim including the fact that he had been detained and ill-
    treated in Sri Lanka and that his mental health issues follow from  the
    ill-treatment which he received.

17.  I have taken into account the various factors which are not in  dispute
    which were emphasised by Mr Haywood.  These included the fact that  the
    appellant had been picked up not in a "round-up"  but  from  his  home,
    that the authorities knew that he had sent money from Britain to secure
    the release of a cousin who was a member of the LTTE and indeed that he
    had a relative who had been relatively senior in that organisation.

18.  While it is the case that he may not be on a stop list I consider  that
    it is reasonably likely that, at some stage, for example  when  he  was
    required to renew his identity card the authorities would be aware that
    he had returned and there is a possibility that he would then be  taken
    in for further questioning.  Alternatively, given the evidence from the
    report of Dr Nadarajah there  is  the  possibility  that  he  would  be
    questioned on entry.

19.   I  have  considered  the  appellant's  claim  in  the  light  of   the
    determination in GJ (Sri Lanka).  The reality is that and  I  note  the
    evidence of Mr Malcolm Lewis,  a  witness  for  UKBA  who  stated  that
    returnees  were  asked  at  the  airport  about  addresses  they   were
    associated with before leaving the country.  I note that the  appellant
    had been picked up at his home address.  I note also that the appellant
    would be asked about his reasons for returning to Britain.  It was also
    Mr Lewis' evidence that onward addresses might well be checked  by  the
    police.  I consider that, given the appellant's background  and  family
    connections there is a possibility that he might be  traced  on  return
    and questioned still further.  I am conscious that this is an appellant
    who would not be able to move around the country with  ease  given  his
    state of mental health.  He would therefore be unlikely to be  able  to
    evade questioning should the authorities decide to question him.

20.  I consider also that there is a possibility that  the  appellant  might
    face being placed in a "rehabilitation programme" which could well last
    for up to two years.  While the Tribunal in GJ did  not  consider  that
    that would amount to persecution  it  is  something  which,  given  the
    mental  health  of  this  appellant  would,  I  consider,   amount   to
    persecution of this particular individual.  I  would  accept,  however,
    that the appellant does not fit neatly into the categories of those  at
    risk as set out in GJ.  I am however aware of the  conclusions  of  the
    Court of  Appeal  in  MP  (Sri  Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829.   which
    emphasised the importance of looking at every case on  its  own  merits
    and in particular that the fact that certain individuals who might  not
    fall easily into the categories set out in GJ might still be  at  risk.
    In all, taking into account the appellant's background and particularly
    taking into  account  his  mental  health,  I  conclude,  applying  the
    relevant low standard of proof, that the appellant would be at risk  of
    persecution because of his perceived political opinions on return.

21.  Even, however, if I were wrong in that conclusion I consider  that  the
    appellant's removal would infringe his right under  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.  In reaching that conclusion I have considered his claim and  the
    medical reports in the light of the judgment in Y  (Sri  Lanka)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 362.  In paragraph 6 of his judgment Sedley LJ referred to the
    judgment in J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and in particular the conclusions set
    out in paragraphs 26 onwards.  These were as follows:-

         "26. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be  serious"
             such that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].

          1. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:

                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).

             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."

          1. Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.



          1. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

          1. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.

          1. Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights. "

22.  Sedley LJ added the additional principle which was whether any  genuine
    fear which the appellant might establish albeit  without  an  objective
    foundation is such as to create a  risk  of  suicide  if  there  is  an
    enforced return.

23.  In this case it cannot be doubted that the appellant does have such  an
    objective fear.  Therefore even if I were wrong in finding  that  given
    the changed circumstances in Sri Lanka he  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return,  it would simply not be arguable  that  he  does
    not have such an arguable fear and of course his fear is based on  past
    persecution which has been accepted by the  respondent.   That  is  the
    context in which I must consider the medical evidence before me.

24.  It is clear from the notes of the appellant's  mental  health  that  as
    early as January 2015 the appellant stated that he  believed  that  the
    army were going to kill him and that he "will die here".  He had, on 24
    December 2014, been noted as stating that he experienced  voices  which
    were disturbing him and that  he  was  confused  and  there  were  very
    considerable concerns about his mental health.

25.  By the  time  of  the  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  there  was  a
    psychiatric report from Dr Saleh  Dhumad  dated  8  January  2015.   Dr
    Dhumad concluded that:-

         "(c)  (Page 139) In my opinion, the risk of suicide in Mr R's  case
             is significant in the context of possible, there are a  number
             of risk factors that makes suicide  more  likely  if  he  were
             deported to Sri Lanka where he  believes  that  he  will  face
             torture and death by the authorities.  These risk factors  are
             severe depression, PTSD and hopelessness, he  feels  suicidal,
             these are triggered by exposure to reminders of the  traumatic
             experience and hopelessness and have been worse in  detention.
             Hopelessness has a serious and  significant  association  with
             the suicide risk.  The risk will be greater when he feels that
             the deportation is close, and any threat  of  removal,  in  my
             opinion, would trigger  a  significant  deterioration  in  his
             mental  suffering  and  subsequently  increases  the  risk  of
             suicide.

         (d)  This type of risk is very difficult to manage in Sri Lanka, as
             he will be extremely anxious and frightened; his mental health
             will  deteriorate  dramatically  coupled  with  high  risk  of
             suicide.

         (e)  In relation to the impact of a return  to  Sri  Lanka  on  his
             mental health additionally that  he  is  currently  depressed,
             hopeless, feeling suicidal and experiencing PTSD."

26.  That report was, of course, well over a year ago.

27.  In September 2015 an addendum psychiatric report  was  prepared  by  Dr
    Dhumad.  He noted the fears expressed to him by the appellant and clear
    evidence of self neglect and lack of eye contact.  He  emphasised  that
    the appellant's symptoms met the criteria for PTSD and referred to  the
    anti-depressant medication the appellant was on - the maximum  dose  of
    Citalopram.  Again he stated at paragraph 14.8:-

         "In my opinion, the risk of suicide is very high if he were  to  be
         deported, if he survives the deportation process; he is not fit for
         interviewing by the Sri Lankan authorities on return, the nature of
         the illness is extreme anxiety.   The  very  thought  of  appearing
         outside the  therapeutic  setting  and  he  does  not  have  coping
         mechanisms to help him deal with such exposure.  It is  my  opinion
         that if he were to be questioned by the Sri Lankan  authorities  he
         would be extremely frightened of what they might do to  him.   This
         would create a psychological state, in which he would be unable  to
         think sufficiently clearly to explain himself properly; it would be
         extremely difficult  for  him  to  keep  focused  and  control  his
         emotions under stress."

28.  He went on to  say  that  his  view  was  that  if  the  appellant  was
    separated from cousins that would make his condition worse and increase
    the risk of suicide.

29.  Finally, before the hearing three further reports were  produced.   The
    first on scarring had been prepared by Dr Martin. Is  largely  academic
    now but it had been accepted that the appellant suffered  ill-treatment
    in Sri Lnka which led to scarring.

30.  The second is a letter from the appellant's doctor who stated that  the
    appellant is  currently  diagnosed  with  PTSD.   He  stated  that  the
    appellant's symptoms contend to be moderate to severe.

31.  A thorough report had been prepared by Dr Rachel  Thomas.   She  stated
    that her conclusions were "highly congruent with those  reached  by  Dr
    Dhumad in  his  reports  as  well  as  that  of  Dr  Koglanathan"   She
    considered there was a slight improvement in the appellant's  diagnosis
    because he was  free  from  immigration  detention,  the  care  he  was
    receiving from his cousins and the medication which  he  is  receiving.
    She stated that if any of those protective factors were to  be  removed
    and his psychiatric condition was to again  worsen  he  would  then  be
    "more severely symptomatic".

32.  In paragraphs 51 onwards of her report she referred  to  the  issue  of
    self harm and "suicidality".  Having noted the appellant's comments and
    having set out what she referred to  as  "post  traumatic  traits"  she
    concluded  in  that  although   the   appellant   denied   any   active
    "suicidality" or self harm on account of  his  current  social  support
    system in the UK and having been released from detention on his current
    medication she considered that that was also due to his retaining  some
    hope of a better outcome to the situation.  In paragraphs  108  onwards
    she gave her prognosis on the consequences of return.  She stated  that
    the appellant was suffering  psychiatrically  here  in  the  safety  of
    Britain and with excellent family support around him and  therefore  it
    could readily be seen how removal from Britain to a  country  where  he
    feared for his life and safety and where he no longer had a stable base
    or  any  robust  social  support/protection  "would  almost   certainly
    precipitate another psychiatric crisis, assumingly occurred when he was
    detained".  She stated that  the  appellant  had  a  history  of  acute
    "suicidality" whilst detained and mentioned that he had been apparently
    placed on recurrent  suicide  watch  for  around  one  month  while  in
    detention.  She talked of the difficulties  that  the  appellant  would
    face if he were returned to Sri Lanka and foresaw a rapid deterioration
    in his psychiatric condition there.  She stated that "in the  event  he
    did not make a suicide attempt",  he  would  be  highly  vulnerable  to
    further abuse  and  to  exploitation.   She  did  however  conclude  at
    paragraph 143 that he was not currently a  suicide  risk  but  she  did
    consider that that risk would worsen considerably in the event  of  the
    appellant's removal from Britain and could rapidly become a significant
    risk.

  33.    It is clear from the various medical reports and in particular  the
    report of Dr Rachel Thomas  that  although  the  appellant  is  not  at
    present a suicide risk that is because  of  the  relative  security  he
    feels living with his cousins in this country.   I  can  only  conclude
    from reading the reports that should he be  removed  the  suicide  risk
    would be magnified and that risk would be based on his subjective  fear
    of what would happen to him on return. That subjective fear  itself  is
    based  on  his  past  experiences  which  have  been  accepted  by  the
    respondent.  I consider that he meets the test set out in  the  further
    factor in a "suicide" case as set out by Sedley LJ in  Y  (Sri  Lanka).
    Indeed I consider that this appellant's claim is on all fours with  the
    third appellant in GJ (Sri Lanka) with the proviso that while it is the
    case that the Tribunal in that case considered that that appellant  was
    not entitled to asylum I have concluded that on the particular facts of
    this case this appellant would be at risk.

34.  I would add that I have  taken  into  account  the  lack  of  effective
    treatment in Sri Lanka given the large numbers  suffering  from  mental
    illness  there  and  the  very  small  number  of   psychiatrists   and
    psychiatric facilities.

Notice of Decision

35.  I have therefore concluded that, having set aside the determination  of
    the judge of the First-tier Tribunal this appeal shall  be  allowed  on
    both asylum and human rights grounds.


Decision

This appeal is allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
