
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/10177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2014                   |On 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Kirubainathan Umakaran
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by S.  Satha
& Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Addio promulgated on 16 April 2014, allowing Mr  Umakaran's  appeal
         against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  8  November
         2013 to remove him from the UK following refusal of his application
         or asylum.

      2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary of State is the
         appellant, and Mr Umakaran is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
         consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier  Tribunal  I
         shall hereafter refer to Mr  Umakaran  as  the  Appellant  and  the
         Secretary of State as the Respondent.

    Background

      3. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 16 September 1990.
         He entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  21  August  2011  with  entry
         clearance as a Tier 4 Student valid until 19 February  2014.  On  3
         August 2012 his  course  provider's  Tier  4  Sponsor  Licence  was
         revoked, and in consequence the Appellant's  leave  was  varied  to
         expire on 3 December 2012, in effect giving him a 60 day period  in
         which to find an alternative course provider. The Appellant did not
         regularise his leave. On 8 October 2013 he made an appointment with
         the Respondent's Asylum Screening Unit, which he duly  attended  on
         31 October 2013 claiming  asylum.  In  due  course  the  Respondent
         refused the Appellant's application for asylum for reasons set  out
         in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 8  November  2013,
         and a removal decision was made and communicated by way of a Notice
         of Immigration Decision of the same date.

      4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Addio
         allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention and  Article  3  of
         the ECHR for reasons set out in his determination.

      5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         which was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  Davies
         on 30 April 2014, but subsequently granted on  14  August  2014  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge P Lane.

      6. The Appellant has provided a Rule 24 response dated 5 October  2014
         resisting the Respondent's appeal.

    Consideration

      7. The Appellant did not give oral evidence at the hearing before  the
         First-tier Tribunal. Supporting psychiatric evidence  was  produced
         to the effect that he was unable to give evidence  or  to  instruct
         legal representatives. Accordingly the appeal proceeded by  way  of
         submissions. (See First-tier Tribunal decision at paragraphs 18 and
         19.) The First-tier Tribunal Judge expressed himself satisfied that
         "it was appropriate in this case for  the  Appellant  not  to  give
         evidence" (paragraph 39). There is no challenge to this assessment,
         and in my judgement it was one eminently open to the Judge  on  the
         available supporting evidence.

      8. It was a feature of the Appellant's case, as given in  his  account
         at interview, that he had undertaken certain tasks  for  the  LTTE.
         The Respondent pleads before the  Upper  Tribunal  that  there  was
         inconsistency in the Appellant's account as to how he  came  to  be
         working for the LTTE - and in particular whether  he  had  done  so
         voluntarily or by force - and that in such circumstances the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge was in error to accept the credibility  of  the
         Appellant's core account. Moreover, the Respondent  argues  in  her
         grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that  the  Judge  erred  in
         considering that inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account  could
         be "explained away by his mental health".

      9. The  Respondent's  allegation  that  the  Appellant's  account  was
         discrepant as to whether he was forced to help the LTTE or assisted
         involuntarily is  raised  in  the  RFRL  at  paragraph  57  in  the
         following terms:

        "Firstly,  you  have  provided  an  inconsistent  account  of   your
             involvement with the LTTE. Initially you claim that  you  were
             "forced to join the LTTE in 2008" (AIR Q23). You  then  stated
             that they asked you to support them and you  stated  "we  said
             yes and went along with them" (AIR  Q30).  This  is  a  direct
             contradiction to  what  you  previously  stated  and  so  your
             credibility regarding your involvement with the LTTE has  been
             damaged in this regards."

     10. In my judgement on any reading of the  Appellant's  interview  such
         reasoning is unsustainable because it does not reflect the  overall
         context and detail of the Appellant's account. It is clear from the
         exchange of questions and questions 23-47  that  the  Appellant  is
         describing being taken by members of the LTTE  under  coercion:  he
         refers to one of the members having a gun, and being locked up upon
         arrival at the LTTE camp in Mullathivu, and only subsequently being
         allowed freedom of movement within the camp with the threat that he
         would be shot if he tried to escape. The reference to going  "along
         with them" in context is clearly no more than an indication that in
         the circumstances he accompanied the LTTE. It is absurd to  suggest
         that he is thereby giving a discrepant account.

     11. In my judgement the point was of no merit when made  in  the  RFRL,
         and it does not assume any additional merit now in  being  made  in
         the context of the challenge to the Upper Tribunal.

     12. In any event, I  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made
         reference to the Respondent's position that there was a discrepancy
         in this context: see decision at paragraph 10: "It was  noted  that
         the Appellant gave contradictory answers with  regards  to  how  he
         became involved with the LTTE". The Judge, nonetheless,  considered
         that the Appellant had "given a  core  account  about  how  he  was
         forced to join the LTTE and had to work in a camp" (paragraph  39).
         In this  context  I  note  that  the  Judge  expressly  stated,  at
         paragraph 45, that he accepted the response to the RFRL made by the
         Appellant's representatives in the Grounds of Appeal at  paragraphs
         22-37. In respect of paragraph 57 of the RFRL  it  is  pleaded,  at
         paragraph 24 of the Grounds, "the Appellant had no  choice  but  to
         comply with the LTTE's request to join them  in  2008  -  there  is
         nothing contradictory in this response". In such circumstances I am
         satisfied that the Judge has adequately addressed this point raised
         by the Respondent, which was in any event of no merit.

     13. The second basis of challenge, as pleaded in the grounds in support
         of the application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
         is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was, in effect,  too  willing
         to marginalise and/or  excuse  discrepancy  on  the  basis  of  the
         Appellant's mental health.

     14.  In  my  judgement  this  challenge  encounters  two  difficulties.
         Firstly, the Respondent does not  identify  which  aspects  of  the
         Appellant's account were particularly discrepant (beyond the matter
         rejected above as being plainly not discrepant). Secondly,  in  the
         absence of particularisation the  ground  essentially  reads  as  a
         disagreement with the outcome of the assessment.

     15. As regards the allegation of discrepancy, beyond the  issue  as  to
         whether the Appellant was coerced or volunteered to join the  LTTE,
         much of the rest of the Respondent's adverse assessment in the RFRL
         is based on matters of plausibility rather  than  discrepancy:  for
         example at paragraph 60 it is  not  considered  credible  that  the
         Appellant did not know the name of a person who had helped  him  to
         escape; similarly the Appellant did not know the name  of  a  nurse
         who  had  later  been  involved  in  his  release  from  government
         detention (paragraph 68); the Appellant's account was otherwise not
         consistent with the background country  information  (eg  paragraph
         65), or the level of medical assistance he was afforded  (paragraph
         70). These are not matters of internal inconsistency.

     16. In my judgement it was entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal  to
         have regard to the Appellant's mental health as of the date of  the
         hearing, and to infer that a person whose mental health was in  the
         process of deterioration might likely have given  an  account  into
         which  discrepancies  or  omissions  of  detail  intruded  at   his
         substantive asylum interview: see paragraph 40. It  is  clear  that
         the Judge had regard to all of the available  supporting  evidence,
         including supporting letters submitted on the  Appellant's  behalf,
         in his overall assessment  of  the  Appellant's  claim:  again  see
         paragraph 40. As noted above, in any event, the Judge had regard to
         the issues identified in the RFRL and the response thereto  by  way
         of the Grounds of Appeal.

     17. In all the circumstances I find this aspect of the challenge to  be
         little more than a disagreement with the outcome, and not otherwise
         to identify any material error of law on the part of the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge.

     18. The only area where I had any  particular  concern  in  respect  of
         discrepancy - and not articulated in this way by the Respondent  in
         the grounds - was the  Appellant's  claimed  involvement  in  anti-
         government diaspora activity by attending "a LTTE demonstration  in
         the UK" (RFRL paragraph 61) in the circumstances where  he  claimed
         to have been a victim of the LTTE.

     19. Indeed, perhaps in recognition of the weakness of  the  Grounds  as
         drafted,  it  was  in  this  area  that  Mr  Whitwell  focused  his
         submissions rather than the voluntary or  non-voluntary  nature  of
         the Appellant's involvement in the LTTE whilst still in Sri Lanka.

     20. I note that the actual reference to LTTE activity in the UK in  the
         interview is brief and lacks particularisation: see questions  122-
         126: essentially the Appellant has attended a single demonstration.
         Nonetheless, the premise  that  pro-LTTE  support  and/or  activity
         would appear inconsistent with the concept of having been a  victim
         of LTTE is, in my judgement, broadly  sound.  I  do  not,  however,
         accept the obverse position: having been the victim of the LTTE  is
         not incongruent with protesting against  any  perceived  anti-Tamil
         government  policies  or  actions.  In  all  such  circumstances  I
         considered the attendance at an anti-government demonstration -  in
         respect of which the LTTE, or some front organisation for the LTTE,
         or former members of the LTTE under some different  guise,  may  or
         may not have been instrumental in organising  and/or  stewarding  -
         does not inevitably equate with actual support  for  the  LTTE,  as
         opposed to opposition to anti-Tamil government  activity,  or,  for
         example, the  demanding  of  inquiry  and  investigation  into  the
         conduct of the civil war.

     21. I do accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  the  Judge  has  not
         expressly addressed this  aspect  of  the  appeal.  However,  as  I
         indicated at the hearing, I am not minded to conclude that this was
         ultimately a material error. For the  reasons  adverted  above,  it
         seems to me that this is not a determinative  matter,  nor  one  of
         such weight as to disturb the balance struck by the Judge.  In  any
         event it is noted that the Judge reached conclusions in respect  of
         risk on return premised primarily on the Appellant's experience  of
         detention by government forces, and the existence of an outstanding
         arrest  warrant.  Such  matters  were  not  contingent   upon   the
         Appellant's claim to have assisted the LTTE in Sri Lanka,  and  not
         contingent upon any diaspora activity. Whilst  the  latter  matters
         are  relevant  to  an  overall  assessment   of   the   Appellant's
         credibility, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         adequately reached findings in respect of credibility that are  not
         materially affected by his failure to engage with the  question  of
         whether or not the Appellant's attendance at a demonstration in the
         UK undermined the credibility of his account to have  been  coerced
         into assisting the LTTE whilst in Sri Lanka.

     22. In all the circumstances I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge did not materially err in law, and the decision is to stand.

    Decision

     23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  contain  any
         material errors of law and stands.

     24. The Secretary of State's challenges  is  dismissed.  Mr  Umakaran's
         appeal remains allowed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     21 April 2015
