
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10941/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd September 2016                        |On 04th October 2016          |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     CSB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lee, Counsel for Wilson Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on  15th  August  1996.
    He appealed the Respondent's decision dated 24th November 2014 refusing
    his application for asylum and humanitarian protection.  His appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Russell on  10th  June  2016.
    He dismissed it on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  in  a
    decision promulgated on 22nd July 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was  made  and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes on 20th August 2016.
     The permission states that it is clear that the judge had in mind  the
    Appellant's age but what he failed to take as his  starting  point  was
    that the injuries ordinarily inflicted during a  Poro  initiation  rite
    would amount to a breach of the Appellant's Article 3 rights if he  was
    required to undertake that rite.  The permission states that the  judge
    appeared to accept that the Appellant's family would  not  support  the
    Appellant in avoiding these rites  and  this  should  have  led  to  an
    analysis of whether the Appellant could avail himself of adequate state
    protection or internal  relocation  to  avoid  the  risk  of  a  forced
    initiation rite and whether as a  result,  in  the  absence  of  family
    support, the Appellant would, on return to Sierra  Leone,  be  rendered
    destitute.   The  permission  states  that  the  judge's  approach  was
    confused and his findings unsafe.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file.  This states that what  the  judge
    had  to  decide  was  whether  the  Appellant  would  be  subjected  to
    initiation into the Poro on return to Sierra Leone and if so would this
    qualify him for humanitarian protection.  The Rule 24  response  states
    that the judge considered this and found that this was not achieved  by
    the Appellant. The judge  observes  at  paragraph  51  the  appellant's
    maturity, education etc. and the response states that it is  reasonable
    for the judge to conclude that because of this the Appellant would  not
    become marginalised or part of the  urban  poor  on  return  to  Sierra
    Leone.  The judge found that the Appellant's parents would not be  able
    to  find  him  in  Freetown  and  that  the  Appellant  could  relocate
    internally.  The response states that the judge reasoned this properly.
     The response also states that  the  judge  considered  sufficiency  of
    protection and was unable to make a finding that  the  Appellant  would
    not be able to avail himself of the protection of  the  authorities  or
    that he would be unable to rely on the support of Muslim leaders.   The
    response states that the Appellant failed to show he  was  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection  and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    decision he did.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel went through his grounds of  application  for  permission.   He
    submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 48 of his decision when  he
    stated that the Appellant's  fear  is  the  initiation  into  the  Poro
    against his  will  and  that  the  Appellant  is  young  enough  to  be
    considered still part of his family although he has no contact with his
    parents any more.  Counsel submitted that based on this  paragraph  the
    Appellant is member of a particular social  group  and  the  judge  was
    wrong  to  find  he  is  not.   I  was  referred  to  the  case  of  KA
    (Afghanistan) and Others [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 which, Counsel submitted,
    refers to a similar situation.  He submitted that age is immutable.

 5. Counsel submitted that the judge's assessment at paragraph  52  of  the
    decision is unsustainable.  I was referred to his  submissions  at  the
    First-tier hearing and he submitted that  based  on  the  evidence  the
    judge cannot say that the high threshold of Article 3 would not be  met
    if the Appellant was initiated into the Poro against his will.   I  was
    referred to the document by the Refugee Documentation Centre in Ireland
    which  gives  information  on  forced  initiation  by  all-male  secret
    societies operating in northern Sierra Leone.  This refers  to  torture
    and other cruel inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to men
    and women being forcibly initiated into tribal secret  societies.   The
    comparison is made with women involved in FGM and reference is made  to
    Muslims being forcefully initiated into the secret Poro  society.   The
    article also refers to the Poro being supported by the police  and  the
    authorities.

 6. Counsel then referred to Grounds 2 and 3 submitting that the judge  had
    an inadequate approach to internal flight.  He referred to paragraph 48
    of the decision  about  risk  in  the  Appellant's  home  area  and  he
    submitted that the judge accepts that he would be at risk there but the
    judge has not engaged with what would happen to  the  Appellant  if  he
    tried internal relocation with no family support.  I  was  referred  to
    the case AH  (Sudan)  and  Others  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  297  and  Counsel
    submitted that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  Appellant  to
    relocate internally.  When the Appellant came to the United Kingdom  he
    was aged 13 and  I  was  referred  to  general  risk  and  the  general
    conditions in Sierra Leone.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  has  not
    engaged with these at all.  Not only does  the  Appellant  fear  forced
    recruitment by the Poro, he fears abuse from his family.  He also fears
    being destitute and living on the streets and  the  risks  attached  to
    that.  He submitted that if the Appellant  returns,  he  will  have  no
    familial support and no financial support.  He is a young man  who  has
    been in foster care since he was aged 13.

 7. Counsel then submitted that the judge has made  an  error  relating  to
    sufficiency of protection by the state.  I was referred to paragraph 53
    of the decision in which the judge states that based on the  background
    evidence  the  Sierra  Leonean  authorities  have  limited  scope  when
    tackling secret societies but the evidence is insufficient to say  they
    are unwilling or unable to protect  the  Appellant  against  the  Poro.
    Counsel submitted that this is not enough and does not  sit  well  with
    the judge's previous finding that the Appellant would be at  risk  from
    his parents.

 8. Counsel submitted that the judge's decision is unsustainable and should
    be set aside.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge gave proper scrutiny to
    whether the  Appellant's  circumstances  were  enough  for  him  to  be
    considered a member of a particular social group.  I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs 25 and 32 of the decision.  At paragraph  25  he  refers  to
    members of  a  particular  social  group  having  to  share  an  innate
    characteristic or belief so fundamental to identity or conscience  that
    they should not be forced to renounce it.  It is also necessary for the
    group to possess a distinct identity in the  relevant  country  because
    members are perceived as different  by  the  surrounding  society.   At
    paragraph 32 he rejects that the Appellant fits this description.   The
    judge states that there is no evidence that anything unites  those  who
    may be initiated into the Poro as those targeted for initiation include
    a very diverse group of men including members of  different  religions,
    ethnic groups, teachers, public servants and politicians.  At paragraph
    34 the judge refers to there being no  common  characteristics  between
    those who oppose or are susceptible to initiation into  the  Poro.   He
    states that those who oppose initiation into the Poro do not form  part
    of a particular  social  group.   She  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to these findings.

10. With regard to sufficiency of protection and general risk on return the
    Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has considered the evidence
    properly at paragraphs 37 and 38 of the decision.  She  submitted  that
    the judge clearly considered all the evidence about the Poro  and  what
    the Appellant's circumstances will be  if  he  is  returned  to  Sierra
    Leone.  He found that the Appellant can relocate and will  get  support
    from Muslim groups who are against the Poro.

11.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  judge  has  taken  the
    Appellant's young age into account together with the fact that  he  has
    been in the United Kingdom since he was 13 and sensibly finds  that  he
    can use his education on return, to relocate.

12. I established that the judge believed the Appellant's account and  that
    the appellant is now aged 20.

13. Counsel submitted that women fearing return to  a  country  because  of
    either domestic violence or FGM form part of a particular social  group
    and he submitted that it follows that someone fearing  initiation  into
    the Poro must also be in a particular social group.  This Appellant, on
    return to Sierra Leone, will be susceptible to forced  initiation  into
    the Poro.

14. I was referred to paragraph 51 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    refers to the Appellant now being an adult.  Counsel submitted that the
    Appellant's circumstances in the United Kingdom have to be  considered.
    He has been in foster care since he arrived here  and  on  return,  for
    example to  Freetown,  he  will  have  problems  as  there  are  50,000
    youngsters sleeping on the street there.  The Appellant  has  now  been
    away from Sierra Leone for seven years and he submitted that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for him to return.

15. Counsel submitted that the judge has accepted that the Appellant cannot
    return to his family in Sierra Leone.  I was referred to  paragraph  37
    of the decision. He submitted that the background  evidence  on  Sierra
    Leone is relevant and the judge has not  properly  analysed  what  will
    happen to the Appellant if he is returned there with no family support.
     He submitted that the judge falls foul in the same way as in the  said
    case of KA (Afghanistan).  Although the Appellant is now over  18  this
    does not mean he would be able to cope on return to  Sierra  Leone.  He
    has not been there for seven years.  He submitted that  the  judge  has
    not given anxious scrutiny to the young man's asylum claim and  he  has
    not engaged with the Appellant's actual situation.

16. Counsel submitted that although the  judge  states  that  there  is  no
    evidence that the authorities  in  Sierra  Leone  would  be  unable  or
    unwilling to protect the Appellant, the background  evidence  makes  it
    clear that the Poro are very much  involved  with  the  authorities  in
    Sierra Leone.  It is unlikely that any initiation of the Appellant into
    the Poro would lead to help for him from the authorities.

17. Having considered the permission to appeal I asked about the  Appellant
    arriving in the United Kingdom and how he managed to get here.   I  was
    told that this was dealt with at the First-tier hearing.  The Appellant
    escaped from the adult who brought him to the United Kingdom on a visit
    and claimed asylum.



Decision and Reasons

18. The judge has found  that  the  Appellant  does  not  form  part  of  a
    particular social group and so is not entitled to asylum in the  United
    Kingdom. A woman fearing return to  her  own  country  because  of  the
    possibility of FGM forms part of a particular social group.   Similarly
    a woman afraid to return to her own country because of  domestic  abuse
    forms part of a particular social group. Based on  these  examples  the
    Appellant must be a member of a particular social group.   The  judge's
    reasons for his finding are based on the fact that the Poro is made  up
    of  people  of  different  religions,  ethnic  groups,  teachers,  etc.
    Similarly the women in the above examples can be a very  diverse  group
    of women.

19. The Appellant, as a member of a particular social group, might well  be
    entitled to asylum in the United Kingdom in his circumstances.

20. There was considerable background evidence provided for the  First-tier
    hearing.  I have the Appellant's  bundle  and  the  objective  evidence
    makes it clear that many boys of the Appellant's age are initiated into
    the Poro, some of them against their will, and if they refuse to accept
    the initiation they are often beaten, treated badly and forced to join.
     There are many of these secret  societies  in  Sierra  Leone  and  the
    rituals involve the scarification of the body  of  the  initiate.   The
    initiation is severe and occasionally an initiate may die.  Symbols  of
    witchcraft are used to  intimidate  and  people  can  be  abducted  and
    forcibly  initiated.   The  background  evidence  states  that   secret
    societies are above the law, particularly the Poro. Youths are targeted
    to join and if they refuse the only alternative is to  go  into  exile.
    It is stressed that the Poro have high  connections  in  Sierra  Leone.
    The background evidence states that to force someone like the Appellant
    to join the Poro is against his human rights.

21. The judge has accepted that the Appellant is likely to be in danger  if
    he goes back to his family. For the judge to say  that  Muslim  leaders
    oppose the Poro and are likely to help  the  Appellant  is  farfetched.
    The people supporting the Poro are powerful.   The  objective  evidence
    points to there being no state protection for the Appellant on  return.



22. With regard to internal flight this is an Appellant who has been in the
    United Kingdom in foster care since he was 13 years old.  Based on this
    he is not going to be equipped to deal with life on his own in Freetown
    where there are thousands of young people living on the streets.  It is
    true that he has been educated in the United  Kingdom  but  nothing  is
    going to prepare him for the  shock  of  returning  to  somewhere  like
    Freetown on his own with no familial support.  There  must  be  a  real
    risk of him becoming destitute based on the background evidence.

23.  The  judge's  reasoning  is  not  sufficient.   He  has  not  properly
    considered the background evidence.  If the Appellant is at  risk  from
    his parents he is also going to be at risk if he is returned on his own
    in Freetown.



24. The judge's decision is unsustainable based on the evidence before him.



Notice of Decision

25. There are material errors of law in the judge's decision. His decision,
    promulgated on 22nd July 2016, must be set aside.

26. No findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
    the case are not to include Judge Russell.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 04th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

