
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10414/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     dt
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Denholm, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and DT  as  "the
    appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who appealed against a decision
    made by the respondent on 13 November  2014  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom following the decision on the same  date  to  refuse  to
    recognise him as a refugee or grant him  Humanitarian  Protection.   He
    also applied on human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Boyes who in a decision promulgated on  19  May
    2015 allowed it on both asylum and human  rights  grounds.   The  judge
    found that in terms of the application of the country guidance case  on
    Sri Lanka: GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) there will  be  a  real  possibility  that  the
    appellant  would  be  perceived  to  be  someone  working   for   Tamil
    separatism, and to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict
    Tamil separatism, especially as he has been involved in an organisation
    now treated as a terrorist group by the Sri Lankan state,  and  as  the
    authorities may well have evidence of this.  Whilst on its own  account
    he cannot be said to be a prominent member, the judge  found  what  was
    important  when  assessing  future  risk  is  the  perception  of   the
    authorities.  In  this  appellant's  case  the  judge  found  that  the
    authorities believe that he was involved with the LTTE  previously  and
    that their perception may, of course,  be  different  to  the  reality.
    The judge also found that the appellant fell  within  a  risk  category
    identified in GJ and also that since the promulgation of that  decision
    the Sri Lankan Government has enacted legislation  proscribing  a  wide
    range of pro-Tamil groups.  He found that whilst there are  no  reports
    before him of arrests having yet been made on that  basis,  involvement
    in such groups may well place an individual such as this  appellant  at
    even greater risk of arrest, detention and torture.  Before  concluding
    that there was no sufficiency of protection available as the  appellant
    fears state actors and no prospect of  internal  relocation  the  judge
    summarised his conclusions  at  paragraph  96  of  his  decision  which
    states:-

         "On the basis of all of the evidence before me, I am satisfied that
         there is a serious possibility that if the Appellant were to return
         to  Sri  Lanka  that  he  would  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
         authorities.  In light of evidence, I  consider  that  there  is  a
         serious possibility that he will be arrested and  detained  because
         of his perceived sympathies, if not at the airport on arrival, then
         subsequently.  I accept that there is a  real  risk  of  him  being
         tortured at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities  and,  further,
         that the conditions in which he would be held would  be  such  that
         there is a  real  risk  that  they  would  amount  to  inhuman  and
         degrading treatment."

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was originally refused
    but on a renewed application granted by Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Grubb on 18 August.  His reasons for so doing are:-

         "1.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Boyes) allowed the  appellant's
             appeal on asylum grounds finding that he would be at  risk  of
             persecution if returned to Sri Lanka.

         2.   It is arguable that the Judge failed to give adequate  reasons
             for, and/or reached an irrational, finding that the  appellant
             fell into the risk  category  in  para  7(a)  of  the  country
             guidance case of GJ and others.  Further, in finding that  the
             appellant was at risk, in any event based upon evidence  post-
             dating GJ and others (see paras 65-67 summarised at 68; and 69-
             70), it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  adequately  to
             explain why he would be at real risk despite his finding  that
             the appellant had never been an LTTE fighter or engaged  at  a
             senior level in any pro Tamil group.

         3.   It is also arguable that the Judge  may  have  misread  and/or
             interpreted  the  Ceylon  Today  article   in   reaching   his
             credibility finding.

         4.   For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted."

 4. Ms Everett argued that the judge at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    materially erred in departing from the country guidance case law of  GJ
    without providing good reasons.  She referred me to paragraph 81 of the
    decision where the judge found that:-

         "81. Even though he Appellant has never been  a  LTTE  fighter,  or
             engaged at a senior level  with  any  pro  Tamil/LTTE  related
             group, from the country information before me  it  seems  that
             there may also be other factors at play when  the  Sri  Lankan
             government decide to detain and ill-treat  an  individual.   I
             note that it is recorded  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch  World
             Report 2014, referred to in the CIG report,  that  torture  is
             used  by  the  Sri  Lankan  government  not  only  to  extract
             confessions but also to "instill terror in the  broader  Tamil
             population  to  discourage   involvement   with   the   LTTE."
             Therefore, even though the Appellant is not a prominent figure
             there is nothing implausible  about  him  being  detained  and
             tortured in the manner that he claims."

    She argued that the judge has erred at paragraph 95 of his decision  in
    concluding that the appellant falls within a risk  category  identified
    in GJ as he has not identified which category he finds the appellant to
    fall within.  The judge has found at paragraph 91  that  the  appellant
    was involved in helping the LTTE gather information in 2008 and that he
    attended pro-Tamil demonstrations in the United  Kingdom.   Neither  of
    these findings bring the appellant within the categories identified  in
    GJ.  The finding on the credibility of the appellant's recent detention
    and torture should properly have been conducted through the application
    of the country guidance case law.  Whilst the judge may be entitled  to
    find that individuals who are outside the categories in GJ  may  be  at
    risk good reasons must be given to establish this  and  the  judge  had
    cited no evidence, save for the appellant's own account,  to  establish
    that the Sri Lankan authorities will  detain  and  torture  individuals
    unless they are or are perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri
    Lanka as a single state.  The finding at paragraph 95 of  the  decision
    that the appellant will be at even greater risk  of  arrest,  detention
    and torture due  to  involvement  with  a  proscribed  organisation  is
    unsupported by any background evidence and is insufficient to  found  a
    further risk category outside those within GJ itself.  On the  findings
    of fact in this case the judge has failed to give adequate reasons  why
    attendance as a volunteer security person  at  a  single  demonstration
    organised by the transitional government of Tamil Eelam would lead to a
    perception by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  that  the  appellant  is  a
    current threat to the unity of the state, particularly in view  of  the
    government's sophisticated intelligence gathering machine.  It is  also
    notable that  the  judge,  in  reaching  this  finding  has  not  given
    consideration to the reasons why the appellant was able to pass through
    Colombo Airport without incident on his return to Sri Lanka only twenty
    days prior to arrest at a checkpoint.

    Secondly it was argued that the judge materially erred  in  mis-reading
    the background evidence relied upon by the appellant.  At paragraph  76
    the judge relies on the article from Ceylon Today  in  considering  the
    appellant's evidence that every  vehicle  at  Omanthai  checkpoint  was
    stopped.  The judge found that whilst this  article  was  written  some
    months after the appellant  claims  to  have  been  stopped  there,  it
    suggests that there had been a gradual increase in the activity at  the
    checkpoint over the previous year.  She  submitted  that  the  relevant
    extract from the article does not support the finding that  there  were
    increased  security  checks  in  September  2013.  The   judge's   mis-
    interpretation of this evidence  has  led  to  a  positive  credibility
    finding on his detention in September 2013 which is, as a  consequence,
    flawed.

    I was invited to remake the decision in this appeal and dismiss it.

 5. Mr Denholm argued that there was no error of law  within  the  decision
    and that it should stand.

 6. I accept his submission.

 7. Whilst not specifically referring to it it is plain that the judge here
    had in mind, in considering the risk factors into which  the  appellant
    fell as described in GJ, paragraph 7(a) of the headnote which states:-

         "(a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka."

 8. It is though perhaps easier in this appeal to deal with the  second  of
    the respondent's two grounds first.

 9. The Ceylon Today article can be found at page  20  of  the  appellant's
    main bundle.  It is dated 29 March 2014 and states:-

         "The Omanthai checkpoint in Vanni  is  now  fully  operational  and
         vehicles entering via A9 highway to the Jaffna  Peninsula  and  the
         vehicles leaving the Peninsula are now being subjected to  checking
         at the Omanthai  checkpoint,  according  to  Military  Spokesperson
         Bridger Ruwan Wannigasooriya.

         "A year ago the checkpoint was  not  fully  functional  and  random
         checks were done. Due to  the  present  security  situation  and  a
         possible re-grouping of  the  former  rebel  group  the  Liberation
         Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) we have increased the security at  the
         checkpoint," he said.

         Wannigasooriya added that a few person have been arrested and a few
         other who are complicit in  terrorist  activities  have  also  been
         apprehended.

         "The army  carries  out  random  spot  checks  which  is  extremely
         necessary.  During the past one year the frequency of checking  had
         decreased and now checks are conducted regularly  by  the  security
         forces," he said.  When asked if foreign passport holders too  will
         be subject to checking, he added nobody can be  discriminated  when
         it comes to security.  The national security is important and if  a
         vehicle is stopped and there are foreign nationals travelling  they
         will be checked too."

    Mr  Denholm  argued,  and  I  accept,  that  this  ground  reads  as  a
    credibility challenge.  On proper consideration  of  the  Ceylon  Today
    article the ground is  misconceived  as  the  appellant's  evidence  is
    consistent with and falls into the context of what is stated within the
    article.  He referred me to the appellant's interview where  he  stated
    in answer to question 80 that it was at the Omanthai sentry point  that
    he was captured.  He described it as an "army  checkpoint  there  every
    vehicle would be stopped and vehicle registration would  be  noted  and
    also passengers would be noted".  He also said that he was not formally
    arrested but was asked to stay in a small room and then he was taken in
    a vehicle to a camp.  This was  an  appellant  who  in  2008  had  been
    involved in assisting an LTTE member albeit that he is not one himself.
     He had entered the United Kingdom as s student in 2010 and returned in
    2013 on holiday with friends when he was stopped at this checkpoint and
    subsequently detained and tortured.  The issue was dealt  with  in  his
    own witness statement which was broadly consistent to  his  replies  in
    his asylum interview  and  referred  to  within  the  respondent's  own
    refusal letter at paragraphs 25 to 28.  Those paragraphs state:-

         "25. When asked about Omanthai checkpoint  point,  you  claim  that
             every vehicle would be stopped and vehicle registration  along
             with passengers would be noted.

         26.  Objective information states:

         27.  "The team from the High Commission noted  during  their  visit
             that there were no checkpoints  in  Jaffna  town.   The  drive
             along the A9 from  Jaffna  to  Vavuniya  revealed  only  three
             checkpoints, the first at Elephant Pass, the second just south
             of Kilinochchi, and the third at Omanthai.  At the first  two,
             barriers  were  raised  to  allow  vehicles  through   without
             stopping.  The Omanthai checkpoint  was  the  only  checkpoint
             where vehicles were made to  stop  and  occupants  to  produce
             documentation.  NGO and humanitarian  agencies  told  us  that
             this was mainly to check  whether  the  foreign  employees  of
             these  organisations  had  the  required  MoD   clearance   to
             enter/remain in  the  Vanni.   Locals  were  allowed  to  pass
             freely".  (COIS - Sri Lanka dated 07/03/2012 paragraph 25.09).

         28.  The  objective  information  above  states  that  locals  were
             allowed to pass freely, your claim that every vehicle would be
             stopped is therefore considered consistent."

10. I find from the evidence within those paragraphs of the refusal  letter
    that  it  effectively  supports  the  appellant's  position  and   that
    accordingly the evidence to be found at paragraph 70(iv) of the judge's
    decision which states:-

         "That Omanthai check point is fully operational  once  more  as  of
         March 2014.  A  year  prior  to  that  checks  were  only  randomly
         undertaken there."

    and also at paragraph 76:-

         "In terms of the Respondent's assertion that individuals were  able
         to travel freely through the Omanthai  checkpoint,  the  background
         information relied upon by the Respondent appears not to be  up  to
         date in this respect.  There is a report from  Ceylon  Today  dated
         the 29 March  2014  [page  20  appellant's  background  information
         bundle] which states  that  the  checkpoint  is  once  again  fully
         operational.  Whilst this article was within some months after  the
         Appellant claims to have been stopped there, it suggests that there
         had been a gradual increase in the activity at the checkpoint  over
         the previous year.  Therefore there seems to me nothing implausible
         about the Appellant's claim that he and his friends were stopped at
         that checkpoint."

    was capable of being relied upon.  The judge was entitled to  conclude,
    and certainly he has not erred, in finding that  at  the  time  of  the
    appellant's arrest the Omanthai checkpoint was partly functional.  This
    is evidence supporting the appellant's claim.

11. Beyond that this is  an  appellant  who  has  been  both  arrested  and
    tortured.   There  is  accepted  evidence  that  his  family  has  been
    approached and arrested by the authorities in looking  for  him.   This
    evidence of past persecution or serious harm is a serious indication of
    the appellant having a well-founded fear of persecution or a real  risk
    of suffering serious harm upon return.  In short an indicator of future
    risk.  It should be noted that within the respondent's  refusal  letter
    he was given the "benefit of the doubt" in relation  to  the  issue  of
    continuing interest in him by the Sri Lankan authorities.

12. It is not a material error for  the  judge  to  fail  to  identify  the
    precise paragraph of the risk category the appellant falls within.  The
    evidence in the appellant's favour to be  gleaned  from  paragraphs  82
    (re: detention and torture), 83 and 92 (re: escape via the payment of a
    bribe and not official release), 84 and 85 (re: activities  within  the
    diaspora), 86 (re: evidence of the Sri Lankan authorities  being  aware
    of the appellant's participation in the demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom) and 92 (re: the fact that the authorities  are  still  looking
    for the appellant) are all factors which entitled the judge to conclude
    that the appellant would be at risk if returned to Sri  Lanka  for  the
    reasons set out and referred to in paragraph 7(a) of  the  headnote  to
    GJ.

13. I find that the judge has correctly  considered  the  totality  of  the
    evidence that was before him and come to conclusions that were open  to
    be made on it.  The  factors  that  he  has  found  pertinent  to  this
    particular appellant are such that he will be at  risk,  as  found,  if
    returned to Sri Lanka.  The grounds put forward by  the  respondent  do
    not amount to a material error of law.

14. Having carefully considered the oral and written evidence the judge was
    entitled to come to the conclusions that he did.

Conclusions

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 10 December 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
