
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10240/2013
                                                               AA/10244/2013
                                                               AA/10245/2013
                                                               AA/10248/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 24th September, 2014                       |On 10th October 2014         |
|Signed 10th October, 2014                     |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                          SELVAKUMARI SUBRAMANIYAM
              GAMINI DILSHAN DESAPRIYA RATHNAYAKE MUDIYANSELAGE
                       AKSHAN DILIMINi GAMINI DILSHAN
                       AKSHAN DILIMINA GAMINI DILSHAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Rasoul of Counsel, instructed by A and P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Rackstraw, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, her husband and her children are  all  citizens  of  Sri
    Lanka.  She and her elder daughter entered the United Kingdom  on  26th
    January, 2011, with a valid grant of entry clearance as  the  dependent
    spouse and child of a person with leave to remain as a Tier 4  Student.
    Her younger daughter was subsequently born in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant's husband was  granted  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student from 12th January,  2011,  to  13th  March,
    2012.  On 3rd March, 2012, the appellant's husband applied for  further
    leave to remain as a  Tier  4  Student  and  the  appellant  and  elder
    daughter applied for leave to remain as his dependants.

3.   Those applications were refused by the respondent on 5th  April,  2012,
    when the respondent also made Section 47 removal directions in  respect
    of them.  No appeals were lodged against that decision, but instead the
    family made further applications of the same type on 30th April,  2012.
    These applications were subsequently refused by the respondent on  20th
    November, 2012, with no right of appeal.

4.   On 20th December, 2012, the applicant made an application  for  asylum.
    Her claim was based on the fact that she claimed to fear risk  of  harm
    from the Sri Lankan authorities in the event of her return to Sri Lanka
    because she was perceived by them to be a member of the LTTE.

5.   The appellant's asylum claim was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  6th
    November, 2013 who made a further decision to remove her to Sri  Lanka,
    having decided that the account of events upon which it was  based  was
    untrue.  The appellant's appeal against the removal decision was  heard
    on 13th December, 2013 and was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Duff in a determination promulgated on 8th January, 2014.   During  the
    course of that determination,  the  judge  made  a  series  of  adverse
    findings of fact, rejecting as untrue the appellant's  account  of  her
    experiences in Sri Lanka.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted the appellant  permission  to
    appeal Judge Duff's determination on 20th February, 2014.   The  appeal
    came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge J M  Holmes,  sitting
    as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge, on 8th May,  2014  when  the  parties
    agreed the determination contained no reference to:

         "(i)     any of the country guidance decisions issued  in  relation
             to Sri Lanka, or
         (ii)     any of the  background  evidence  relating  to  Sri  Lanka
             relied upon by either party, or
         (iii)    any analysis of the evidence offered  in  support  of  the
             appeal by the appellant's  husband, or
         (iv)     any analysis of the risk the appellant says that  she  and
             her family face as returnees to  Sri  Lanka  from  the  United
             Kingdom, travelling on emergency travel documents  which,  she
             says, would give rise to the perception that  she  and/or  her
             husband were failed asylum seekers and will lead to an enquiry
             into their pasts and to their being placed on a 'stop list' or
             a 'watch list'.

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  M  Holmes,  sitting  as  a  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge, was satisfied  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  these
    omissions was such as to render the determination unsafe, for  lack  of
    adequate reasoning and analysis  of  the  evidence  placed  before  the
    Tribunal and the appropriate course was for him to remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for it to be reheard.

8.   The appeal was listed for rehearing before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes on 11 July, 2014, at North Shields  and  his  determination  was
    promulgated on 21st July, 2014.

9.   In his determination the judge makes it clear that he  was  aware  that
    there were deficiencies in the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Duff, but he referred to the judge's very helpful and full Record
    of Proceedings which Judge Duff had typed  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing before him.  Judge  Holmes  made  references  to  the  evidence
    recorded by First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff at paragraphs 43, 51 and  65
    of his determination.

10.  The grounds for permission to appeal are lengthy and I  have  set  them
    out in the  annex  to  this  determination.   The  first  suggests  (at
    paragraph 5) that findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes  on
    the basis of a comparison of the evidence heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Duff with that given to First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  were
    unfair to the appellant.  It is said that it  was  unfair  because  the
    appellant's Counsel (who was not the Counsel representing the appellant
    at the previous hearing) did not have a record of the evidence and as a
    result the appellant's Counsel could not have been  expected to put  to
    the appellant matters raised in evidence by the appellant now when they
    had not been previously been  mentioned when the appellant earlier gave
    evidence to First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff.

11.   The  second  challenge  is  that  the  judge  made  his  findings   on
    credibility  without  reference  to  objective  evidence.  The  grounds
    suggest that this is of particular significance in  the  light  of  the
    fact that these previous determination was  set  aside  partly  because
    credibility findings had been made in the vacuum.

12.  The third challenge refers to paragraph  46  of  the  determination  of
    Judge Holmes  and  criticises  him  for  attaching  no  weight  to  the
    appellant's evidence in her statement. There are other challenges which
    I shall deal with shortly but they are the principal ones.

13.  In addressing me, Miss  Rasoul  suggested  that  there  were  two  main
    complaints in the grounds of application, the first being a  comparison
    by Judge Holmes with the  evidence  heard  by  him  compared  with  the
    evidence recorded by Judge Duff when Judge  Holmes  had  not  made  the
    Record  of  Proceedings  of  Judge  Duff  available  to  Counsel.   She
    suggested that it would have been appropriate to have given  copies  of
    the Record of Proceedings to Counsel to enable the appellant to comment
    on them. Miss Rasoul suggested that this error taints the determination
    because it affects the credibility findings and it was  important  that
    the hearing should have been  conducted with scrupulous fairness.

14.   The  second  challenge  was  that  the  objective  evidence  was   not
    considered by the judge but, Counsel told me, none had  been  submitted
    on behalf of the appellant.  At paragraph  62  Judge  found  it  to  be
    implausible that the appellant's husband engaged the  assistance  of  a
    "travel agent" to assist in securing the release of the appellant  from
    detention through payment of a bribe.  The appellant  and  her  husband
    had only referred to this man as being an "agent" and the  judge  erred
    in failing to appreciate that agents are often used  in  Sri  Lanka  to
    facilitate both release from detention and departure from the  country.
    They do not act as "travel agents" as they do in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The judge asks why this particular travel agent would be  a  person  to
    approach for assistance and finds the explanation "He is a  Muslim,  he
    is the type of person who does these  jobs"  a  "less  than  compelling
    explanation  but  he  does  not  make  any  reference  to  the  judge's
    explanation given in evidence as to why he  approached  the  agent  for
    help, namely "I can't explain to a Sinhalese man, I can't explain to my
    brothers. I know him very well so I explained to him".

15.  The judge further erred  at  paragraph  50  where  he  noted  that  the
    appellant  claimed  to  have  been   identified  and  checked  at  that
    checkpoint whereas her husband was not. The judge  finds  that  account
    not to be true and suggests that if the authorities had cause to detain
    the appellant for questioning then it would make no sense  at  all  for
    them to fail to  question  the  husband.   What  the  judge  failed  to
    appreciate was that the appellant is a Tamil but that  her  husband  is
    not.

16.  The judge also generally "misportrayed and overstated  the  appellant's
    case".  He refers to the appellant's "long term  mission"  and  to  the
    "Colombo mission" but none of these words were the appellant's.  At  no
    time did she say that she was sent on a "mission" as such, merely  that
    she was sent to Colombo to gather intelligence for the LTTE.   The  use
    of such language by the judge as  "target"  "spy"  and  "mission"  have
    given  the  appellant's  claimed  involvement  a  heightened  sense  of
    importance that she never sought to assert.

17.  The judge's finding at paragraph 35 ignores the fact that her  evidence
    was not that she was purporting  to  pass  for  a  Sinhalese  woman  or
    proposing to convince her husband of the fact that she  was  Sinhalese.
    The appellant was speculating when she suggested that the property  she
    and her family moved into at  Ja-Ela  was  purchased  by  the  LTTE  in
    advance of her mission.  There was no suggestion that the property  had
    actually been purchased for their  mission  merely  that  it  had  been
    acquired at some stage by the LTTE. The judge should have realised that
    it was speculation on the part of the appellant that the  property  had
    been purchased specifically for the mission.

18.  Finally it is suggested that what the judge said  at  paragraph  32  is
    misleading.  The judge  records  that  the  appellant's  "claimed  Tami
    ethnicity is not accepted by the respondent" but that is misleading  in
    that the respondent did  not expressly state that the  Tamil  ethnicity
    is accepted. It was never put to the appellant  that  she  was  not  of
    Tamil ethnicity.

19.  For the respondent the Presenting Officer took me to  paragraph  51  of
    the judge's determination and asked me to note that the evidence before
    the judge was that the appellant was beaten and sexually  abused.   She
    did not claim to have been  deliberately burned during her  questioning
    or hit with iron bars and she did not then claim that she had  sustains
    any injury in the course of her detention that resulted in any  visible
    scarring to her body.  At paragraph 51 the judge merely points out that
    again when giving evidence to Judge  Duff,  her  undated  and  unsigned
    witness statement that she relied upon did  not  make  any  such  claim
    either. There was no reason why the judge should not have  relied  upon
    the record of evidence recorded  by  Judge  Duff.   The  reasons  Judge
    Duff's determination could not stand had nothing to do with his  Record
    of Proceedings or the evidence he had recorded.

20.  It has been suggested that Counsel should have been  shown  a  copy  of
    the Record of Proceedings and it was unfair because she  did  not  know
    what had been recorded by Judge Duff.  However, the appellant knew very
    well what evidence she had given to Judge Duff and the  fact  that  she
    was not able to give  a  consistent  account  to  Judge  Holmes  is  an
    indication that it was not credible. The judge was entitled to do  what
    he had done.

21.  The Presenting Officer then  referred  me  to  paragraph  43  of  Judge
    Holmes's determination. There he refers to the "target" that  was  said
    to have been two brothers which each held the rank of corporal.  It  is
    the fact that they each  held  the  rank  of  corporal  which  was  the
    evidence given to Judge Duff.   Judge  Holmes  has  not  relied  on  an
    adverse finding made by Judge Duff and that of course would  have  been
    entirely wrong because Judge Duff's determination could not stand.

22.  Miss Rackstraw asked me to note that there was no complaint at  all  of
    there being any error  in  the  Record  of  Proceedings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Duff.

23.  The findings that were made by Judge Holmes at  paragraphs  46  and  47
    were findings which he was entitled to make on the evidence before him.
     At paragraph 62 the judge does refer to the agent as a "travel  agent"
    but it is quite clear that the very experienced Immigration  Judge  was
    not confusing the agent with being what one might describe as  being  a
    "travel agent" in the United Kingdom.  He very clearly knew  that  this
    agent was used to help with the applications for entry  clearance.  The
    judge had been  entitled, she suggested, not to accept the  appellant's
    explanation for having approached this person.

24.  Criticism is made of the judge for making  findings  without  reference
    to  objective  background  material  but  of  course,  as  Counsel  has
    confirmed, none had been  served.   However,  the  judge  clearly  does
    refer to background evidence served by the respondent at paragraph  22.
    However,  there  was  clearly  nothing  about  the  appellant  or   her
    background which suggested any reason why the LTTE should approach  her
    to undertake an  intelligence  gathering  job  on  their  behalf.   The
    criticism levelled at the judge for what is said at paragraph 46 of the
    determination  does  not  identify  any  error  on  his  part.  It  was
    reasonable of the judge in the circumstances to find  as  he  did.   In
    relation to the challenge at paragraph 14, one could reasonably  expect
    someone who had chosen to entrust their life and security to  an  agent
    to give an explanation as to why they had chosen this particular  agent
    but  none  was  given  at  all.   What  the  judge  said  was  in   the
    circumstances reasonable.

25.  Addressing me in closing, Miss Rasoul asked me to find  errors  of  law
    and to remit the appeal for hearing  afresh  by  another  Tribunal.   I
    reserved my determination.

26.  Dealing first with the issue of Judge Holmes comparing  his  record  of
    the appellant's  evidence  before  him  with  the  record  of  evidence
    recorded by Judge Duff when the appellant had earlier given evidence to
    him, I have concluded that there is no material error  of  law  on  the
    part of Judge Holmes.  He was perfectly entitled to look  at  what  the
    appellant had  earlier  said  in  giving  evidence  to  a  judge.   The
    appellant suffered no unfairness, because she was very  well  aware  of
    what she had said earlier. Judge Homes was entitled  to  conclude  that
    because the appellant has not given a consistent account, she was not a
    credible witness.

27.  The fact that Counsel was not present  on  the  earlier  occasion  when
    Judge Duff recorded the appellant's evidence does not mean  that  Judge
    Holmes is precluded from taking into account  what  the  appellant  had
    earlier said.  No criticism was  made  of  Judge  Duff's  determination
    which has any bearing on his Record of  Proceedings  and  none  of  the
    issues which cumulatively rendered Judge  Duff's  determination  unsafe
    involved the evidence he recorded given by the appellant.  It was  not,
    for example, suggested that he had wrongly  recorded  the  evidence  he
    heard.  I have concluded, therefore, that there was  no  error  on  the
    part of Judge Holmes by making reference  to  the  evidence  record  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff.

28.  It is suggested that the judge's  findings  on  credibility  were  made
    without reference to any objective evidence.  According to Miss  Rasoul
    there was no evidence filed on behalf  of  the  appellant.   The  judge
    records at paragraph 22 the fact that he was supplied with a map of the
    Colombo region, identifying the areas the appellant referred to in  her
    evidence as places where she had lived and an extract of the Country of
    Origin Information Report on 2002.  The judge was hampered by the  fact
    that those representing the  appellant  had  not  prepared  a  properly
    paginated and indexed bundle of documentary  evidence,  but  they  were
    quite content (as apparently was Counsel) for  the  appeal  to  proceed
    without the submission of  any  further  background  evidence.   It  is
    suggested that Counsel's skeleton argument (consisting of some  fifteen
    pages) made reference to a Human Rights Watch  Report  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account.  Criticism  is  made  of  his  finding  at
    paragraph 34. At paragraphs 33, 45 and 35 the judge said this:

         "33. The appellant denies that her knowledge any  other  member  of
             her extended family has any LTTE connection,  involvement,  or
             membership.  It is however her case that at about the  age  of
             19 (when she had said she was living in Killinochchi) she  was
             approached by a stranger in the street and asked to  join  the
             LTTE. She says that a number of such approaches were  made  to
             her, which she rejected, although ultimately she took  someone
             she believed to be a member of the LTTE to  the  family  home,
             where an agreement was reached with her father that she should
             join, although it was a condition of the  agreement  that  she
             would not be used as a fighter or a suicide bomber.


         34.  The appellant denies knowledge of why she  should  be  singled
             out for such an approach (none having been made to anyone else
             she knew, or to any  member  of  her  extended  family).   She
             claimed to believe that the  LTTE  would  have  monitored  her
             before making any approach to her -  but  she  was  unable  to
             explain what that monitoring would have consisted of, or, more
             importantly, would reveal that would have  given  the  LTTE  a
             reason to believe their approaches to her would  be  welcomed.
             If her belief as to monitoring were correct, then  it  follows
             that any accurate  LTTE  enquiries  into  her  background  and
             family would have revealed that she was  a member of a  family
             with no LTTE connections, who had only recently moved into the
             area. One might have thought that this would  have  given  the
             LTTE cause for concern about the family's true loyalties,  and
             good reason to seek its recruits elsewhere. It certainly  begs
             the question as to why they would persist in trying to recruit
             someone from a family with no LTTE connections,  knew  to  the
             area, who was unwilling to volunteer  when  first  approached,
             and whose  family  loyalties  might  therefore  reasonably  be
             inferred to be opposed to the LTTE.


         35.      The appellant's account is that she was not  recruited  to
             fight, but to gather intelligence, and that for  that  purpose
             the LTTE trained her to be entirely fluent in Sinhalese.   She
             does not say in terms that her appearance  is  such,  and  her
             fluency is such, that she  could  at  the  completion  of  her
             training pass for a Sinhalese woman, although if she  were  to
             be a truly effective spy for the  LTTE  within  the  Sinhalese
             community I would have expected  that  would  be  a  necessary
             qualification."

29.  The fact that the LTTE were recruiting during the ceasefire  does  not,
    with respect, mean that what the judge said was wrong.  He was entitled
    to suggest as he did that it begs the  question  why  the  LTTE  should
    persist in trying to  recruit  someone  from  a  family  with  no  LTTE
    connections, new to the area, who was unwilling to volunteer when first
    approached, and whose family loyalties might  therefore  reasonably  be
    inferred to be opposed to the LTTE.

30.  So far as the next challenge is concerned, I have concluded that  there
    are  no  errors  in  what  the  judge  said  at  paragraph  46  of  the
    determination. It again takes out of context what the judge  has  said.
    At paragraph 45, 46 and 47 he said this:

         "45. The appellant claims to have fallen in love with the 'target',
             to have become pregnant by him, and to  have  married  him  in
             December 2008.  She offers no explanation of what  her  family
             made of all of this, having been persuaded to relocate to  Ja-
             Ela in order that she might spy upon  the  'target',  only  to
             find him becoming a member  of  their  family.  Having  fallen
             pregnant during 2008, the appellant claims to have decided  to
             cease her involvement in the LTTE.  She claims  to  have  done
             this by the simple expedient of throwing  away  the  SIM  card
             that she had been provided with for the mobile telephone  that
             she had been equipped with in order to permit her  to  contact
             the individual within the LTTE to whom she was meant  to  pass
             on information she was meant to be gathering.


         46.  The appellant does not claim to have believed at any time that
             the LTTE had been destroyed so completely that  there  was  no
             risk of any member of that organisation trying to contact her.
              It does not appear to have occurred to her that if her  story
             were true, officers of the LTTE knew perfectly well where  she
             and her family, and the 'target' were living  in  Ja-Ela,  and
             had the ability to trace them even if they had moved  on.   On
             the appellant's account, however, only did she never hear from
             the LTTE again but it is plain that she did not expect  to  do
             so.


         47.      At interview the appellant sought to explain the  lack  of
             further contact from the  LTTE  not  on  the  basis  of  their
             military difficulties, but on  the  basis  that  she  and  her
             husband had moved to Gampaha after  their  marriage  in  2008.
             The only reason she gave for that move under cross-examination
             was, however, the need for herself, her husband and  her  baby
             to have a home of their own.  Gampaha  is  no  great  distance
             from Ja-Ela and she does not suggest they changed their  names
             or that her husband  changed  the  nature,  or  name,  of  his
             construction business.  Moreover on her own account the family
             appeared to have remained in the LTTE house provided  to  them
             in Ja-Ela and one might  infer  that  she  continued  to  have
             regular contact  with  them.   Thus  on  her  own  account  no
             effective protections were taken against her being  traced  by
             officers of the  LTTE.  What  the  judge  said  was  perfectly
             reasonable in the circumstances.

31.  The next challenge at paragraph 14 criticises what the  judge  said  at
    paragraph 62 of the determination and the criticism, again,  takes  the
    judge's findings out of context.  The judge said this:

         "62.  The appellant says that she was released from detention after
             seven days without charge after her husband paid  a  bribe  on
             12lac Rupees.  He denies bribing anyone directly but  he  says
             that once the appellant was detained he  returned  to  Colombo
             unaware of where she was  held or how long she was  held  for.
             He claims to have decided that the only person he  could   ask
             for assistance was the travel agent that he had used  to  help
             him  with  applications  for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK  -
             whereupon he claims to have been given a price, and then later
             told where and when to go  and  collect  her.   Asked  why  he
             thought this travel agent would be the person to approach  for
             assistance, his reply was 'He is a Muslim, he is the  type  of
             person who does these type of jobs' - which is in my judgement
             a less than compelling explanation.  No further  details  were
             forthcoming, save that he claimed to  trust  the  agent  as  a
             result of dealing with him  over  the  application  for  entry
             clearance.  However, he shied away  from  explaining  what  if
             anything the agent had been required to do in order that entry
             clearance to the UK would  be  granted  that  would  lead  the
             appellant to conclude that he would have the contacts  or  the
             expertise to bribe the army to release anyone who on his  case
             he knew had correctly  been  identified  as  an  LTTE  spy  in
             Colombo. He also denied knowledge of  how  this  travel  agent
             could identify where his wife was held or  who  needed  to  be
             bribed to secure her release, and negotiate and  pay  all  the
             necessary bribes to secure that, all in such  a short space of
             time."

32.  The judge did not err in referring to this man  as  a  "travel  agent".
    He knew precisely what the appellant and her husband  had  meant.  This
    was the agent who had actually   obtained  the  appellant's   husband's
    visa for the UK.   The appellant's husband had not entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally but with a valid visa of the sort usually obtained by
    travel agents.

33.  I am afraid I do not accept that the judge's  findings  are  materially
    flawed as a combined result of erroneously  recording  the  appellant's
    evidence and failing to consider the realities of the situation in  Sri
    Lanka with reference to objective evidence. The  challenge  has,  to  a
    large part, simply taken out of context what the judge has said.

34.  The next challenge is paragraph 50 of the judge's determination,  where
    he did not believe the appellant's account that she was detained  at  a
    checkpoint, even thought her husband who was with her was  simply  told
    to go.  If the authorities genuinely believed that the appellant was an
    LTTE agent then  it  is  reasonable  that  they  would  not  only  have
    questioned the appellant, but would question anyone travelling with her
    whether he was a Tamil or not and particularly so if it  appeared  that
    he was her husband.  It is simply not credible that  if  the  appellant
    was of  interest,  anyone  with  her  would  not  have  at  least  been
    questioned.

35.  The  next  criticism  of  the  determination  is  that  the  judge  has
    generally misportrayed and overstated the appellant's case.  I  do  not
    believe that he has.  Her job was effectively to be a spy for the  LTTE
    and in May 2006 claims to have been instructed  to  go  to  Colombo  in
    order to gain the trust of a particular man. The fact  that  the  judge
    refers to this particular man  as  being  a  "target"  does  not,  with
    respect, misportray or overstate the appellant's case.  The  fact  that
    the judge refers to  the  "long  term  mission"  and  to  the  "Colombo
    mission," does not misportray or overstate the  appellant's  case.  The
    Colombo mission refers to the task which she was given  to  befriend  a
    particular man with a view to obtaining information from him about  the
    activities of the Sri Lankan army. There is  simply  no  merit  in  the
    suggestion  that  this  in  some  way  misportrays  or  overstates  the
    appellant's case.

36.  The criticism in the grounds of what the judge  said  at  paragraph  35
    also, I believe, fails to identify any error on a  point  of  law;  the
    judge was entitled to say what he did  at  paragraph  35.   I  was  not
    addressed on the challenge at  paragraph  17b  by  Counsel  but  having
    carefully read what the judge said at paragraph 44 I am satisfied  that
    again no error of law is identified. Had the person she was supposed to
    befriend simply ignored her there was no alternative plan.

37.  The challenge at paragraph 17c  does  not  misportray  the  appellant's
    evidence. Her evidence was that a house was being  made  available  for
    her to enable her to pursue her mission.  The evidence of the appellant
    was that it had been purchased by the LTTE in advance  of  her  mission
    because it was next door to the place where the person she was supposed
    befriend lived. Again, I find no error of law on the part of the judge.



38.  The last challenge at paragraph 19 suggests that the judge misleads  by
    suggesting that the appellants' claimed ethnicity is  not  accepted  by
    the respondent.  With very great respect,  he  did  not  mislead.   The
    appellant's claimed ethnicity was not accepted by the respondent.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter was silent. That  does  not  mean  that  her
    ethnicity was accepted.

39.  For all of these reasons I have concluded  that  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes does not contain an error on  a  point
    of law.  I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   10th October 2014















                       The appendix above referred to
[pic]

[pic]

[pic]

[pic]

[pic]

[pic]

