
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10454/2014
                                                               AA/10455/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AMK
                                     OWK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Maninder Chaggar, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing on
    4th June 2015 and our decision of 4th August 2015 in which we found  an
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. As we did in our earlier decision, pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/269)  we  make  an
    anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court   directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  appellants.
    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 3. To summarise  the  background,  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision of 13th November 2014  to  refuse  to  grant  the  appellants'
    asylum was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Raikes  for  the
    reasons set out in his decision and reasons promulgated on 3rd February
    2015.   In our decision of 4th August 2015  we  had  no  hesitation  in
    finding that the First-tier Tribunal failed to address  the  protection
    claim of OWK.  We found that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained material errors such that it had to be set aside in order for
    the protection claim of OWK to be determined, and for an assessment  of
    the risk upon return for both appellants to be made, taking account  of
    sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation  in  light  of  the
    additional findings made.  We directed that the findings of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raikes otherwise stand and that the decision will be re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal on the material that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal subject to any Rule 15(2A) application,  to  be  made  no
    less than 21 days prior to the resumed hearing.

 4. Because they are relevant to the assessment of the risk upon return  to
    be made by us, taking account of sufficiency of protection and internal
    relocation in light of the additional findings  that  we  make,  it  is
    useful at this stage for us to summarise  the  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raikes set out in his decision and  reasons  promulgated
    on 3rd February 2015, that stand:

         "34. I  will  deal  firstly  with  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
         credibility. I have had the benefit of seeing  and  listening  most
         carefully to the Appellant as she gave  her  evidence.  Moreover  I
         have compared her oral evidence today  with  her  written  accounts
         given in statement and interview form. Having had that opportunity,
         I state now at this early stage in my findings that I do  not  find
         the Appellant's claim to be credible. It contains  inconsistencies,
         contradictions and implausible statements, the cumulative effect of
         which is to cast serious doubt upon reliability of the  Appellant's
         evidence and the veracity of her case. The  main  examples  are  as
         follows;

         35.  I did not find the Appellant's claim  to  have  been  attacked
         outside her home in November 2010 by four men, at  the  instigation
         of her husband, to be credible ...

         36.  ... I find that her  account  of  this  incident  is  designed
         solely to enhance her claim that she would be at risk on return and
         unable to internally relocate not only due to her husband's actions
         on an individual basis but  through  those  she  describes  as  his
         spies, at his instigation ...

         37.  In addition to this, I did not find her claim to  fear  Doreen
         as a result of the photographs she states to be in existence to  be
         credible ...

         38.  I have  considered  the  e-mail  which  the  Appellant  claims
         supports the fact that her ex-husband is now in possession  of  the
         photographs ...

         39.  In the first place I find this document  wholly  self-serving.
         It appears that it is intended purely to ensure  that  the  account
         given by the Appellant that there are rumours that she is a lesbian
         is supported in another form. I have looked  at  the  documentation
         carefully. I find it is of no evidential value  particularly  given
         the nature and way the information is stated to have been  obtained
         and it provides no support or  corroboration  for  the  Appellant's
         claim to be in fear of Doreen.

         41.  Further whilst she has indicated that  she  now  believes  her
         family to be aware of the information in the possession of her  ex-
         husband, and is assuming that this is the photographs  she  alleges
         to have been taken by Doreen, she states that none  of  her  family
         have mentioned it, despite her having some contact with them. I  do
         not find it plausible that, particularly given the stigma faced  by
         LGBT persons in Kenya, and also the  fact  that  she,  without  any
         evidence to support her, is stating that the village elders will be
         aware of the information, that her family  would  not  have  either
         informed her of the rumours or challenged her about this whilst she
         was in the UK if they were aware of them.

         43.  Having considered all the evidence, particularly the objective
         evidence produced, the evidence relating  to  the  Gender  Violence
         Recovery Centre, and the Respondent's acceptance of the evidence of
         the Appellant relating to her husband,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant has a well- founded fear of her husband. I  am,  however,
         not satisfied, having considered the Appellant's written  and  oral
         evidence presented today that she would be pursued on the basis  of
         her sexuality, that she would not be able to seek the protection of
         the authorities given that  she  is  formally  separated  from  her
         husband and has been for some time and further that  at  she  would
         not be safe from her husband, his  family,  Doreen  or  indeed  any
         associates were she to relocate internally in  Kenya.  In  reaching
         this conclusion, I have not found her account  in  respect  of  her
         difficulties with being ostracised on the basis of her sexuality to
         be credible"

 5. Notice of the resumed hearing listed on 4th November 2015 was  sent  to
    the parties on 14th October 2015. No further evidence was  relied  upon
    by the appellant and there was no application  made  pursuant  to  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 6. At the resumed hearing, Ms Chaggar applied  for  an  adjournment.   She
    submitted that since the previous hearing on 4th June 2015 matters have
    moved on and that OWK is now receiving counselling following a referral
    made by Social Services.  We were told that  OWK  has  been  undergoing
    counselling since November 2014.  Ms Chaggar submitted that  given  the
    issues that we would be considering surrounding abuse that OWK has been
    subjected to, a report by the therapist treating OWK would be  of  some
    assistance to the Tribunal.  Ms Chaggar confirmed that  no  report  has
    yet been prepared and she was unable to provide any explanation for the
    lack of a report to date.

 7. Having carefully considered the application, we refused to adjourn  the
    resumed hearing.  Despite the on-going treatment that OWK is  now  said
    to be receiving, and is said to  have  been  receiving  since  November
    2014, there was no evidence before us at all, of  that  treatment.   No
    steps whatsoever appear to have been taken to obtain  any  evidence  of
    the treatment or therapy being received by OWK, and the  reliance  that
    the appellants' now seek to place upon such treatment,  appears  to  be
    very much an after-thought.  We were provided with no explanation as to
    why such evidence was not relied upon before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and no information about  the  author  of  any  potential  report,  the
    timescales  involved,  or  the  relevance  of  such  a  report  to  our
    consideration of the appeal.  The parties were aware of the issues that
    we would be considering at the resumed hearing and we had made it clear
    in our 'error of  law  decision',  that  we  proposed  to  re-make  the
    decision on submissions only, subject to any Rule  15(2A)  application.
    No such application has been made.

 8. We proceeded to hear submissions from the parties  which  we  summarise
    below.  Ms Chaggar confirmed that no further oral evidence  was  to  be
    called on behalf of the appellants.

The resumed hearing

 9. We have before us, the appellants' bundle and the  respondent's  bundle
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal containing the evidence  relied
    upon. In her witness statement dated 14th October 2014, AMK states that
    in 2010, she woke up in the middle of the night and realised  that  her
    husband was not in the bedroom.  As she walked towards  her  daughter's
    bedroom, she saw her husband undressed, standing  in  their  daughter's
    bedroom.  He followed AMK out of the room and told her that he had gone
    into OWK's room in order to cover her up.  When she asked  him  why  he
    was in his daughter's bedroom naked, he replied that he has  the  right
    to do what he wanted in his house.  AMK did not speak to  her  daughter
    about this incident.  AMK states that she fears for her daughter as she
    is sure that her husband had been sexually abusing OWK, as he did  with
    AMK's sister.  She states that whilst her daughter has never  disclosed
    this information, she has been referred to see a child psychiatrist  as
    a result of her being emotionally distressed.

Submissions

10. At the resumed hearing, Ms Chaggar adopted the matters set out  in  her
    written submissions dated 4th November 2015.  She reminds us  that  the
    respondent and the First-tier Tribunal accepted the general  allegation
    made by AMK of general domestic abuse and violence during her marriage.
     She submits that the objective evidence referred to by the  respondent
    in her decision to refuse asylum confirms:

         "Rape and domestic violence are widespread and  rarely  prosecuted,
         spousal rape is not prohibited by law. The law  criminalises  rape,
         defilement, and sex tourism, however, enforcement remained limited,
         and as many as 95% of sexual offences  were  not  reported  to  the
         police. The law does not specifically prohibit spousal rape".

11. Ms Chaggar submits that AMK sought protection by reporting  matters  to
    the police and provided copies of the investigation diary  and  assault
    report to confirm that she had reported matters  to  the  police.   She
    submits that nothing was done by the police to protect AMK.

12. Insofar as the protection claim of OWK is concerned,  Ms  Chaggar  drew
    our attention to five documents in  particular  that  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The first is a "Post Rape Care  Form"  issued  by
    the Nairobi Women's Hospital following an examination  of  OWK  on  6th
    January 2014 that is to be  found  at  page  [38]  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  The form records that the alleged  perpetrator  is  a  "known"
    male and that the chief complaint is "suspected defilement".  The  form
    states "Mother reports child was visiting father at  the  ...  and  has
    been complaining of stomach upsets and vomiting".  General  examination
    revealed that the outer genitalia, vagina and  anus  were  normal,  and
    that the hymen was intact.   The second document is a letter  from  the
    Gender Violence Recovery Centre dated 30th May 2014 that is to be found
    at page [39] of the appellant's bundle.  That letter refers to both  of
    AMK's children and states:

         "...  the  above  named  minors  have  been  attending  counselling
         sessions at the Gender Violence  Recovery  Centre  at  the  Nairobi
         Women's  Hospital  following  secondary  trauma  suffered  due  the
         parents' separation.

         The children, who are currently under the care of their mother, are
         having a hard time dealing with the tug-of-war between the parents,
         in addition to dealing with the breakdown of their family unit. The
         counselling sessions have been on-going since March 20l2, with  the
         aim of helping them cope with the resultant stress and anxiety."

13. The third document is a "Parental Responsibility Agreement" dated  17th
    June 2011 issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and  Social
    Development that is to be found at page [53] of the appellant's bundle.
     The agreement records discussion and agreement  between  AMK  and  her
    husband who have:

         "... agreed mutually without any  coercion  on  either  party  from
         anyone  else  to  enter  into  an   agreement   on   the   Parental
         Responsibility and legal custody of their children as follows:

               1. That AMK shall have custody of  the  children  during  the
                  period of separation;

               2. That AMK's husband shall have access to the children twice
                  a month during weekends

               3. ..."

14. The fourth document is a "Separation agreement" signed by AMK  and  her
    husband in June 2011 which provides inter alia:

      1. In 2002 the HUSBAND had an affair with the WIFE'S sister  in  their
         matrimonial home, and the WIFE found the HUSBAND  in  her  sister's
         (B) bedroom at night while naked.  B was in college then and living
         with the couple.

         ...

         3.1  The WIFE shall have custody of the children during the  period
         of separation;

         3.2  The HUSBAND shall have access to the children  twice  a  month
         during weekends;

15. The fifth and final document relied upon was a manuscript  letter  said
    to have been written by OWK that is to be found at  page  [92]  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  In that letter OWK states that she does  not  want
    to return to Kenya because she is very scared of her father.  She  sets
    out in that letter the abuse that she claims to have been subjected  to
    at the hands of her father.  We do not  set  out  the  detail  in  this
    decision, but we have had careful regard to the content of that letter.

16. Ms Chaggar submits that OWK is left vulnerable to on-going contact with
    her father, notwithstanding the disclosure that she has made, of abuse.
     She submits that OWK is at risk of harm from her father upon return to
    Kenya because she will have to have contact with him, exposing  her  to
    continuing abuse.

17. Ms Chaggar also relies upon the agreement reached between AMK  and  her
    husband with regard to the arrangements for their children and contact,
    in support of the protection claim made by AMK.  She submits  that  the
    protection claims are inextricably linked and  that  in  light  of  the
    contact agreement that is binding, AMK will be unable to  cut  off  all
    ties with her husband and AMK will therefore remain at risk of  further
    abuse, wherever she goes in Kenya, without sufficient protection  being
    available to her.  It is submitted that if AMK cannot  get  protection,
    OWK is equally unlikely to be protected by the state.

18. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that it is a matter for  the  Tribunal  to
    make a finding as to the credibility of the account of  abuse  advanced
    on behalf of OWK.  He reminds us that no concession has  been  made  by
    the respondent that OWK was abused in any way by  her  father,  and  he
    submits that the evidence in support of the claim is very limited.

19. Mr Mills drew our attention to the limited information provided by  AMK
    at the screening interview on 20th June 2014  when  AMK  was  asked  to
    briefly explain why she could not return  to  Kenya.   She  had  simply
    explained that she feared her ex-husband because before she  moved  out
    in 2011, she had caught him in her daughter's bedroom with no  clothes,
    and she had become worried that that had been the same  room  in  which
    she had previously caught him, with  her  sister.   He  also  drew  our
    attention to the answers provided by the appellant at interview on 16th
    October 2014.  In particular, when AMK was asked (at  Q.  123)  whether
    apart from being in their daughter's room naked, her husband  had  done
    anything else to her daughter, AMK replied "No he was  not  violent  to
    her.  Only sometimes shouting, she was very scared of him".  He submits
    that the account provided by AMK in her statements  is  vague  and  the
    documents that are relied upon by the appellants are broadly based upon
    claims made by  AMK  to  professionals.   Mr  Mills  submits  that  the
    manuscript letter that is said to have been written by OWK  is  unclear
    and that it is far from clear that it was OWK who  wrote  that  letter.
    He submits that at it's highest, the letter has been  produced  by  OWK
    with the assistance of her mother, who herself has been found, in part,
    to have fabricated her account of events in Kenya.  He submits that  in
    any event, there is no evidence of any further disclosure  having  been
    made by OWK, and that evidence that could have been provided in support
    of her protection claim, has not been adduced.

20. Mr Mills submits that even if we find that OWK has  been  subjected  to
    abuse in the past by her father, we should consider whether she remains
    at risk upon return.  He  submits  that  the  "Parental  Responsibility
    Agreement" dated 17th June 2011, is a voluntary agreement entered  into
    by AMK and her husband and there is no evidence  to  confirm  that  the
    agreement is binding upon the parties, or  would  be  enforced  by  the
    authorities in Kenya without further investigation.   Furthermore,  the
    separation agreement is an agreement reached  with  the  assistance  of
    family and friends.  Mr Mills submits that AMK has in the past lived in
    Nairobi and when she did so, she did  not  hide  from  her  ex-husband.
    They remained in contact with each other, and she  facilitated  contact
    between him  and  the  children.   Mr  Mills  submits  that  if  it  is
    established that her father has subjected OWK to  abuse  in  the  past,
    there is no reason to believe that AMK would now remain in contact with
    her ex-husband and permit contact between him and OWK.  If OWK's father
    were to insist upon contact, it would be open to AMK to bring the abuse
    of  her  daughter  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  who  would
    investigate the claim.   He submits that the authorities in Kenya   are
    unlikely to enforce any previous agreement, if the abuse is brought  to
    their attention.

21. In reply, Ms Chaggar submitted that AMK has maintained her  claim  that
    her daughter was abused at the hands of her father throughout, and that
    the contact order is an official document that  is  enforceable.    She
    submits that OWK's father could insist upon contact in accordance  with
    the agreement and that will expose OWK and AMK to a risk or harm.   She
    referred us to the operational guidance note  on  Kenya  and  submitted
    that protection would be lacking in the event that the abuse of OWK was
    brought to the attention of  the  authorities.  She  submits  that  the
    objective evidence establishes that there is  no  effective  protection
    available to OWK and AMK.

THE BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF

22. We remind ourselves that the burden of proof rests upon the  appellants
    to show  that  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  us,  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that they meet  the  requirements  of
    the Qualification Regulations and that they are entitled to be  granted
    humanitarian protection  in  accordance  with  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Additionally, the burden of proof  rests  upon  the
    appellants to show that removing them to Kenya will result in a  breach
    of their rights under the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection
    of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).  The  appellants  must
    discharge the burden of proof placed upon them to the  lower  standard.
    This lower  standard  of  proof  can  be  expressed  as  a  'reasonable
    likelihood', 'a real risk' or a 'serious possibility'.

FINDINGS UPON OWK's PROTECTION CLAIM

23. We have carefully considered the submissions made by the parties as  to
    the protection claim made by OWK, and  having  considered  all  of  the
    evidence before us in the round, we are satisfied that OWK has been the
    victim of abuse at the hands of her father.  We make that finding for a
    number of reasons;

      a) In her decision of 13th November 2014, the respondent accepted,  in
         light of the evidence relied upon by the appellants, that  AMK  has
         been internally consistent and has shown a well founded fear of her
         husband in  Mombasa,  Kenya.   That  concession  was  made  by  the
         respondent having regard to the evidence from the  Gender  Violence
         Recovery Centre and the post rape claim form that refer to OWK.

      b) Although at times lacking detail, the appellant has been consistent
         in her claim that she believes OWK  to  have  been  abused  by  her
         father.  In particular, she has consistently  claimed  that  before
         moving to Nairobi  she  had  found  her  husband  naked,  in  their
         daughter's bedroom.

      c) The claims made by AMK that she believes OWK to have been subjected
         to abuse by her father are supported by the disclosure made by  OWK
         herself.  We accept that we can only place  limited  reliance  upon
         the manuscript letter that is said to have been written by OWK, but
         in our assessment of the evidence at the  lower  standard,  we  are
         satisfied  that  the  content  of   that   letter   provides   some
         corroboration to the account maintained by AMK throughout.

      d) The reports of AMK and OMK as to the abuse of  OMK  by  her  father
         have been taken seriously by their GP and Social Services

CONCLUSIONS

24. As we have set out in our previous  decision,  the  assessment  of  the
    likelihood  of  AMK  being  located  by  her  husband  on   return   is
    inextricably linked to the risk of OWK being sought by her  father.  We
    have found that there is a reasonable likelihood that OWK was subjected
    to sexual abuse at the hands of her father.  The question  that  arises
    is whether any interest that her father has in OWK, on  her  return  to
    Kenya will be rekindled, and what if any steps, AMK and OWK could  take
    to seek the protection of the authorities and or internally relocate.

25. We have considered those issues in light of the finding  we  have  made
    that OWK has been the victim of abuse at the hands of  her  father  and
    having reminded ourselves of the findings previously made by the First-
    tier Tribunal that we have summarised at paragraph 4 of this  decision.
    We have also had regard  to  objective  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellants.   That  is,  the  respondent's  Operational  Guidance  Note
    ("OGN")  relating  to  Kenya  of  December  2013.   We  have  carefully
    considered section 3.16 of that note relating to women and domestic and
    gender based violence.  We note that rape  and  domestic  violence  are
    widespread and rarely prosecuted, and the  law  does  not  specifically
    prohibit spousal rape. The law criminalises rape, defilement,  and  sex
    tourism but enforcement remained limited, and as many as 95 percent  of
    sexual offenses were  not  reported  to  the  police.    We  note  that
    traditional dispute mechanisms were frequently used to  address  sexual
    offenses in  rural  areas,  with  village  elders  assessing  financial
    compensation for the victims' families.



Sufficiency of protection and internal relocation

26. It is now well established that an asylum seeker who claims  to  be  in
    fear of persecution is entitled to asylum if he or she can show a well-
    founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason  and  that
    there would be insufficiency of state protection to  meet  it;  Horvath
    [2001] 1 AC 489.  Sufficiency of state protection, whether  from  state
    agents or non-state actors, means a willingness and ability on the part
    of the receiving state to provide through its legal system a reasonable
    level of protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for asylum
    has a well-founded fear.

27. We reject the submission made by Ms Chaggar that OWK is left vulnerable
    to on-going contact with her father, because of the  agreement  reached
    between AMK and her husband with regard to the arrangements  for  their
    children and contact.  We do not accept that AMK will be unable to  cut
    off all ties with her  ex-husband,  and  that  AMK  and  OWK  would  be
    returning to Kenya without a willingness or an ability on the  part  of
    the  Kenyan  authorities,  to  provide  through  the  legal  system,  a
    reasonable level of protection from ill-treatment.

28. We have carefully read the "Parental  Responsibility  Agreement"  dated
    17th June 2011 issued by the Ministry of Gender,  Children  and  Social
    Development.  As  it's  heading  and  the  recitals  imply,  it  is  an
    agreement between the parties, entered into by their mutual consent and
    without any coercion from anyone else.  We accept the submission of  Mr
    Mills  that  the  parental  responsibility  agreement  is  a  voluntary
    agreement entered into by AMK  and  her  ex-husband  and  there  is  no
    evidence to confirm that the agreement is  binding  upon  the  parties.
    Furthermore there is no  evidence  that  such  an  agreement  would  be
    enforced  by  the  authorities  without  some  further   investigation,
    providing AMK a good opportunity to refer to the  abuse  that  OWK  has
    been subjected to in the past, at the hands of her father.

29. We have also very carefully read the "Separation agreement"  signed  by
    AMK and her ex-husband in June 2011.  We note that  the  parties,  also
    entered into that agreement  by  consent,  and  it  appears,  with  the
    assistance of family and friends.  In  our  judgment,  upon  return  to
    Kenya in the event that her husband insisted upon re-instating  contact
    with OWK in reliance upon the two agreements, it would be open  to  AMK
    to draw the abuse that OWK has been subjected to in the  past,  to  the
    attention of the  authorities  as  a  good  reason  why  any  agreement
    previously reached, should not be enforced.

30. Whilst we acknowledge that law in Kenya does not prohibit spousal  rape
    and that rape and domestic violence are widespread, AMK is now formally
    separated from her husband and has been for some time.  In  any  event,
    the law criminalises rape, and defilement and whilst many do not report
    sexual offences to the police, AMK claims that in the past she has made
    such reports.  The OGN relied upon by  the  appellant  notes  that  the
    police have launched a special unit to investigate and address  gender-
    based violence, although its effectiveness remains to be proven.

31. There has been some progress in Kenya and  we  find  that  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection given  the  material  that  has  been  placed
    before us. The state is both willing and  able  to  afford  protection.
    There is no objective evidence to establish  that  the  authorities  in
    Kenya do not take steps to prevent abuse of children, whether by  their
    parents or others.

32. Based upon the objective evidence before us and the  findings  that  we
    have set out, we find that the authorities, in the  event  of  any  on-
    going threat from AMK's ex husband and OWK's father, would protect  AMK
    and OWK.

33. We also find that the appellants on return to Kenya, could live in  one
    of the major cities as they did  before  their  departure  to  the  UK,
    should they choose to do so.  Kenya is not a small country.  It  has  a
    large population. The appellants have been away  from  Kenya  and  away
    from their family for some time, with some,  albeit  limited,  contact.
    AMK's ex-husband believes them to be in the UK and her evidence  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes was that he has not contacted  her  in
    the UK due to the fact that he has no number for her, and he is unaware
    of her whereabouts.  It would not be clear how he would know  of  their
    return to Kenya, but even if he were to become aware of  their  return,
    as we have set out above, AMK and OWK would be able to seek  sufficient
    protection from the authorities in the event  of  any  on-going  threat
    from AMK's ex husband and OWK's father.

34. Furthermore, in our judgment, it would not be unduly harsh for AMK  and
    OWK to return to live elsewhere in Kenya should they choose to  do  so.
    We reject AMK's claim that it would be unduly harsh for her to relocate
    to other parts of Kenya because of her tribal affiliations.  AMK is  an
    industrious woman with  property  in  Kenya.   We  note  the  objective
    evidence  in  respect  of  women  in  Kenya  and  note   that   despite
    discrimination remaining an issue in certain circumstances,  there  are
    widening opportunities for women there. AMK has been very  successfully
    employed in the past.  She was  also  able  to  move  from  Mombasa  to
    Nairobi previously with her two children.  She has family remaining  in
    Kenya and there is  no  reason  why  they  could  not  assist  her,  if
    required.

35. In the end, we agree with the ultimate conclusions  reached  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Raikes.  We too are not satisfied even to  the  low
    standard of proof that the appellants have an objectively  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Kenya.  They have  failed  to  demonstrate  that
    there is a  real  risk  on  return  that  engages  either  the  Refugee
    Convention or the ECHR .

36. As to the Article 8 claims of both appellants,  it  is  uncontroversial
    that the appellants cannot succeed  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   We  have  carefully  considered  the
    detailed freestanding consideration of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes
    at paragraphs [57] to [70].  The finding that we have made  in  respect
    of OWK's protection claim does not impact upon the thorough  assessment
    of the Article 8 claim, by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   We  agree
    that the proposed removal of the appellants would  be  an  interference
    with the appellants' right to respect for their private and  or  family
    life and that the removal of the appellants' from  the  United  Kingdom
    will inevitably interfere with their private and/or family life.    The
    interference  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  necessary  in  a
    democratic society.  The crucial question is whether  the  interference
    is proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved.

37. We have had careful regard to the duty under section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and note that the  best  interests
    of AWK must be a primary consideration.  We have also had regard to the
    matters now set out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.

38. We are satisfied that upon return  to  Kenya  in  the  event  that  her
    husband insisted upon re-instating contact with OWK, it would  be  open
    to AMK to draw the abuse that OWK has been subjected to in the past, to
    the attention of the authorities as a good  reason  why  any  agreement
    previously reach should not be enforced.  There is no evidence that the
    authorities in Kenya  would  enforce  that  agreement  or  insist  upon
    contact between OWK and her father,  against  a  background  of  sexual
    abuse. As above, it is not our conclusion  that  either  appellant  has
    shown that they will face mistreatment on return on any basis.

39. It is also our view that the appellants can be expected to re-establish
    themselves in Kenya as AMK is a professional woman who  has  lived  and
    worked there previously in a number of locations before and has  family
    who have shown a willingness to offer some assistance, caring  for  her
    son in her absence, for example. For these reasons and on the basis  of
    those already been set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Raikes, and which were not challenged  before  us,  we  find  that  the
    removal of AMK and OWK to Kenya would not amount to a  disproportionate
    interference with their right to a family and or private life.

Notice of Decision

40. We re-make the decision in the  appeals  and  dismiss  the  appeals  on
    asylum grounds,  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  and  human  rights
    grounds.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
