
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10261/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 20th October 2016               |on 28th November 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    H.Z.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M.  Cleghorn,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellant is a national of Lebanon. He came to the United Kingdom
   with his wife and their two children, now aged 5 and 6, in December 2014.
   They gained entry with valid visit visas. A week later they claimed
   protection.

2. He claimed that he was at risk on return from various factions within
   the country for imputed political opinions. Whilst not a supporter of
   Hezbollah he was required to work for them in a security capacity. They
   wanted him to go to Syria to fight and he said he could not because of
   his family commitments. He recounted an incident in February 2013 when a
   car bomb detonated as he was collecting his child.  He was questioned by
   Hezbollah about his presence. In May 2013 he and his wife were attacked.
   He believes the group that attacked them oppose Hezbollah and were
   antagonistic towards the appellant and his wife because they are Shia
   Muslims. In June 2013 his wife's cousin had been killed by Hezbollah
   after protesting against their activities. In January 2014 he was in the
   vicinity of another car bomb and was subsequently questioned by Hezbollah
   about his presence at the scene. He was detained and tortured for several
   days and then released. He and his family decided to leave the country.
   Hezbollah has since been enquiring about them.

3. His claim was refused in July 2015 on credibility grounds.

4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope in July 2016 and
   dismissed. The judge did not find the account credible.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in relation to
   the judge's assessment of credibility. It was suggested that the judge
   made comments about the Lebanese postal system which went beyond judicial
   knowledge. It was also suggested that the judge dismissed the appeal on
   the basis of inherent implausibility rather than credibility.

The First tier Tribunal decision

6. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope runs to 137 paragraphs
   and comments on detailed aspects of the claim.

7. At paragraphs 19 to 23 of the decision Judge Cope referred to general
   consistency with the country information and the appellant's account and
   that of his wife. The appellant gave an account at his initial screening;
   in the subsequent letter from his representatives; in his substantive
   interview; in his statement; in responses to the refusal letter; and his
   oral evidence. His wife gave her account at screening; in her statement;
   and in her oral evidence. The judge went on to state this consistency was
   a factor in the appellant's favour but there could be other adverse
   explanations.

8. The judge referred to the general situation in Lebanon as unstable, with
   violence associated with politics and terrorist incidents. Hezbollah
   coexisted with the Lebanese authorities.   There were conflicts occurring
   between various groups including Palestinians; fundamentalists and
   difficulties connected with relations with Israel and Syria. Into this
   there was interreligious conflict.

9. The judge commented that the account given by the appellant in oral
   evidence was at times confusing .It was difficult to comprehend at times
   the point he was trying to make. The judge found it difficult to obtain
   clear and consistent answers to straightforward questions relating to his
   claim. The judge set out examples.

10. At question 33 of the appellant's interview he said he started with
   Hezbollah in 2009 and provided security in the area he lived. He said he
   did not carry a weapon nor did he receive any training. He would work 6
   days a week from 8 PM until 2 AM. This continued until 2012. Elsewhere in
   the interview, notably at question 144, reference was made to a letter
   from his representatives to the effect that he worked for Hezbollah from
   2009 until he left Lebanon. The judge found the appellant's response
   confusing but concluded he was saying his duties changed after May 2012.
   At question 155 he said he was not working for the organisation. Then he
   said he only worked one day a week. In a written response he said he
   stopped work in 2012 and returned his weapon but between then and 2014 he
   continued to do some security duties at a checkpoint. He said he stopped
   in December 2014 when he left the country. However, in his statement at
   paragraph 9 he said after being released by Hezbollah in January 2014 he
   went into hiding until he left Lebanon.

11. The judge referred to inconsistencies as to whether or not he was
   armed. At question 36 to 49 of his interview he said he did not carry a
   weapon. However, at paragraph 4 of a written response he referred to
   handing in his weapon. In cross-examination he said that before 2012 he
   carried a weapon but not afterwards.

12. There was inconsistency as to whether he received any training. At
   question 50 of his interview he said not. In his oral evidence he said he
   had seven days training.

13. There were inconsistencies as to his duties for Hezbollah. At question
   52 of his interview he said he was at a checkpoint in the street where he
   lived and that was the only area he worked in. However, his wife did not
   know if he worked in other areas.

14. The appellant produced a health card which he said was issued by
   Hezbollah to its members. The judge could see nothing on it to show
   membership of Hezbollah. At para  65 it is recorded that the appellant
   said he asked his sister to forward a threatening letter she had received
   as well as the medical card. When the envelope arrived however it had
   been opened and only the card was inside.

15. At paragraph 68 the judge refers to the name and address at the back of
   the copy envelope provided. The appellant did not know the name on the
   back but then said it was the person who owned the store where his sister
   had sent the letter from. The appellant said in Lebanon there was no
   postal service but some companies had a store where people could hand in
   letters.

16. The envelope had a franked postage stamp. At paragraph 72 the judge
   said because of this he rejected the appellant's claim that there was no
   Lebanese postal service and concluded a more likely explanation was that
   the letter was simply sent through a normal postal service. At paragraph
   73 and 74 the judge stated:

         "... in my duties as an immigration judge I have seen envelopes
         from very many if not most of the postal systems of the world.
         Although certain countries such as United States of America usually
         have any return address the written on the front of the globe, the
         great majority will have it written on the rear of the envelope. I
         have never heard suggested that the name and address written on the
         back of an envelope in this fashion when it is sent to a postal
         service is that the postal agency through which the envelope has
         been handled rather like being the name and address of the person
         who has sent it.

         Of course Lebanon can be an exception to what in my experience is a
         general rule, but was held more I am not prepared to accept the
         appellant is explanation as being reasonably likely to be true."

17. The judge went on to comment about an inconsistency with the evidence
   of the appellant's wife who said the envelope was empty.

18. The judge then dealt with the appellant's claimed detention in January
   2014. The appellant said he was released after signing a letter agreeing
   to fight in Syria and that Hezbollah would not be responsible if he were
   injured. At paragraph 80 the judge referred to a report from the Refugee
   Board of Canada in November 2011 which recorded that Hezbollah was not a
   de facto government. The judge concluded it was highly implausible they
   would have a system of disclaimers.

The leave application

19. The leave application seeks to fault the judge for his comments about
   the postal service in Lebanon.

20. It was also contended that the judge made assumptions about how
   Hezbollah would operate and conflated plausibility with credibility.
   There was also reference to the judge relying on a 2011 report which
   predated the hostilities in Syria.

21. It was also said that the judge failed to have regard to the
   possibility that the core of the account could be true notwithstanding
   untruths about peripheral matters.

22. It was suggest the judge failed to make allowances for the appellant's
   state of mind.

23. It was also contended that the appellant's representative was taken by
   surprise by the judge questioning the appellant's nationality.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

24. At hearing Mrs Cleghorn referred to paragraph 18 onwards were the judge
   stated the appellant and his wife gave largely consistent accounts
   compared against the country information.

25. She also referred to the judge's comments about the postal system,
   pointing out the judge was not an expert.

26. She also referred to issues with the interpreter and submitted that the
   judge in the circumstance should have been slow to find inconsistencies.

27. She submitted that the judge was conflating issues of probability with
   credibility. An example was at paragraph 88 with the appellant stating he
   was in hiding at his sister-in-law's house despite being under
   surveillance. The explanation was that there were two entrances to the
   property.

28. She submitted that an expert report on Hezbollah could not be obtained
   given the nature of the organisation and the appellant should not be
   penalised for this.

29. She also referred paragraph 114 and the reference to the appellant's
   nationality.

30. In reply, Mrs R. Petersen suggested the latter might simply have been a
   slip of concentration.

31. Regarding the comments about the postal service she submitted the judge
   was not setting himself up as an expert and at paragraph 76 was prepared
   to accept that the envelope was posted in Lebanon. The key finding
   however was that the judge did not accept it had been demonstrated the
   envelope contained a copy medical card produced or that at some stage it
   contained a threatening letter.

32. Regarding the Canadian Refugee Report, this was contained in the
   appellant's bundle and what the judge said at paragraph 76 about
   Hezbollah not forcibly recruiting members was correct.

33. In assessing the appellant's evidence the judge was not forming an
   opinion based upon Western standards but was considering simply what the
   appellant said.

34. She submitted the judge was entitled to comment at paragraph 89 that it
   was not reasonably likely that Hezbollah would be so inefficient that
   they would only guide one entrance to a building.

Consideration

35. I am satisfied that the reference at paragraph 114 to the appellant's
   nationality is simply a slip on the part of the immigration judge. The
   decision indicates that the reasons for refusal letter was carefully
   considered. Paragraph 10 of the refusal letter states that the
   appellant's identity and nationality has been accepted. This would be
   consistent with the fact the appellant and his family had been issued
   with valid visit visas. The judge in the opening describes the appellant
   as a citizen of Lebanon. Nowhere else in the decision is there any
   reference to a doubt as to his nationality.

36. The judge found the appellant a difficult witness who was unable to
   give a straightforward answer to a simple question. Similar problems were
   encountered in his asylum interview. Some individuals can find it hard to
   listen to a question and to keep to the point. It can also suggest a
   person being evasive.

37. The judge considered language problems. The appellant had complained
   about the Iraqi interpreter used at the asylum interview. At hearing an
   Egyptian national was used without any apparent difficulty. The judge
   observed that the appellant appeared to have a good command of English
   and concluded that he would be able to voice any concerns at the time.

38. The judge had regard to the country information and the totality of the
   evidence of the appellant and his wife. The judge accepted that the claim
   was broadly consistent with country events. However there were numerous
   inconsistencies in the evidence which the judge reflected on.

39. The appellant did not give a consistent account as to when he worked
   for Hezbollah and what he did for them. The judge referred to his asylum
   interview (question 33) where he said he started with them in 2009 and
   stopped in 2012. He said he did not carry a weapon and had no training
   and worked at least six days a week from 8 PM to 2 AM. In the same
   interview a letter from his representatives was put to him which
   indicated he had been working for Hezbollah until he left Lebanon.
   However, in his statement he said that after being released in January
   2014 he went into hiding until he left in December 2014.

40. There are contradictions in his account as to whether he was armed or
   not. There was uncertainty over what his duties where, with the appellant
   stating he only ever patrolled his own street with his wife not
   confirming this.

41. Regarding how the appellant came by the medical card the judge made the
   observation that the envelope had a franked postage stamp. On the face of
   it contradicted the appellant's account there was no postal service in
   Lebanon. I find this a matter of legitimate comment by the judge. The
   judge went on to say that the address on the back was indicative of the
   sender rather than a postal agency. The judge was not giving expert
   evidence but was simply commenting on his experiences. Whilst a decision
   on credibility must be reached rationally the decision maker is entitled
   to draw on their common sense and their ability as a practical and
   informed person to identify what is or is not plausible. A judge is not
   expected to operate as a machine in a sealed vacuum but is entitled to
   draw on his own experiences. The judge for completeness acknowledged that
   Lebanon might have its own unique system. Notably, there has been no
   application by the appellant's representative to introduce country
   information to demonstrate there is no postal service in Lebanon.

42. The appellant's representative sent in a BBC article on the treatment
   of Lebanese Sunnis for admission under rule 15 (2) (a). The covering
   letter states that it addresses the problems of Lebanese Sudanese with
   Hezbollah. The relevance of this is not apparent as the appellant states
   he and his wife are Shia. As an example of the balance in the judgement
   First-tier Judge Cope at paragraph 95 accept the possibility of a
   religiously motivated attack upon the appellant and his wife.

43. First tier Judge Cope commented at paragraph 78 on Hezbollah requiring
   a disclaimer of liability from the appellant for fighting in Syria. The
   judge found this extraordinary. I find no fault in the judge referring to
   a report submitted by a representative to make the point that Hezbollah
   are not a legitimate government or employer and the notion of a civil
   disclaimer was not credible.

44. The judge commented on other aspects of the detention and the claimed
   abuse and I find the comments appropriate. At paragraph 87 the judge
   specifically refers to the appellant's representative not referring him
   to any up-to-date information to contradict the report submitted that
   Hezbollah do not engage in forcible recruitment.

45. The judge then referred to the implausibility of the appellant hiding
   for an extended time at his sister-in-law's house, notwithstanding he
   claimed the property was under surveillance. I find the comments
   appropriate.

Conclusion

46. When looked at in the round the decision indicates that careful
   consideration was given to the claim and multiple inconsistencies and
   implausibility's noted. I find no substance in any of the issues raised
   on behalf of the appellant. The judge did not assess the credibility of
   the claim from a Western viewpoint but simply from common sense and based
   on contradictions in the account. My conclusion is that no material error
   of law has been demonstrated and the decision dismissing the appellant's
   appeal shall stand.



Decision

No material error of law has been demonstrated. The decision of First-tier
Immigration Judge Cope dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

