
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa106822014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                             |On 8 June 2016                |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KAMRUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Coleman instructed by Lawland Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Respondent in this case was the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Appellant was the Respondent. For the sake of  clarity
    I refer to the Respondent in  this  appeal  as  the  Claimant  and  the
    Appellant as the Secretary of State.

    Background
2.   The Claimant's immigration history is that he left Bangladesh by  plane
    and arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 January 2009 at which  time  he
    was approximately 12 years old and he  claimed  asylum  on  16  January
    2009. He was granted discretionary leave to remain in  accordance  with
    the Respondent's policy on unaccompanied minors until 29 April 2012. On
    10 May 2012 he made an application for further leave to remain  on  the
    basis of asylum and human rights and that application was refused on 18
    November 2014. He appealed the decision to refuse to grant  of  further
    leave under section 82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). In a decision dated 4 March 2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blake dismissed his asylum appeal and allowed his appeal
    on human rights  grounds,  namely  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi).   The
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and  there
    was no cross-appeal  from  the  Claimant.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer granted permission to appeal on the basis that it  was  arguable
    that the  judge  erred  in  not  properly  considering  the  Claimant's
    circumstances should he be returned to  Bangladesh  and  in  particular
    regarding the ambiguous findings regarding what family he had there.

3.   The matter came before me and I determined that there  was  a  material
    error of law in relation to the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    regarding paragraph 276ADE and Article 8.  Those findings are  set  out
    in a decision that was made pursuant to a hearing on 8  September  2015
    and which was sent to the parties.

4.   My findings and reasons were as follows. The requirements of  paragraph
    276 ADE (1) (vi) are not satisfied  unless  an  applicant  demonstrates
    that there are very significant obstacles to  his  re-integration  into
    the country to which he will return.  That necessarily involves a First-
    tier Judge making findings of fact in relation to the circumstances  in
    the country of return.  In finding that there was inconclusive evidence
    as to whether  or  not  the  Claimant  would  receive  any  support  in
    Bangladesh and finding also that it was an  incredible  aspect  of  the
    Claimant's claim that he had no contact with his family in Bangladesh I
    considered that the First-tier Tribunal made inconsistent findings  and
    his conclusions  in  respect  of  paragraph  276ADE  were  inadequately
    reasoned. If there was inconclusive evidence and the burden was on  the
    Claimant he should have found that he had not discharged the burden  on
    him. Further, he failed to  give  adequate  reason  why  he  found  the
    absence of ties determinative. I found therefore  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal gave inadequate reasons in relation to  material  matters  and
    that that amounted to a material error of law.

5.   Further, there was no express reference in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to section 117.  Whilst it  was  not  necessary  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to set in full each of the statutory provisions, it
    was required to demonstrate that the relevant statutory provisions  had
    been taken into account, and that they had been applied to the facts of
    the particular appeal (Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).  At
    no point in the decision did the First-tier Tribunal direct itself that
    little weight should be given to a private life which  was  established
    whilst  the  Claimant's  immigration  status   was   precarious.    The
    Claimant's status was precarious because it depended on a further grant
    of leave (AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260).

6.   I preserved no findings of fact in relation  to  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal under paragraph 276ADE and under  Article  8.   The
    matter therefore came before me as a re-hearing on those matters.

The Hearing
7.   I heard evidence at the hearing from the Claimant and one witness,  Mrs
    Nessa.  The Claimant adopted his witness statement that was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at pages 2 to  9  of  the  Claimant's  bundle.   In
    answer to questions from Mr Coleman he said that he had been offered  a
    place at University by Queen Mary College.  He had  achieved  two  'A's
    and a 'B' at A level.  He was proposing to do a BSc  in  IT  management
    where he learnt code specific programmes and designed the  outer  layer
    of the programme and could edit it.  He hoped  to  get  a  First  Class
    honours degree and work for Stanley  Morgan  or  KGMB  as  a  programme
    manager.  He described the contents of the photographs he submitted  in
    an eight page bundle, namely that he was interviewed by Sky Sports  and
    won an outstanding achievement award in cricket.  He also  described  a
    newspaper article from Eastern Life and said he ran  a  mini  club  for
    people with behavioural issues and did sports  sessions  with  them  to
    help with social problems, for example knife crime.  He had acquired  a
    wide network of friends and from his school sports and  voluntary  work
    background.  He said his late uncle had passed away in 2014 and he  had
    heard from that uncle that his  family  may  have  moved.   He  had  no
    brothers and sisters.  He spoke Bengali.  He could read  and  write  in
    Bengali a little bit.  His witness was his father's cousin.  He  called
    her his aunt.  He had no other relatives in the UK apart from that.

8.   Mr Melvin asked if the Claimant had heard from his late uncle  in  2014
    that his family may have moved.  He said it must have been before  2014
    because that was when his uncle died.  He said that his uncle  did  not
    say where the family had moved.  He was asked what attempts he had made
    to contact his family and he said  he  did  not  know  where  to  start
    because he did not have anything to contact them.  He  had  not  phoned
    the Bangladeshi Embassy.  He did not know whether there was any  reason
    why the authorities could not help him with locating his  parents.   He
    did not try to ask for support from organisations that might be able to
    help him.  He was asked if there was any reason  he  did  not  ask  for
    support from organisations and he said Bangladesh was  like  a  foreign
    country.  Here he had friends and family and  there  was  nothing  back
    home in Bangladesh.  He was asked if he blamed his parents for  sending
    him here and he said it was like they did not want him.  He  was  asked
    if he did not want to return and he said in Bangladesh he did not  have
    anything.  He would not be able to go to university in Bangladesh.   He
    did not know if the qualifications were very  different.   He  was  not
    perfect at reading or writing in Bengali.  It  was  very  difficult  to
    brush up because he was  always  speaking  English  and  the  education
    system was very different here.  He knew the course  he  wanted  to  do
    here and had done research but he did not  know  anything  about  those
    things  there.   He  had  made  no  attempt  to  look   at   Bangladesh
    universities.  He did not intend to attend a management course which he
    had initially applied for here.  He had applied for two courses and  he
    had chosen his preferred course.  He did not know if  the  same  course
    was available in Bangladesh but  he  said  the  course  was  very  rare
    because it was linked with a company.

9.   He had done voluntary work and unpaid work here  and  had  no  contacts
    there.  He looked after 35 children here and taught  them  sports.   He
    did social work about knife  crime  and  bullying.   He  was  attending
    college  here.   He  did  not  know  about  his  aunt's  relatives   in
    Bangladesh.  He was asked if he was  deliberately  trying  to  distance
    himself from Bangladesh and he said he did not understand the question.
     He had made no efforts to trace his  family.  He  was  busy  with  the
    children he helped and it was sad that his family  had  abandoned  him.
    He wanted to improve things in his community here.  He was asked if  he
    had any fears if returned  to  Bangladesh  and  he  said  he  would  be
    frightened because he felt that he was born there but everything he had
    achieved was here and  it  was  a  strange  country  and  he  would  be
    frightened and had friends and family here and not there.

10.  Here in the UK he resided with his aunt and one  cousin  who  had  just
    finished university.  He helped his aunt with the shopping and reminded
    her about her medication.  She had seven children all of whom had moved
    away.  They were at university and now lived elsewhere.  He had contact
    with a few of them when they came to the house and the younger one grew
    up with him but they had less contact since he had been to  university.
    The 21 year old was working with  a  company  and  had  graduated  from
    Oxford.  He went in the morning and came back at  night.   He  did  not
    really help his aunt.  The last time his aunt  was  in  Bangladesh  was
    around 2011.  He could not remember how long she was  there  for.   The
    flat he lived in had three bedrooms.  It was a first  floor  flat.   He
    did not know if she owned it.  She was not working and he did not  know
    if she had ever worked.  He had lived there for seven years.

11.  There was no re-examination.  I asked him if he was not  curious  about
    his family in Bangladesh and he said he did not remember  anything.   I
    asked if he could remember what his  parents  said  about  why  he  was
    coming here and he said he did not remember anything  about  what  they
    said, he just remembered he was going to school.

12.  Mr Coleman then asked what his parents said before he left and he  said
    he did not remember, he just knew he was here and he did  not  remember
    if they said he was coming to the UK.

13.  Nutun Nessa gave  evidence.   Mr  Coleman  asked  her  to  confirm  her
    address.  She adopted her  witness  statement.   She  said  she  forgot
    things as she was depressed.  She was last in Bangladesh in 2012.   The
    Claimant was her cousin's son.  She treated him like her own son and he
    looked after her, helped  with  shopping  and  medication  because  she
    forgot to take it.  Her children had grown up and moved away  and  were
    living on their own.  Her children were married and from time  to  time
    came to visit her and were busy with their own  children.   Kamrul  had
    lived with her for seven years and he was a good boy and had  done  his
    studying.  He helped her quite a lot  and  she  was  lonely  since  her
    husband passed away in 2014.  She did not  know  about  the  Claimant's
    family in Bangladesh.  She was asked how she  had  first  contact  with
    him.  She said her husband brought him and said he would stay with them
    and she would have to look after him  and  feed  him.   She  was  asked
    whether it was her husband's decision that he should come and join  the
    family.  She said, "my husband said he brought him over and said he  is
    going to stay with us".  Mr Coleman asked what she meant by brought him
    over and she said she could not remember, her husband  brought  him  to
    the house.  Mr Coleman asked if her husband brought him from Bangladesh
    and she said no, from the UK.  She was asked if  she  was  happy  about
    this arrangement and she said he was a young boy and she  looked  after
    him.  She was asked what she thought about her cousin sending him  here
    and she said she did not know anything about it. She could not say what
    happened. She could not remember why he was sent here and she  did  not
    know.

14.  She was asked whether her husband went with her in 2012 on holiday  and
    she said that she went alone.  She was asked whether she had  made  any
    effort to contact or find the Claimant's family and she  said  she  did
    not ask their whereabouts, she could not  find  them.   She  was  asked
    whether if the Claimant was allowed to stay he  would  live  with  her.
    She said he could stay with her as he helped her, he was a good boy and
    taught sports and did a good job in the community.  She  was  asked  if
    she had family members who would help him find his feet  in  Bangladesh
    and she said he was from a poor family and she did not  know  where  he
    could stay. He had grown up here and  if  he  went  back  it  would  be
    difficult.  She had no income and could not send him any money.

15.  Mr Melvin asked how often she visited Bangladesh and she said the  last
    time she visited was the first time in a  long  time.   When  she  went
    there she went with her children and stayed for two weeks and  did  not
    like it.  She stayed in Sylhet.  She was asked if she was  deliberately
    avoiding his questions and she said no, she stayed in Sylhet.  He asked
    who she visited and she said she stayed with her son  at  her  in-laws'
    house and went to a few places for two weeks.   Four  of  her  children
    were working and another was at university and she could  not  remember
    things.  It was put to her that the Claimant  claimed  his  father  was
    involved in politics in Bangladesh  and  she  was  asked  if  she  knew
    anything about this.  She said, "I know he is doing well, I don't  know
    anything about back home".  She was asked if her family received  money
    to take care of the Claimant in the United Kingdom and she said she did
    not know anything about that.  Whatever her husband had  done  she  did
    not know about.  She was asked if her working family could  assist  the
    Claimant in Bangladesh financially and she said she did not think  they
    would do that. They did not give her money so how could they give it to
    him.  She did not think anyone had asked them and they  did  not  visit
    her.  She was asked how many of her sons and daughters went in 2012 and
    she said two of her children went with her and she could  not  remember
    how long she had had British citizenship but had to renew her  passport
    there in 2016.  She did not have any money  to  give  the  Claimant  at
    university.

16.  There was no re-examination.

17.  I asked how she knew his family were poor.  She said if he  had  to  go
    back anyone who stayed there was from a poor background, they could not
    look after him.  I asked her given he had described  his  father  as  a
    prominent businessman in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  why
    she said he was poor.  She said everybody was poor, they did  not  have
    enough money for everyday life and how could she give him to someone to
    look after.  I said I wanted to understand her evidence  correctly  and
    asked whether it was true that she really did not ask why  she  had  to
    look after him when her husband brought him.  She said she did not know
    anything and she was finding it a bit difficult.  I asked if she stayed
    with relatives in the two weeks she was in Bangladesh and she said  she
    went to in-laws' houses and could not remember where she had been.  Her
    sons had taken her there.   I  asked  again  whether  she  stayed  with
    relatives and she said she stayed with family members and she  did  not
    remember who. It was in her in-laws' house.

18.  Mr Coleman asked if she did not  know  anything  about  his  family  in
    Bangladesh and she said she did not know about his family members.  She
    had been trying to find out but no one could tell her anything.

19.  In submissions Mr Melvin relied on the refusal letter.   He  said  that
    neither the Claimant nor his witnesses had any  credibility  whatsoever
    in this matter.  It was clear that they were both hiding evidence  from
    the Tribunal as to the exact circumstances regarding his arrival in the
    United Kingdom in 2009 and subsequent attempts to trace the parents.  I
    had heard evidence that he had made no attempt to ask  the  Bangladeshi
    authorities to assist him to converse with Bangladeshi community groups
    and he had no interest in finding them.  It was  difficult  to  believe
    when the Claimant's own evidence was that his father was a  businessman
    and involved in politics that he could not be found.  The asylum  claim
    was found to be without credibility and the Claimant did not attempt to
    resurrect his claim that there would be harm to him on  return.   There
    were relatives and parents in Bangladesh  and  Mr  Islam  had  made  no
    attempt to consider going to  university.   His  focus  was  solely  to
    remain here and to say or do anything to enhance his position including
    being untruthful about evidence given.  His witness had proven to  have
    a selective memory and blamed medical issues.  There were relatives  on
    his aunt's side capable of assisting him on his  return  to  Bangladesh
    after obtaining an education at public expense.  He asked  me  to  find
    that he could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE as there were cultural
    and family ties in Bangladesh if he was required to leave.

20.  With regard to Article 8, he did not accept that there was family  life
    engaging Article 8 and his submissions were set  out  in  his  skeleton
    argument including those in relation to Section 117 of  the  2002  Act.
    He referred me to the  latest  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  Rajendran
    (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 00138 (IAC). Little weight should  be
    given to a private life based on the disingenuous claim for asylum.  As
    the Upper Tribunal noted the Claimant's life was one  of  a  precarious
    nature and as such little weight  should  be  placed  on  it.   He  was
    assisting local authorities  with  voluntary  work  and  there  was  no
    challenge to that fact.   A  small  part  of  voluntary  work  was  not
    sufficient to displace the legislation and he asked me to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

21.  Mr Coleman submitted that it  was  entirely  speculative  that  he  was
    lying and hiding evidence and there was no basis for  that  conclusion.
    There had been no inconsistencies.  His aunt  had  been  unable  to  be
    specific about  anything.   She  was  fairly  recently  bereaved.   The
    husband made the important decisions in her life.  The  fact  that  she
    did not know was true.  She was a poor Bangladeshi woman who had  taken
    him under her wing.  He was a person of good character and was entitled
    to be believed and Mr  Melvin  did  not  score  any  points  in  cross-
    examination.

22.  With regard to the evidence of lack of  family  circumstances,  if  the
    Home Office were unable to trace his family, to suggest that he  should
    be able to find his family was absurd.  What we knew for sure was  that
    he arrived when he was 12 years old and a child and  I  could  be  sure
    that he could have been in no way complicit in being  sent  here.   His
    precarious immigration status was not his fault.  He was sent here  and
    whether her late husband was complicit was not clear.  She did not know
    and we could be sure that she was not a part of  that.   There  was  no
    hint or suggestion that he had to work as a domestic servant as he  had
    really excelled academically.  There had been nothing untoward and  she
    loved him due to his achievements and he had achieved a great deal as a
    result of hard work and against adversity.  He would  be  a  tremendous
    asset to the United Kingdom.

23.  In terms of Section 117 whether  someone  could  contribute  positively
    was relevant and he was a role model for underprivileged  children  and
    children who were not on the straight and  narrow  and  that  made  his
    position very attractive.  On the evidence he was for  whatever  reason
    abandoned by his family and there had been never any suggestion that he
    had been indirectly in contact.  He felt sad when he thought about  his
    parents.  He blamed them  and  he  could  not  be  blamed  for  feeling
    abandoned.  He did not want to return and would therefore not look into
    making arrangements.  He could not have been  properly  criticised  for
    failing to make arrangements.  There had been a two year delay  in  the
    decision making process and in relation to someone of his age it was  a
    relevant factor and it meant that he became more established here.   He
    had been here for seven years and for two of those he  was  awaiting  a
    decision.  He was a Bangladeshi and read and  wrote  some  but  minimal
    amounts.  He had no home, no job, no family and  no  friends.   He  had
    been here since he was a  child  and  he  would  be  vulnerable  as  an
    individual and frightened as a 19 year old.  It was an alien country to
    him.  It  was  not  his  fault  and  those  factors  amounted  to  very
    significant obstacles I could be satisfied that there was no social and
    familial support.  There would have to be some firm evidence  that  his
    family were in touch with him, so he had social ties but  the  evidence
    suggested that he had no one and he would not be returning to  anything
    and that satisfied paragraph 276ADE(vi).  It was not a  threshold  that
    was unobtainable.  Some cases fitted into it and in relation to a child
    that was the type of case that it was envisaged would  succeed.   There
    was of course  Article  8  and  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    because there were unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual.
     He was a boy sent here at 12 years old and he submitted that it  would
    be unjustifiably harsh in those circumstances.   He  had  a  degree  of
    private life deserving of respect.  He could not have been expected  to
    develop a family life here.  He was an adult and he had lived with  his
    aunt for seven years.   His  education,  his  voluntary  work  and  his
    network of friends and outstanding achievements amounted to  a  glowing
    private life and it was hard to imagine a  more  entrenched  one.   The
    precariousness of his immigration status that had been spent here as  a
    child were not matters that should be  given  weight  and  the  balance
    tipped in his favour.

24.  Mr Melvin replied in relation to a point of law  that  in  relation  to
    delay the case of Nnyanzi v United Kingdom 21878/06  ECHR  282  in  the
    skeleton argument was relevant and he referred me to the case of EU and
    others [2013] EWCA Civ 32 with regard to  the  tracing  duties  of  the
    Appellant.

Discussion and Findings

25.  In coming to my conclusions in this appeal I have taken account of  all
    of the evidence submitted by both parties.

26.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Claimant's asylum  appeal.  There
    was no cross-appeal by the Claimant in relation to his  asylum  appeal.
    In Devaseelan 2002 UKIAT 00702, the Tribunal held that where  a  second
    appeal deals with the same issues  as  a  previous  appeal,  the  first
    Tribunal's determination stands as  an  assessment  of  the  claim  the
    Appellant was making at the time of that first  determination.   It  is
    not binding on  the  second  Tribunal  but,  there  again,  the  second
    Tribunal is not hearing an appeal against it.   The  Tribunal  set  out
    various principles: the first  decision is always the  starting  point;
    facts since then can always be considered; facts before  then  but  not
    relevant to the first decision can always  be  considered;  the  second
    Tribunal should treat with circumspection relevant facts that  had  not
    been brought to the first Tribunal's attention; if issues and  evidence
    on the first and second appeals are materially  the  same,  the  second
    Tribunal should treat the issues  as  settled  by  the  first  decision
    rather than allowing the matter  to  be  relitigated.   Devaseelan  was
    approved by the Court of Appeal in Lkrim Djebbar 2004 EWCA Civ 804.

27.  In DK (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  1
    WLR 1246 Latham LJ made the following observations in relation  to  the
    procedures then in place for reconsideration of  a  decision  following
    the identification of an error of law in the decision:

    "25.  Accordingly, as far as the scope of reconsideration is concerned,
    the tribunal is  entitled  to  approach  it,  and  to  give  directions
    accordingly, on the basis that the reconsideration will first determine
    whether or not there are any identifiable errors of law and  will  then
    consider the effect of  any  such  error  or  errors  on  the  original
    decision.  That assessment should prima facie take place on  the  basis
    of the findings of fact and the conclusions of the  original  tribunal,
    save and in so far as they have been infected by the  identified  error
    or errors of law.  If they have not  been  infected  by  any  error  or
    errors of law, the tribunal should only revisit them if  there  is  new
    evidence or material which should  be  received  in  the  interests  of
    justice and which could affect those findings  and  conclusions  or  if
    there are  other  exceptional  circumstances  which  justify  reopening
    them."

28.  I have set out the relevant conclusions in my decision  in  respect  of
    the error of law above. The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  the  following
    findings of fact. At paragraph 75 of the decision  he  found  that  the
    Claimant's account was not credible. He rejected the Claimant's account
    that he would be at risk because of his  father's  involvement  with  a
    political party. The political party named by the Claimant could not be
    found to exist. At paragraph 78 he found that the Claimant's family had
    gone to great lengths to remove him from Bangladesh and place him  with
    an uncle in the UK and that this was inconsistent with his  claim  that
    he had lost all contact with his family.  At paragraphs 81  and  82  he
    did not accept that the Claimant's father had gone into hiding.

29.  In accordance with  the  case  law  cited  above,  I  find  that  these
    findings of fact are not infected by the errors of  law  identified  in
    relation to  the  First-tier  tribunal's  conclusions  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 ECHR.

30.  The Claimant contends that he meets the requirements of  paragraph  276
    ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules. In YM (Uganda) 2014  EWCA  1292  the
    Court of Appeal held at [39] that for applications  which  are  decided
    after 28 July 2014 the relevant wording is  " ....  aged  18  years  or
    above, has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
    (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the United  Kingdom".
    This version of the Rule therefore  applies  to  the  Claimant  as  his
    application was decided in November 2014.

31.  I have not been referred to any specific authority in relation  to  the
    wording "very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration". In
    YM (Uganda) v SSHJD Case C5/2013/1864 the Court  of  Appeal  considered
    the previous version of the Rule  which  required  that  the  Appellant
    demonstrate that he had "no ties (including social, cultural or family)
    with the country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
    UK" and endorsed Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT
    00060 (IAC) and stated that the test was an exacting one.  The exercise
    that had to be conducted was a "rounded assessment of all the  relevant
    circumstances", which were not to be confined to "social, cultural  and
    family" issues. Similarly, I consider that the test in the new  version
    of the Rule is an exacting one and in assessing whether there are  very
    significant  obstacles  to  the  Claimant's  integration,   a   rounded
    assessment must  be  conducted  and  the  existence  of  ties  will  be
    relevant.

32.  The Claimant  adopted  his  witness  statement  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at page 1 of his bundle. In that statement he maintained  that
    he would be at risk on the basis of his father's political  involvement
    in Bangladesh and that  he  would  be  at  risk  from  the  Bangladeshi
    authorities and influential groups. He asserted that his father  was  a
    well-known activist and leader of the local party. He claims that since
    his arrival in the UK he has lost contact with his  parents  and  heard
    that they had moved to another place as they believed their lives  were
    in danger. He states that he has no other relatives in  Bangladesh  and
    has no social or cultural ties to that country. He claims that his life
    would be in danger and he would be destitute if he went back.

33.  The Claimant did not seek to argue before me that he would be  at  risk
    of harm on return. It is clear from reading  the  Claimant's  interview
    dated January 2009 at A2 of the Respondent's and in the  light  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings  of  fact  that  the  Claimant's  family
    arranged for him to join a  family  in  the  UK,  namely  that  of  his
    father's cousin, Mrs  Nessa.  The  Claimant  informed  the  Immigration
    Officer in that interview that he left his parent's home and came  with
    a man and woman to the UK who pretended to be his parents.  On  arrival
    the people he travelled  with  dropped  him  at  Mrs  Nessa's  and  her
    husband's house. The Claimant stated at A5 that he had  previously  met
    the uncle in 2007 at his home.

34.  The First-tier Tribunal found, as stated  above,  that  the  Claimant's
    circumstances were not as claimed in  Bangladesh.  He  found  that  his
    father was not a member of a political party, did not  go  into  hiding
    and his family went to great lengths to get him out  of  Bangladesh.  I
    find it wholly unbelievable that the Claimant and his aunt do not  know
    his parent and wider family's  whereabouts  in  Bangladesh.  There  was
    clearly an elaborate  arrangement  involving  deception  regarding  the
    Claimant's identity to get him to the UK. The Claimant  maintained  his
    account to be at risk of persecution that he made  on  arrival  at  the
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2015.  That  account  was
    disbelieved. He has not sought to appeal that decision or argue  before
    me that his account was true. Mr Coleman argued that the  Claimant  was
    not complicit in the arrangement to get him to the UK. That may well be
    true, but he nevertheless maintained a false account 6 years after  his
    arrival here. It also follows from the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
    of fact in relation to his credibility that if his father  was  not  at
    risk, there would be no need for him to go into  hiding  or  indeed  to
    cease his contact with the Claimant.  Further,  in  the  light  of  the
    effort and in all likelihood expense of arranging for the  Claimant  to
    come to the UK it is unlikely, in the absence of any risk, that contact
    would be severed.

35.  I found the evidence of both witnesses  regarding  their  knowledge  of
    his parent's whereabouts to lack credibility.  It  was  the  Claimant's
    account in his evidence before me that he had made no attempts to trace
    his family. I note that the Respondent also stated in paragraph  57  of
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter that the Claimant had not  provided  the
    contact information required and that the Home  Office  was  unable  to
    utilise therefore the limited service that the British High  Commission
    in Dhaka had to trace his family. I do not find  it  credible  that  he
    simply would have acquiesced in a situation where he would  be  content
    to have no contact with his birth parents.  On  his  own  evidence  his
    uncle was aware of their whereabouts because  he  stated  that  he  had
    heard from his uncle some time before 2014 that his  parents  may  have
    moved.

36.  I found Mrs Nessa's evidence  to  be  unbelievable.  According  to  her
    witness statement at p1 of the Claimant's bundle dated 14  March  2016,
    since his arrival to the UK, her husband had attempted to  contact  his
    family on numerous occasions but without any success. She  also  states
    that whenever she spoke to relatives in Bangladesh  she  would  ask  of
    news of his family but nobody  knew  of  their  whereabouts.   In  oral
    evidence when she was asked what she thought about her  cousin  sending
    him here she said she did not know anything about it. She could not say
    what happened. She could not remember why he was sent here and she  did
    not know why it was. When asked about the Claimant's  father  she  said
    she did not know anything about him. When she was asked if  her  family
    received money to take care of the Claimant in the United  Kingdom  and
    she said she did not know anything about that.

37.  I simply do not find it credible that she would know nothing about  the
    Claimant's circumstances in Bangladesh, nothing about  the  arrangement
    to bring him here or remember why he was sent here. I do  not  find  it
    credible that even if her husband had made the  arrangements  that  she
    would not ask why he she was being asked to take him into her  home  or
    about his circumstances in Bangladesh. On her evidence, the  Claimant's
    father is her cousin. In the circumstances her asserted  utter  absence
    of curiosity or knowledge of any of the circumstances relating  to  the
    Claimant's background in Bangladesh or arrival here is highly unlikely.

38.  I also found her evidence in relation to who she visited in  Bangladesh
    to be less than truthful. In answer to my questions she said that could
    not remember where  she  had  been  and  she  did  not  remember  which
    relatives she had seen in Bangladesh. I do not accept  that  she  could
    have forgotten this in the light of the fact she was there in 2012.  No
    medical evidence has been presented to show she has issues with memory.



39.  I have taken account of the fact that the  Claimant  has  an  excellent
    academic record and has made significant contributions to his community
    in relation to voluntary work and attained great sporting achievements.
    However, this does not persuade me that he has been telling  the  truth
    about his contact with his family in  Bangladesh.  He  clearly  has  an
    interest in maintaining that there is no contact in the  light  of  his
    evidence that he does not want to return to Bangladesh  and  wishes  to
    study and remain here.

40.  I find therefore that the likelihood is that the Claimant and his  aunt
    retain contact with the Claimant's family in Bangladesh. He left at the
    age of 12 and is likely therefore to  have  acquired  familiarity  with
    customs there at an age when it was not unreasonable to think he  would
    retain a rudimentary understanding of how to function  and  get  on  in
    that society. He speaks Bengali and his aunt, with whom  he  has  lived
    since his  arrival  here  in  2009,  clearly  retains  links  with  the
    Bangladeshi community both here and in  Bangladesh.  According  to  his
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, his  father  was  a  prominent
    businessman. In the circumstances I do not think it is likely that  the
    Claimant would be destitute on  return.  Further,  he  has  significant
    academic gifts and laudable A'level  results  which  would  undoubtedly
    ease his path either to further education or employment  on  return.  I
    conclude therefore that  he  retains  family,  linguistic,  social  and
    cultural ties to Bangladesh  and  notwithstanding  the  length  of  his
    absence he has not demonstrated that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration.

     Article 8

41.   The  first  issue  is  whether  there  are  compelling   circumstances
    warranting  a  consideration  of  the  Claimant's  case   outside   the
    Immigration Rules (SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA  Civ  387).  The
    two-stage approach has been approved by the Court of Appeal in a number
    of cases including Singh and Khalid v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  72.  The
    decision-maker should adopt a two-stage process.  The first question is
    whether the individual can succeed under the Rules and the  second  is,
    if not, can he or she succeed outside the Rules under Art 8.  There  is
    no threshold requirement of arguability before a decision maker reaches
    the second stage. However, the extent of any consideration outside  the
    Rules will depend upon whether all  the  issues  have  been  adequately
    addressed under the Rules.  In Singh and Khalid the  Court  of  Appeal,
    Underhill LJ opined at [64]:

     "there is no need to conduct a  full  separate  examination  of  Art  8
    outside the Rules where, in the circumstances of a particular case, all
    the issues have been addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

  42. In SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [32] Richards LJ in the Court  of
      Appeal clarified the relationship between the  Immigration  Rules  and
      the public interest considerations:

     "However, even away from those contexts, if the Secretary of State  has
    sought to formulate Immigration Rules to  reflect  a  fair  balance  of
    interests under Article 8 in the general run of  cases  falling  within
    their scope, then,  as  explained  above,  the  Rules  themselves  will
    provide  significant  evidence  about  the  relevant  public   interest
    considerations which should be brought into account  when  a  court  or
    tribunal seeks to strike the proper balance of interests under  Article
    8 in making its own decision. As Beatson LJ observed in  Haleemudeen  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558;  [2014]
    Imm AR 6, at [40], the new Rules in Appendix FM:
    "... are a central part of the legislative and policy context in  which
    the interests of immigration control are balanced against the interests
    and rights of people who have come to this country and wish  to  settle
    in it.  Overall,  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  as  to  when  an
    interference  with  an  Article   8   right   will   be   regarded   as
    disproportionate is more particularised in the new Rules  than  it  had
    previously been."

  43. Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to  give  the  new  Rules
      "greater weight than as merely a starting point for the  consideration
      of the proportionality of  an  interference  with  Article  8  rights"
      (para. [47])."


  44. The Claimant does not  meet  the  private  life  requirements  of  the
      Immigration  Rules  in  terms  of  length  of  residence  nor  has  he
      demonstrated  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
      integration. He argues that he has established a  private  life  since
      coming here in 2009 at the age of 12 which deserves respect  and  that
      if he were returned to Bangladesh there would  be  a  breach  of  that
      private life.


  45. I accept that the Claimant has established a significant private  life
      in the UK. He has not sought to argue that he has a family  life  here
      for the purposes or Article 8. The Claimant has  been  educated  here,
      achieved 8 GSCE's and 3 A'levels. He has integrated into  Mrs  Nessa's
      family and grown up with her children who have now left home.  He  has
      been offered a place at Queen  Mary  University  of  London  to  study
      Information Technology Management for Business in September 2016.  The
      Tower Hamlets Youth Sport Foundation have written two letters, one  at
      page 12 of the Claimant's bundle and the other produced at the hearing
      describing his great talents as a cricketer. It is said  that  he  has
      quickly established himself  as  a  leading  coach  within  the  Tower
      Hamlets Sport Foundation  and  has  worked  as  a  physical  education
      teaching assistant in primary schools around the Borough. It  is  said
      that his all-round  abilities  as  a  sportsman  and  the  respect  he
      commands amongst his peers  also  make  him  an  incredibly  important
      figure at his local primary schools and in the community. I have  also
      taken account of the certificates of  achievement  in  the  Claimant's
      bundle. The Claimant evidently has made a valuable contribution to his
      local community and is valued by his peers and  associates.  I  accept
      also that he has a close relationship with his  aunt,  Mrs  Nessa  and
      that he assists her with household chores.


  46. Since the impugned decision is in  accordance  with  the  law  and  in
      furtherance of a legitimate aim, namely the maintenance of immigration
      control,  the  next  question  to  be  addressed  is  whether  it   is
      proportionate.  Where the question of proportionality is reached,  the
      'ultimate question for the appellate immigration authority is  whether
      the refusal of leave to enter or remain, in  circumstances  where  the
      life of the  family  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
      elsewhere, taking full  account  of  all  considerations  weighing  in
      favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the applicant  in
      a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the fundamental
      right protected by Article 8' Huang [2007] UKHL 11.


  47. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within  the  meaning
      of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  With regard to  the  factors  in  section
      117B, I have taken  account  of  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of
      immigration controls is in the public interest.  It  is  also  in  the
      public interest that a  person  seeking  to  enter  or  remain  speaks
      English. The Claimant speaks fluent  English.  It  is  in  the  public
      interest that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom  are  financially  independent.  No  evidence  was  called  in
      relation this his  finances.  The  Claimant  has  not  claimed  to  be
      financially  independent.  In  any  event,  in   Forman   (ss   117A-C
      considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  held  that
      the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted by  the
      consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR  has
      at no time been a financial burden on the state or is  self-sufficient
      or is likely to remain so indefinitely.   The  significance  of  these
      factors is that where they are not  present  the  public  interest  is
      fortified.


  48. According to section 117B, little weight should be given  to-  (a)   a
      private life, or (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
       that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully. Little weight should be given to a  private
      life established by a person at a time when the  person's  immigration
      status is precarious. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 the Upper
      Tribunal held that a person's immigration status  is  "precarious"  if
      their continued presence in  the  UK  will  be  dependent  upon  their
      obtaining a further grant of leave.


  49. The Claimant's private life was at all times  precarious  because  his
      continued presence in the UK was dependant on his obtaining a  further
      grant of leave. He made an application for further leave to remain  in
      May 2012 and the Respondent did not determine that  application  until
      November 2014. In EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 41 and LU  15.8.08
      the House of Lords said that delay could be  relevant  as  during  the
      period of the delay the applicant  may  develop  closer  personal  and
      social ties and establish deeper roots in the community than he  could
      have shown earlier.  The longer the period of delay the likelier  this
      is to be true.  To the extent that it is  true  the  applicant's  case
      will be strengthened. Delay may be relevant  in  reducing  the  weight
      that would otherwise be accorded to fair and firm immigration  control
      if the delay is shown to be the result of a dysfunctional system which
      yields unpredictable and unfair results.


  50. I accept that the Claimant has  strengthened  his  private  life  ties
      during the period of the delay and that he has established significant
      private life ties in the UK in the form of friendships  and  community
      ties since 2009. However, I find that  the  Respondent's  decision  to
      refuse further  leave  to  remain  and  remove  him  from  the  UK  is
      proportionate for the following reasons. By virtue of  statute,  I  am
      required to give little weight to his private life. Not only was  that
      private life established whilst his status was precarious  as  he  had
      discretionary leave but it was established against  a  backdrop  of  a
      false asylum claim and in circumstances in which I have found that the
      likelihood is that he and his aunt and uncle were well  aware  of  the
      whereabouts of his parents. In the circumstances he has benefited from
      an education in the UK at public expense as a result of this artifice.
      He does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and I  have
      found that there would not be very significant obstacles to his return
      to Bangladesh where I have found that he is likely to have family ties
      and consequently support. I do not need to repeat the findings here as
      the considerations were addressed in my findings under the Rules.  The
      Claimant is concerned that he will not be able to pursue  his  further
      education in Bangladesh, however, there is no evidence  before  me  in
      this regard nor has he personally conducted an inquiries.  Further, in
      In MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; "private life") Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT  00037
      the Tribunal held that respect for 'private life' in Art  8  does  not
      include a right to work or study per se. Weighing all relevant factors
      in the balance,  I  consider  that  public  interest  in  his  removal
      outweighs his private life ties and that consequently the Respondent's
      decision is a proportionate one.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3rd June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

