
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA101632015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 May 2017                        |On 12 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                   J P M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC").
     He was born on [ ] 1962.  He arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  17
    January 2015 on a business visa which he had obtained from the  British
    High Commission in Pretoria,  South  Africa.   On  2  March  2015,  the
    appellant claimed asylum.

 3. The basis of his claim was that he  had  established  a  media  company
    called Camera ou Realit� ("CoR") which  produces  news  programmes  and
    documentaries.   He  was  an  investigative  journalist  and   took   a
    particular interest in the  wrongdoings  of  the  DRC  government.   He
    claimed that in November 2013 he  and  his  family  were  abducted  and
    detained by government agents.  Whilst in detention, he was accused  of
    being a traitor and was tortured.  He subsequently escaped with the aid
    of a Catholic  priest  who  had  been  summoned  to  give  him  medical
    treatment.  The priest agreed to help the appellant escape and  he  did
    so disguised as a priest.  He left the DRC by aeroplane to South Africa
    using his own passport which the  priest  had  obtained  for  him.   He
    claimed that seven months after he escaped,  in  September  2014  South
    African agents of the DRC attempted to abduct him but he  escaped.   He
    applied for a visa to come to the UK which he obtained and came to  the
    UK where he claimed asylum on 2 March 2015.

 4. On 1 July 2015, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  27  October  2016,  Judge  A  D  Troup  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  He found the appellant's account to
    be a fabrication.  In addition, he concluded that the  appellant's  sur
    place activities in the UK with APARECO did not create a real  risk  on
    return.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   His
    discursive grounds were self-evidently prepared  by  the  appellant  in
    person.

 7. On 8 December 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  I  Murray)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    arguably erred in law in reaching his adverse credibility finding.

 8. On 21 December 2016, the Secretary of State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

 9. Before me, the appellant was represented by  Mr  Howells  who,  despite
    being instructed shortly  before  the  hearing,  helpfully  provided  a
    skeleton argument in which he set out  three  grounds  of  appeal.   Mr
    Mills, who represented the Secretary of State, raised no  objection  to
    the reliance upon the carefully articulated grounds of Mr Howells.

10. Mr Howells raised three grounds which, he submitted, establish that the
    judge had erred in law in his assessment of credibility.   The  grounds
    did not challenge the judge's adverse finding that  the  appellant  was
    not at risk as a result of his sur place activities in the UK.

11. First, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had  failed  to  assess  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of torture which was set out  in
    detail in the report of Dr Wickert on behalf of the Medical  Foundation
    dated 22 February 2016 at paras 11-39 (pages 161-164 of the appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal).  Mr Howells submitted that  the
    judge had simply dismissed the appellant's  account  of  detention  and
    torture on the basis that he did not accept that the CoR existed.   The
    expert had commented on the appellant's demeanour during his  interview
    and the appellant had been subject to no cross-examination or questions
    from the judge in  relation  to  the  issue  of  torture.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the judge's failure to make any finding on  the  central
    issue of the appellant's claim that he had been detained  and  tortured
    was an error of law.

12. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had  failed  properly  to
    take into account the medical report which  supported  the  appellant's
    claim to have been tortured.  The expert's report noted that  a  number
    of injuries on the appellant's body were consistent  with  his  account
    and two were "highly consistent" with his account, namely a scar on his
    left face which was highly consistent with his account of  blunt  force
    trauma to the face and secondly the scarring  to  his  anus  which  was
    highly consistent with his claim to have been anally  raped  whilst  in
    detention.  Mr Howells also pointed out that the expert also  concluded
    that the appellant was suffering from PTSD caused  by  his  experiences
    and ill-treatment in detention in the DRC.  Mr Howells  submitted  that
    the judge erred in law by failing properly to  take  into  account  the
    expert's conclusion in assessing the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claim and in particular his account of being tortured.

13. Thirdly, Mr Howells relied on a number of matters set out at  paras  11
    and 12 of his skeleton  argument  which  he  submitted  the  judge  had
    wrongly taken into account in  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility
    because they were peripheral to the core of his claim or,  in  reaching
    findings on the matters set out, the judge had failed to  consider  all
    the evidence.

14. Mr Mills submitted that the judge was not required to set out and  deal
    with each and every point raised by the expert.  He accepted  that  the
    report was supportive of the appellant's claim but, he  submitted,  the
    judge had taken it into account in the round on the basis  of  all  the
    evidence.  He submitted that the expert  had  concluded  that  injuries
    were either "consistent" or "highly consistent" but, in accordance with
    the Istanbul Protocol, the expert  had  recognised  other  causes  were
    possible.  In particular, in relation to the two injuries  said  to  be
    "highly consistent", the expert had recognised in relation to the  scar
    on the appellant's face that it could have been as a result of  another
    cause "such as an assault or road accident"  (see  para  108);  and  in
    relation to the anal injury, the expert had stated that such injury was
    "most commonly" caused by constipation and other  causes  also  existed
    (see paras 127 and 128).  Mr Mills submitted that it was  not  for  the
    expert to decide whether the appellant was credible and the  judge  was
    entitled to find, for the reasons he gave, that the injuries  were  not
    as a result of the causal events claimed by the appellant,  namely  his
    torture.  The judge had set out the appellant's account of  torture  at
    paras 15-19 and he was required to do no more  than  that.   The  judge
    dealt with the expert report, in particular, at para 64 and, given that
    the expert report gave the judge room to find that  other  causes  were
    possible, it could not be said that his finding was not  properly  open
    to him.

15. As regards Mr Howells third point, Mr Mills submitted that the  matters
    relied upon by the judge were not peripheral, in particular whether the
    media company existed at all was central to whether he was detained and
    tortured.  He submitted that the judge's reasoning was, contrary to  Mr
    Howells' submissions as set out in paras 11  and  12  of  his  skeleton
    argument, properly open to him.

Discussion

16. It may be helpful to take Mr Howells' Grounds 1 and 2 together as there
    is a degree of overlap between them.

17. Mr Howells placed reliance upon the judge's failure, as  he  contended,
    to make any finding in relation to the  appellant's  claimed  detention
    and torture.  Mr Howells placed  reliance  upon  the  detailed  account
    which the appellant had given Dr Wickert in his interview with her  and
    set out at paras 11-39 of her  report.   He  placed  reliance  upon  Dr
    Wickert's comments about the appellant's demeanour at paras 15, 18, 21,
    22, 23 and 26.  Further, he relied on the fact that the  appellant  had
    not been cross-examined or asked questions by the judge about his claim
    to be tortured.

18. There is no doubt that the appellant's credibility,  including  of  his
    detention and torture, was  in  issue  before  the  judge.   The  judge
    clearly had in  mind  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  claimed
    detention and torture which he set out in some detail at paras 15-20 of
    his determination as follows:

         "15.     In November 2013 he was abducted by government agents  and
             was detained.  At the same time his wife []  and  daughter  []
             were abducted but his two sons, who were  at  school  at  that
             time, were taken by a friend to safety in  Congo  Brazzaville.
             A's  offices  were  searched  and   much   of   his   property
             confiscated, and four colleagues - [X], [Y], and  [Z]  -  were
             arrested.

         16.  A was interrogated by an army General who wanted to  know  for
             whom he was working, accused him of being a traitor and warned
             him that he would be executed for treason.

         17.  A was slapped and verbally abused, hooded and placed in a foul
             cell infested with rats and other vermin.  He was  beaten  and
             raped by soldiers.  On the third day the General  paraded  A's
             four colleagues in front of him and shot each  of  them  dead,
             saying that he wanted the information that he believed A  had,
             and told him that he was "deadly serious".  A was compelled to
             write a statement confessing to alleged crimes and saying that
             it was he who had killed his colleagues.

         18.  During his incarceration A was given meat to eat, which had  a
             strange taste and smell; he was later told that  it  was  from
             the bodies of his wife and daughter, and their  severed  heads
             were shown  to  him.   He  was  continuously  beaten,  knocked
             unconscious, and injected with a cocktail of drugs.

         19.  Later he was transferred to a prison in Lubumbashi, a city  in
             the province of Katanga, where the interrogation  and  torture
             continued.  He was told that the documents seized at his  home
             incriminated him.  He was continuously violated, sexually  and
             psychologically.

         20.  After about a  month  in  Lubumbashi  a  Catholic  priest  was
             summoned to give him medical treatment.  The priest was Father
             [], who A knew from primary school; A told  him  that  he  was
             working for freedom against government oppression through  his
             media company.  The  priest  agreed  to  secure  A's  release,
             recovered A's passport from his friend [] who was  holding  it
             for him,  and  obtained  travel  documents.   Disguised  as  a
             priest, A left the detention centre and was driven straight to
             the airport, where he flew to Johannesburg  the  same  day,  7
             February 2014."

19. It was not incumbent upon the judge to set out each and every  part  of
    the appellant's evidence in the form of what he told Dr Wickert in  his
    interview.  Further, Mr Howells reliance  upon  Dr  Wickert's  comments
    about the appellant's demeanour in truth take the appellant's case that
    the judge did not properly consider his  evidence  no  significant  way
    forward.  Indeed, it would have been dangerous (perhaps  impermissible)
    for the judge to base his credibility finding - one way or the other  -
    upon the appellant's  demeanour  whether  in  interview  or  in  giving
    evidence before him (see e.g. HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 at  [46]).



20. Further, it is not right, with respect to Mr Howells, to  suggest  that
    the appellant's evidence concerning his detention and torture  was  not
    challenged in cross-examination at the hearing.  At  paras  41-43,  the
    judge records the cross-examination of the  appellant  in  relation  to
    discrepancies as to the period of time he claimed to be detained:

         "41.     As for A's detention in November 2013, he agreed  that  he
             had been detained in Kinshasa for one month and in  Lubumbashi
             for one month and one week.  In reply to Q44 of the AIR, A had
             said he had been held for one month but in evidence said  that
             that related only to the time spent  in  Lubumbashi,  not  the
             whole period of detention.

         42.  At paragraph 36 of  his  witness  statement  he  said  "I  was
             detained for around one month" and when asked why he had  said
             that if in fact he had been detained for two months, he simply
             replied "no".

         43.  It was put to him further that in his  Grounds  of  Appeal  at
             page 141 of the bundle under the heading  'Para  25',  he  had
             said he was detained for four to five weeks  in  Kinshasa  and
             for about two months in Lubumbashi.  He was asked why  he  had
             stated that period if in fact he had  been  detained  for  one
             month and one week as he now claimed.  He replied  that  there
             was a misunderstanding and confusion.  He was detained for two
             months and one week overall."

21. Whilst the appellant was not cross-examined about the  minutia  of  his
    torture, clearly he was challenged, in effect, as  to  whether  he  had
    been detained at all.  That  can  be  the  only  point  of  the  cross-
    examination recorded at paras 41-43 of the determination.

22. Mr Howells contention that the judge did not, in  effect,  engage  with
    and make findings upon the appellant's claim to be tortured is,  in  my
    judgment, simply not sustainable.  As I  have  already  indicated,  the
    judge set out the evidence of  the  appellant  concerning  his  claimed
    torture and the cross-examination directed to whether he  was  detained
    (and therefore whether the opportunity to torture him as  claimed  ever
    arose) in his determination.  The  judge  made  clear  findings  (which
    subject to points raised in Ground 3) led the judge to find that he did
    not accept the underlying aspect of the appellant's claim that  he  had
    been detained and tortured because he worked for his own media  company
    CoR and had provided material, albeit  "non-sensitive"  to  Canal  5  -
    which he claimed was a national broadcaster.  The judge  gave  detailed
    reason at paras 50-56 for not accepting the veracity of this aspect  of
    the appellant's account, including that there was no trace of a channel
    called Canal 5 even though the point had been raised by the  respondent
    in the refusal letter.  Further, the judge gave a number of reasons  at
    paras 57-58 why he considered it implausible  that  the  appellant  had
    been detained as he claimed including that security was so lax (despite
    him being accused of treason) and interviewed  by  "an  army  general")
    that he was permitted visits from a priest who provided  him  with  the
    means to escape disguised as a priest.

23. In reaching his adverse finding, I do not accept Mr Howells' submission
    that the judge failed properly to take into account the evidence of  Dr
    Wickert.  The judge summarised Dr Wickert's  opinion  at  paras  46-48,
    including that she had found twenty of his  scars  to  be  "consistent"
    with his account and two to be "highly consistent"  with  his  account.
    At para 48, he noted that Dr Wickert concluded that the  appellant  was
    suffering from PTSD caused by experiences and ill-treatment in the DRC.

24. Then, at paras 63 and 64, the judge gave his reason for  not  accepting
    the causal connection between the appellant's  scars  and  his  claimed
    trauma as follows:

         "63.     I have taken into account fully the medico-legal report of
             Dr Wickert who examined A on three  occasions  and  found  his
             injuries to  be  consistent  or  highly  consistent  with  his
             account.  Those terms are defined at Appendix D to the  report
             as follows:

             'Consistent with: the lesion could have  been  caused  by  the
             trauma described, but is non-specific and there are many other
             possible causes.'

             'Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused  by  the
             trauma described, and there are few other possible causes.'

         64.  Dr Wickert concludes at paragraph 171  that,  taken  together,
             the overall pattern of lesions is highly consistent  with  the
             account given of A's  ill  treatment  and  detention,  and  in
             keeping with the timescale given.  I bear  in  mind  that  the
             report  is  carefully  written  and  has  178  paragraphs,   6
             appendices and 7 illustrations  arising  from  three  meetings
             with A.

             Unlike Dr Wickert however, I have had the advantage of hearing
             and reading all the evidence in this appeal.  I conclude  that
             although A has the scars described in  the  report,  given  my
             findings above, they were not caused by the  trauma  described
             by A but by other causes.   I  have  carried  out  an  overall
             evaluation of A's  account  and  have  to  disagree  with  the
             findings of Dr Wickert as to the causes of both  his  physical
             and psychological symptoms."

25. It is quite impossible to conclude that the judge  did  not  take  into
    account Dr Wickert's opinion.  But, as Mr Mills submitted, Dr Wickert's
    opinion about the causal link  between  the  scarring  and  the  trauma
    claimed by  the  appellant  that  he  suffered  in  detention  was  not
    determinative.  Dr Wickert, in accordance with the  Istanbul  Protocol,
    even in relation to those  which  were  "highly  consistent"  with  the
    appellant's  account,  identified  that  other  causes,  indeed   other
    specific causes, could be attributed to his injuries.  As I have  said,
    Dr Wickert's evidence was not determinative.   The  judge  had,  as  in
    every case, to consider all the evidence.  He did  precisely  that  and
    gave reasons why he did not accept that  the  appellant's  account  was
    truthful.  I will return to some of the challenges in relation to  that
    shortly under Mr Howells' Ground 3.  However, subject to those  points,
    the judge clearly considered all the evidence  including  Dr  Wickert's
    evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's  physical  and   psychological
    symptoms but he did so, correctly, in the context of all the  evidence.
    The expert evidence left room for the judge to find rationally that the
    causal connection had not been established and that, for the reasons he
    gave, the appellant's account was not truthful.

26. In my judgment, the judge carried out the task he was required to do in
    assessing the appellant's credibility in the light of the expert report
    and was entitled to find that the appellant's account was not true  and
    that, therefore, in not  accepting  the  appellant's  account,  he  had
    failed to prove he had been detained and tortured as he claimed.

27. For those reasons, I reject Mr Howells' Grounds 1 and 2.

28. That then leaves Ground 3 which sets out as a number of points in paras
    11-12 of Mr Howells' skeleton argument.

29. First, it is said that the judge was wrong to take  into  account  that
    the appellant had offered no explanation as to  why  he  would  collect
    "sensitive" material when he did not offer that to Canal 5.  The  judge
    was clearly aware that the latter was the case as  he  made  the  point
    specifically in para 51 of his determination.  However, it is said that
    the judge failed to take into account that in  his  interview  with  Dr
    Wickert he said that he would use  the  "more  sensitive  subjects"  to
    produce a documentary in  the  future.   It  is  unclear  whether  this
    passage in the expert's report, not found in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement or oral evidence, was ever drawn to  the  judge's  attention.
    In fact, in cross-examination he was asked why he had  made  programmes
    which could not or would not be broadcast and, as the judge recorded at
    paras 37 and 56 of his determination, he replied that:  "As a  patriot,
    I have to do so because of the suffering of the people and it is a  job
    I like.  I am passionate about it."  There is  no  reference  there  to
    what it is said he said to Dr Wickert in his medico-legal interview.

30.  Mr  Howells  relied  in  his  skeleton  argument  on  the  appellant's
    explanation that he had come to the attention of the  authorities,  not
    through the broadcast of any material, because he had been  filming  in
    the aftermath of a number of murders.  That appears to be  a  reference
    to an answer at question 19 of his asylum interview where he said:

         "A lot of people used to call me to come and record, the killing of
         people.  That's how they knew and I had recorded those pictures."

    Whilst the judge did not make specific reference to that  evidence,  he
    did refer to the fact that the appellant:

         "Gave no particulars of the nature of  the  intimidation  which  he
         claims to have suffered, and  did  not  elaborate  upon  the  vague
         generalisations contained in that paragraph [namely paragraph 13 of
         his statement]."

31. Paragraph 13, quoted by the judge at  para  52  of  his  determination,
    stated:

         "I received a lot of information  about  Congolese  mass  killings,
         government corruption.  I received many threats, anonymous calls, I
         was subject to intimidation".

32. Mr Howells did not direct me to any other specific  evidence  from  the
    appellant as to how it was he came to the attention of the authorities.
     In my judgment, there is no doubt that the judge carefully  considered
    the evidence and was entitled to take the  view  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was "vague"  and  that  he  had  not  offered  a  satisfactory
    explanation as to how he came to the attention of the authorities.

33. But, in truth in relation to that aspect of  the  appellant's  account,
    the fact remains that the appellant  presented  no  evidence  that  the
    television channel, Canal 5 existed.  This was despite  the  fact  that
    the respondent raised in the refusal letter in 1 July 2015 that:

         "Background information that lists over 50  Congolese  TV  channels
         does not make reference to any such channel, nor can such a channel
         be found using a comprehensive internet search" (see para 18).

34. Given the appellant's  account  that  he  was  providing  material  for
    broadcast on Canal 5, and that it was a  recognised  national  channel,
    the judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  absence  of  any
    supporting evidence for its existence (see TK (Burundi) v  SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 40).  This was, in truth, highly damaging of  the  credibility
    of the appellant's account.

35. Secondly, Mr Howells criticised the judge for taking  into  account  at
    para 58 of  his  determination  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    authorities would allow a Catholic priest to attend him in  prison  and
    provide him with the means to escape and also to  infer  that  security
    for a prisoner such as the appellant accused of treason would  be  very
    tight in  contradistinction  to  the  ease  with  which  the  appellant
    escaped.   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  had  ignored   the
    appellant's evidence, again found in the medical report  [at  para  32]
    that the priest had "medical training".  Mr Howells submitted  that  it
    was pure speculation by the judge as to  the  level  of  security  that
    would exist.

36. The judge's reasoning at para 58 is as follows:

         "On that evidence, A was regarded  very  seriously  indeed  by  the
         authorities and accused of the most serious  crime  that  could  be
         committed in any nation state.  A senior army  officer  dealt  with
         the interrogation over an extended period  in  both  locations  and
         four of A's work colleagues were murdered (as  were  his  wife  and
         daughter).  Given my conclusions about CoR however, I find that  it
         is less than realistically likely that CoR came to the attention of
         the authorities at all and thus scarcely likely that A  would  have
         been arrested and treated as claimed.  Even if it were the case, it
         is scarcely probable that a Roman Catholic priest, whose  loyalties
         did not lie with the regime, would be introduced in order  to  tend
         to A, thus enabling him to assist A to escape.  On A's evidence, he
         was accused of treason against a brutal regime: it is not  credible
         that security was so lax as to enable A to walk  out  of  detention
         unchallenged, albeit disguised as a priest, and not  credible  that
         he could exit the country by air on his own  passport  without  any
         challenge whatsoever.

         It may be the case that security arrangements for  petty  criminals
         in the DRC is lax but for a  prisoner  accused  of  crimes  of  the
         highest order, that is to say treason, and who has  been  subjected
         to interrogation by a General over two months, I have  to  conclude
         that security would have been very tight indeed.  The apparent ease
         of A' escape is simply not credible in such circumstances."

37. The only reference to the priest being "medically trained"  is  in  the
    expert's report.  Again, it is far from clear that this  was  drawn  to
    the judge's attention or relied upon before the judge.  In  any  event,
    the real point being made by the judge in the first half of para 58  is
    that it was not probable that the authorities would  allow  a  Catholic
    priest, who was not likely to be supportive of the regime, to be put in
    a position where he could assist the appellant's escape.  I see nothing
    irrational or impermissible in the judge taking such a view.  Likewise,
    although the judge made no reference to any background material, in the
    absence of any evidence that security  arrangement  for  all  prisoners
    were "lax", it was in my judgment reasonably open to the judge to doubt
    the account of the appellant's escape on the basis that security  would
    be expected to be tight for  a  prisoner  who  had  been  considered  a
    traitor and had been interrogated by an army  general  which  indicated
    his significance to the authorities.

38.  Thirdly,  Mr  Howells  criticised  the  judge  at  para  59   of   his
    determination for counting against the appellant  an  inconsistency  in
    his evidence about his place of residence on the basis that what he had
    said in the visa  application  was  likely  to  be  true.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant's evidence was that the visa application had been  filled  in
    by his employer.

39. The judge no doubt had the appellant's explanation in mind as he set it
    out in para 44 of his determination.  Whilst he failed to grapple  with
    that explanation  in  para  59,  given  the  totality  of  the  judge's
    reasoning  his  finding  on  this  issue,  even  if  his  reasoning  is
    inadequate,  was  not  material  to  his  ultimate  conclusion  on  the
    appellant's credibility.

40.  Fourthly,  Mr  Howells  criticised  the  judge's  reasoning  that  the
    appellant's description of his intimidation was vague (see para 53) and
    of his escape from South Africa (where he also  claimed  to  have  been
    kidnapped) was vague (see para 60).   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    appellant had not been cross-examined on these issues and as  a  result
    lesser weight should have been placed upon these reasons by the judge.

41. Mr Howells himself accepts that the issue was only as to the weight  to
    be given to the "vague generalisations" in  the  appellant's  evidence.
    The judge's reasoning in paras 53 and 60 made up only a small  part  of
    the totality of the judge's reasoning.   It  was  always  open  to  the
    appellant in his witness statement, or through  his  oral  evidence-in-
    chief, to provide greater detail of his account.  His account  was,  in
    fact, clearly challenged by the respondent  and  I  do  not  accept  Mr
    Howells'  submission  that  it  was  somehow  the  obligation  of   the
    Presenting Officer or the judge to ask further questions  in  order  to
    give the appellant an opportunity to fill out his "vague" evidence.  In
    any event, the judge's reasoning in paras 53 and 60 formed only a small
    part of the totality of his reasoning and I am wholly unpersuaded  that
    he was irrational in the weight that he placed upon this aspect of  the
    appellant's evidence.

42. Finally, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to  doubt
    the appellant's account that he was wanted by the  authorities  in  the
    DRC because he had been able to leave the DRC on his own passport.

43. At para 61, the judge noted that the  appellant  had  been  allowed  to
    escape detention, not once but twice, and had been permitted  to  leave
    the DRC on his own passport on two  occasions.   It  was  open  to  the
    appellant to introduce evidence before the judge, but  none  was,  that
    the DRC authorities were not interested in escaped  prisoners  who  had
    been accused of being traitors such that they could freely pass through
    Lubumbashi Airport.   In  the  absence  of  such  evidence,  it  was  a
    reasonable  inference  for  the  judge  to  draw  that  a   person   of
    considerable interest  to  the  DRC  authorities  which  the  appellant
    claimed to be, was likely to encounter difficulty in  leaving  the  DRC
    through an international airport.  In any event, again  this  reasoning
    played only a small part in the judge's overall  consideration  of  the
    evidence and reasons for finding the  appellant's  account  not  to  be
    credible.

44. Standing back and considering the judge's  reasoning  overall,  despite
    the imperfections that Mr Howells relies upon in the judge's reasoning,
    overall his findings are properly sustainable on  the  evidence  before
    him.  His reasons were adequate to sustain those  findings  which  were
    not, in my judgment, irrational or otherwise materially legally flawed.



45. For these reasons, I also reject Ground 3.



Decision

46. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not  materially  err
    in law in reaching its adverse credibility finding  and  in  concluding
    that the appellant had not established a real risk  of  persecution  or
    serious  ill-treatment  if  returned  to  the  DRC.    That   decision,
    therefore, stands.

47.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is,   accordingly,
    dismissed.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated  9 June 2017





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated  9 June 2017



