

                            Appeal number:    AA 103082013 / AA 103092013


The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Determined without a hearing
Field House                                  Determination Sent
13 June 2014                                             20 June 2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

                                   Between

                                  SOFIE MANALLARI
                              XHEISON MANALLARI




                                                                  Appellants

                                                                       and


                  Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                  DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The appellants are  citizens  of  Albania.  They  appealed  against  a
      decision of the respondent to remove them which is  dated  30  October
      2013. The appeals were allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  to  limited
      extent  that  the  applications  for  further  leave  to   remain   be
      reconsidered  by  the  respondent  in  the  light  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's comments.


   2. I  granted  permission  on  28  April  2014  on  the  basis  that  the
      determination was arguably flawed for each of the reasons asserted  by
      the appellants in their grounds  of  appeal  dated  8  April  2014.  I
      directed that, if the respondent did not object in writing  within  14
      days of having received my directions, I would set  aside  the  First-
      tier Tribunal  determination.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has  received  no
      response from the Secretary of State. I do not  propose  to  say  more
      than to observe that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by remitting
      the matter to the Secretary of State in circumstances where there  was
      absolutely no reason whatever to do so. The First-tier Tribunal should
      have determined the appeals before it on the  basis  of  the  evidence
      adduced by both parties. Its failure to do so constituted an error  of
      law such that the determination and any findings of fact should be set
      aside. There has been a total failure by the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
      adjudicate in these appeals and I  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
      direct that the decision be remade in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
      before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears).

      DECISION
      The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 20 January 2014  is
      set aside. I direct that the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall  remake  the
      decisions (not Judge Pears)





      Signed[pic]


      Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


      Dated 13 June 2014
