
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10425/2014
     AA/10427/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd December 2015                         |On 18th January 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     a b
                                    t U N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MaDE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Gasparo of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwalla. Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellants are sisters  and  citizens  of  Pakistan  born  on  10th
    November 1988 and 5th November 1983 respectively.  The appellants  both
    entered the United Kingdom as visitors on 24th September 2014 and  were
    granted leave until 3rd March 2015.  The appellants both claimed asylum
    on 14th October 2014.  The respondent decided on 12th November 2014  to
    refuse the appellants' asylum claim.

 2. The decisions of the respondent also  indicated  that  the  appellants'
    leave was curtailed and that they would be removed by way of directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The appellants appealed and their appeals  came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal A K Simpson on 26th February and 15th  April  2015.
    In a decision promulgated on 3rd August 2015  Judge  Simpson  dismissed
    the appeals of both appellants on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and further on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was granted on 29th September 2015.  Permission  was  sought
    on six grounds.  Although the judge granting permission was of the view
    that  the  majority  of  the  grounds  amounted  to  no  more  than   a
    disagreement with the outcome of the appeal, it was arguable that there
    was a material error of law as the judge may have erred in  failing  to
    give sufficient consideration to the individual  circumstances  of  the
    second appellant taking into account that she:

      a) Bears the scars of serious injuries suffered in  a  sectarian  bomb
         attack by the Wahabi group in Quetta on Shia Muslims returning from
         pilgrimage and she has been publicly identified as one of the  very
         few  survivors  of  the  attack.   It  is  arguable  that  she   is
         consequently easily identifiable to those who may wish  to  do  her
         harm.

      b) Has been educated to PhD level in Iran and was offered a university
         lecturing post in  Pakistan  at  the  instigation  of  the  Iranian
         Government.

      c) Is motivated to promote the education of women in Pakistan.

    The appeal then came before me.

 5. Ms Gasparo submitted a skeleton argument in which she expanded  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  Ms Fijiwalla confirmed that these grounds  did  not
    amount to a variation of the Grounds of Appeal.

Error of Law

 6. Although Ms Fijiwalla argued that the judge had taken into account that
    the appellants  were  Shi'a  Muslims,  she  conceded  that  there  were
    difficulties  with  the  judge's  consideration,  in   particular   the
    consideration of the alleged high profile of the second appellant, Ms T
    U N

 7. Ms Gasparo  accepted  that  the  first  appellant's  case  was  largely
    dependent on that of her sister and the claim that the first  appellant
    would by association be at risk on return.

 8. I am of the view that there was an inadequate assessment by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge of the risk to both appellants  given  the  alleged
    high profile of T U N and the alleged risk to her sister as the  family
    member of a Shi'a woman with a high profile and given the high level of
    education of both women.

 9. I note that despite the fact that Judge Simpson noted, at [15] that the
    Presenting Officer appeared to concede that the second appellant  might
    attract some risk as a result  of  her  public  activities,  the  judge
    failed to make adequate findings as to the extent  and  effect  of  the
    public profile of the second appellant and the  risk  thereof  to  both
    appellants.

10. The evidence before the judge included newspaper  articles  naming  the
    second appellant as a victim and survivor of the bomb  blast.   As  set
    out by the judge at [2] the respondent accepted  that  such  an  attack
    took place and that the second appellant was  caught  up  in  the  bomb
    blast.

11. Ms Fijiwalla conceded, properly in my view that  the  judge's  findings
    did not refer to the second appellant's profile.

12. I am satisfied that whilst  considering  the  situation  of  Shi'as  in
    Pakistan from [21] to [24], the judge erred in failing to make adequate
    findings in relation to the specific factual context of the  appellants
    in Pakistan.

13. The judge, at [25] relied on AK & SK  (Christians:  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2014] UKUT  00569  (IAC);  he  considered  that  they  had  failed  to
    demonstrate a well-founded fear because the judge was of the view  that
    the appellants did not come within the areas  mentioned  in  the  UNHCR
    guidelines considered in AK & SK (where an  internal  relocation  would
    not be available) and the judge considered that the appellants also did
    not come within the categories of members of religious minorities  with
    defined  profiles  set  out  in  the  UNHCR  profile.   However   those
    guidelines also indicated that  members  of  the  Shi'a  community  may
    'depending on the individual circumstances of the case, be in  need  of
    international   protection'.     Given    the    accepted    particular
    circumstances of the second appellant and by  association  her  sister,
    the judge failed to provide  adequate  reasons  in  relation  to  these
    appellants.

14. I am not satisfied that it can  be  safely  said  that  had  the  judge
    considered the second appellant's profile  he  would  necessarily  have
    reached the same conclusion on risk and sufficiency  of  protection  in
    respect of both appellants.

15. I am satisfied therefore that the errors in the  judge's  consideration
    of both appellants are sufficient that the decision of 3rd August  2015
    cannot stand and should be set aside in its entirety.



Conclusion

16. The decision contains an error of law and is set aside. It  was  agreed
    that fresh findings of fact need to be made.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set
aside.  No findings are to stand,  Under section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and Practice Statement 7.2 (b), the nature and extent of  judicial  fact
finding necessary for  the  decision  to  be  remade  is  such  that  it  is
appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s)  of
the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to  include
Judge Simpson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
