
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10390/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 11 October 2013                              |On 8 November 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Rafee Mohd

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel, instructed by Thompson and
                    Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hague made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 1 July 2013.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1  June  1980.   He
    arrived in the UK on 19 February 2012 with a business visit visa.

 3. He came to the UK, he said, because he wished  to  attend  a  two  week
    management development course.  He paid the course fee for himself  but
    did not attend.  He said that the interpreter that he had arranged  did
    not turn up  and  a  man  told  him  that  he  would  be  able  to  get
    accommodation elsewhere.  He  did  not  return  home  when  the  course
    finished on 2 March 2012, regarding it as a holiday. He claimed  asylum
    on 3 September 2012 and was refused on 31 October 2012.

 4. His claim is that he fears returning to  Afghanistan  because,  in  the
    latter half of 2011 when travelling on official business  he  had  been
    kidnapped by the Taliban and held for thirteen days.  He  was  released
    because of his father's connections with the Ministry  of  Defence  but
    spent twenty days in hospital  being  treated  for  his  injuries.   In
    September 2011 he agreed to meet the Taliban but told  his  father  who
    informed the police.  At the meeting place he met a man who was with  a
    car packed with explosives.  The appellant was told to  drive  the  car
    bomb into the Ministry building but the police arrived and the man  was
    arrested.   After  he  had  arrived  in  the  UK  the  Taliban  left  a
    threatening letter at the family home stating that he was a traitor. On
    1 July 2012 the Taliban killed his four brothers and a sister, although
    his parents and another sister survived.

 5. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim in its  entirety.   There
    were a number of discrepancies in his account both in relation  to  the
    kidnap, his alleged involvement in a car bomb attack, and  the  killing
    of his family.

 6. The appellant relied upon the report  of  Dr  Huws  who  described  the
    appellant as having a depressive  illness  of  moderate  severity  with
    symptoms of unresolved grief over the death of his siblings.   Dr  Huws
    suggested that his condition could cause  difficulty  in  concentrating
    and focusing and might result in confusion  with  historic  dates.   Dr
    Huws stated that questioning about the story could act as a distressing
    trigger leading to periods of dissociation when the appellant would not
    be in touch with reality and his ability to give  a  coherent  response
    would be compromised.

 7. The judge stated that he had paid considerable attention to the opinion
    of Dr Huws  but  nevertheless  agreed  with  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant had not given a credible account of events.  He said that the
    appellant had failed to attend the course for which he came to  the  UK
    without a satisfactory explanation and had  not  returned  a  fortnight
    later.  The threatening  letters  from  the  Taliban  began  some  time
    afterwards and could have played no part in his decision.  He  analysed
    the discrepancies relied upon by the respondent and said that  he  bore
    in mind the potential for error in translating dates between the Arabic
    and Gregorian calendars. Nonetheless he found that the  inconsistencies
    could only be explained by the appellant having no genuine memories  to
    refer to.  He considered all of the documents  which  he  found  to  be
    incongruous and  contrived,  and  concluded  that  the  account  was  a
    fabrication.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had  erred  in  law  in  his  approach  to  the  appellant's  evidence,
    particularly his consideration of the report from Dr Huws.   The  judge
    had  not  considered  the  objective  evidence  before   reaching   his
    conclusions  with  respect  to  Afghan  criminal  procedures  and   had
    speculated in relation to whether the appellant was in  fact  in  touch
    with his family.  Finally, he had failed to apply anxious  scrutiny  to
    the documents before him.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Gibb on 5  August  2013,  who
    stated that they merited further consideration.  No response was served
    by the Secretary of State.

Submissions

10. Mr Khan made no submissions save for  in  relation  to  ground  1.   He
    relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge had  not  adequately
    addressed the psychiatric report.

11. Mr Spence defended the determination and submitted  that  the  findings
    were open to the judge on the basis of the evidence before him.

Findings and Conclusions

12. There is no error in this determination.

13. Dr Huws's diagnosis of moderately severe depression, which  could  lead
    to confusion with historic dates and difficulties in giving a  coherent
    account, was taken into account by the judge.  The judge observed  that
    the opinions expressed were implicitly founded on the premise that  the
    account was true.  In JL (medical reports - credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 00145 the Tribunal gave  guidance  on  the  judicial  approach  to
    medical reports and stated  that  ultimately,  whether  an  appellant's
    account of the underlying  events  is  credible  and  plausible,  is  a
    question of legal appraisal and a matter for the Tribunal judge.  There
    is therefore no error in the  judge  stating  that  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the report was a matter for him.

14. Dr  Huws  stated  that  minor  discrepancies,  when  the  appellant  is
    suffering from depression in  a  long  interview,  could  be  expected.
    However these were not minor discrepancies.  The judge was entitled  to
    take into account the fact that the dates given by the  appellant  were
    wildly discrepant.  He claimed to have been kidnapped by  the  Taliban,
    when he was interviewed, in July 2011 but the documents he provided put
    the date as October.  The October date, however, could not  be  correct
    because it post-dated the arrest of the man who had tried  to  persuade
    him to drive a car bomb.

15. It was plainly open to the judge to  find  it  not  credible  that  the
    appellant had not been asked to make a statement to the police or  been
    called upon to give evidence in relation to the car bomb  incident  and
    the arrest of the man who had asked him to drive the car.

16. The remaining grounds amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the  decision.
    There is no merit in the assertion that the documents were not properly
    assessed.  In any event, no reference is made in  the  grounds  to  the
    respondent's position  that,  even  if  the  Taliban  had  any  ongoing
    interest in the appellant, there would be a sufficiency  of  protection
    available to him given his father is currently said to be a  member  of
    the Afghan security force.

Decision

The original judge did not err in law and the decision stands.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

