
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10585/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 16th June 2014                               |On 27th  June 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                         MISS Suraja Temitayo OSOMO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 5th November 1995 is a citizen of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Nicholson  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison, a Home Office Presenting
    Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum based on her claim to  be
    at risk of persecution because of her membership of a particular social
    group namely a  former  victim  of  trafficking.   The  Respondent  had
    refused that application on 10th November 2013 and had  issued  removal
    directions.  The Appellant had appealed that decision  and  her  appeal
    was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Birrell  sitting  at
    Manchester  on  6th  February  2014.   The  judge  had  dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   Application  for  permission  to
    appeal had been made on the Appellant's behalf by Mr Nicholson on  25th
    February 2014.  That application had been refused by  Designated  Judge
    McCarthy on  12th  March  2014.   The  grounds  had  been  repeated  in
    precisely the same format and permission to appeal was granted  on  the
    basis it was possible the determination was  not  sufficiently  engaged
    with the impact of a finding that an individual  had  been  trafficked.
    That decision being taken by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan on 15th  April
    2014.  The matter comes before me  in  accordance  with  directions  in
    order to decide firstly whether an error of law had been  made  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant's Submissions

 3. Mr Nicholson whilst not conceding the point did not submit  further  on
    the issue about the judge's findings relating to  whether  or  not  the
    drug  traffickers  were  members  of  gang.    His   submissions   were
    essentially in terms of the grounds and applications already presented,
    that there had been insufficient consideration of the impact on  return
    of trafficking with reference  to  a  country  expert  report  and  the
    supporting evidence given by  Barnardo's.   It  was  further  submitted
    again in line with the grounds that the UK's international humanitarian
    obligations had not been properly considered.

The Respondent's Submissions

 4. Mr Harrison submitted that there had been a detailed  analysis  of  the
    evidence in this case and that whilst it had been acknowledged that the
    Appellant  was  a  trafficked  person  the  judge  had  given   careful
    consideration of all of the matters relating to risk upon return.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider  submissions  made
    and documents presented.  I now provide that decision with my  reasons.



Decision and Reasons

 6. The judge who refused permission had noted that the Grounds  of  Appeal
    consisted largely of sweeping statements which do not identify specific
    error  on  the  point  of  law.   The  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  granting
    permission had also noted "whilst the  Grounds  of  Appeal  exhibit  an
    emotional engagement which is not entirely helpful ...".

 7. Those criticisms are justified.  An unfortunate consequence of such  an
    approach is they may (and in this case do) misrepresent or distort  the
    determination actually prepared.

 8. The judge in paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the  determination  had  set  out
    accurately the burden and the standard of  proof  applicable  in  cases
    where asylum, humanitarian protection or  protected  rights  under  the
    ECHR  are  claimed.   It  was  inaccurate  to  assert  in  Ground  2(a)
    otherwise.  Thereafter the judge has set out accurately  a  summary  of
    the Appellant's case and had given careful consideration to that  case,
    contrary to the Grounds of Appeal at 2(b).

 9. The judge had been referred to, and had set out in full  the  preserved
    findings at paragraphs 191 and 192 in the case of PO (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 132; the appropriate and current guidance.   The  judge
    was also aware and had set out and considered the trafficking  passages
    of the COIS at 25.20.

10. She had also made clear and it is apparent from the determination  that
    she had considered all the evidence and in particular made reference to
    the  expert  report  of  Miss  Olatera-Olabegi  and  the  witness  from
    Barnardo's, Miss Pritchett.

11. The  judge  correctly  identified  the  issues  she  had  to  determine
    (paragraph 49) as whether the Appellant was at risk  on  return  having
    accepted that she was a victim  of  trafficking  for  the  purposes  of
    domestic servitude by a Nigerian couple.  As noted by Designated  Judge
    McCarthy refusing permission, the task of the  judge  appears  to  have
    been misunderstood in the somewhat emotional approach taken within  the
    Grounds of Appeal.

12. In order to properly  assess  the  risk  on  return  of  an  individual
    acknowledged to have been trafficked to the UK it was necessary for the
    judge  to  carefully  examine  the  facts  and  circumstances  of   the
    Appellant's case.  That is readily understood both from  a  reading  of
    the case law of PO and to properly assess the risk.  In  that  respect,
    it was necessary for the judge to undertake  a  careful  assessment  of
    whether the Appellant had been trafficked as part of  a  gang  or  not.
    The importance of that assessment is apparent on a reading of paragraph
    192 of PO.  In that paragraph it was noted:

         "Very careful examination of the circumstances in which the  victim
         was first trafficked must be undertaken and careful findings  made.
         ... The extent of the risk of the trafficking will very much depend
         on  the  circumstances  in  which   the   victim   was   originally
         trafficked."

13. It is unhelpful therefore to find Grounds  of  Appeal  criticising  the
    judge for undertaking such  an  assessment,  in  particular  to  decide
    whether the Appellant was trafficked by members  of  a  gang.   It  was
    further of importance in this case  as  the  expert  report  sought  to
    suggest the Appellant was  indeed  trafficked  by  members  of  a  gang
    (paragraph 52 determination).  The criticisms  within  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal implicitly appear to be a criticism of the approach directed  by
    the Court of Appeal.

14. The judge having carefully analysed the  evidence  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had been trafficked to the UK as a  domestic  servant  by  an
    opportunistic couple acting alone and gave cogent reasons why  she  did
    not find that they were part  of  a  trafficking  gang,  nor  that  the
    Appellant was the victim of a trafficking gang.   Given  the  criticism
    made of the judge and the view taken by the expert it is noteworthy  if
    not somewhat  ironic  that  the  author  of  those  grounds  no  longer
    submitted before me that the Appellant was  trafficked  as  part  of  a
    gang.

15. There was further criticism made of the judge at  paragraph  7  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal that the judge took an unduly harsh approach  to  the
    evidence from Barnardo's.  It was  said  the  judge  "found  that  they
    (Barnardo's) should have carried it (the support process) more quickly,
    presumably for the convenience of the Tribunal listing."   The  grounds
    refer to paragraph 55 of the determination in that respect.  In reality
    at paragraph 55 the judge had looked at the evidence from Barnardo's to
    see if the Appellant was in an enhanced risk category  because  of  her
    mental state.  The judge  noted  that  Mrs  Pritchett  from  Barnardo's
    readily acknowledged she was not a medical expert nor an expert  as  to
    medical  conditions  in  Nigeria.   It  was  also  noted  that   whilst
    acknowledging the Barnardo's approach was a careful one  the  Appellant
    began with Barnardo's in  May  2013  and  had  not  been  seen  by  any
    healthcare professional or a GP in relation to any claimed  depression.
    There is nothing within that paragraph indicating the judge did not pay
    proper regard to the evidence from Barnardo's.  There is no  suggestion
    that the judge directly or inferentially  suggested  Barnardo's  should
    have carried out the process  more  quickly  or  that  presumably  that
    should have been to  accommodate  Tribunal  listings.   The  Ground  of
    Appeal therefore is wholly in accurate and a reflection of the  dangers
    inherent in an emotional  approach  to  appeal  drafting.   Whilst  not
    referred to by the judge, at the time of the  hearing  (February  2014)
    the Appellant had been under the care  of  Barnardo's  for  ten  months
    without any medical evidence even from a GP, presented  with  reference
    to depression.

16. In summary the judge directed herself  accurately  on  the  burden  and
    standard of proof.  She had clearly in mind the issue in the  case  and
    the case law that provided guidance as to the correct  approach  to  be
    taken.  Her fact finding in terms of risk on return was done  carefully
    and took account of all the relevant material.  The Grounds  of  Appeal
    in reality are a disagreement with her conclusions and no more.

Decision

17. There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                          Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

