
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10928/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th October   2016                      |On 6th October 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                  YONAS [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Bednarek (instructed by Immigration Advice
                    Service (Manchester))
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge  R  D  Taylor
      promulgated  on  30th  December  2015  by  which  he   dismissed   the
      Appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal may have acted unfairly in proceeding to deal with the appeal
      in the Appellant's absence given that he  had  not  been  served  with
      notice of hearing.

   3.  In  his  application  seeking  permission  to  appeal  the  Appellant
      indicated that he  had  never  received  notice  of  either  the  case
      management review hearing or the substantive hearing.  When  he  first
      claimed asylum he was at a temporary  address  but  has  been  at  his
      current address since March 2015. Indeed, the SEF correctly gives  his
      current address. However, his then solicitors, Blavo & Co used the old
      address on the notice of appeal.


   4. Between his giving notice of appeal and the hearing Blavo  &  Co  were
      closed down  by  the  Solicitors  Regulation  Authority.  Accordingly,
      therefore there were no solicitors to receive the  notice  of  hearing
      and the Appellant himself did not receive it, it having been  sent  by
      the Tribunal to his previous  address.  No  fault  can  lie  with  the
      Tribunal as that was the address provided on the notice of appeal.  It
      seems that the fault lies squarely with his former representatives.


   5. Indeed there is evidence on the file that a friend of the  Appellant's
      emailed the Tribunal to the effect that they were using an old address
      and giving the new one. Unfortunately, as he was not identified  as  a
      representative the Tribunal was not able to act on his instruction.


   6. It might have been prudent of the Judge dealing with the appeal,  when
      there was no attendance by the  Appellant,  to  check  with  the  Home
      Office Presenting Officer   that both the Tribunal and the Home Office
      had the same address for the Appellant. However, he did not do so  and
      I attach no blame to the Judge for that.


   7.  However,  it  is  clear  that  there  was  procedural  unfairness  in
      proceeding to deal with the appeal in the Appellant's absence  in  the
      circumstances. The procedural unfairness amounts to an  error  of  law
      such that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.


   8. As the Appellant has not had the opportunity of putting  his  case  to
      the First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate that the appeal is  remitted
      to that Tribunal for a full rehearing.
       Decision

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent  that  it  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.


    There having been no application for an anonymity order I do  not  make
    one.


Signed                              Date 6th October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
