
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10153/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2015                 |On 7 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     Au
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Edwards instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Divnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure  and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a national of Sudan who was born on  1  October  1979.
    He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 May  2003  but  thereafter
    was removed to France on 22 May 2003.  He re-entered the United Kingdom
    on 29 May 2003 and claimed asylum.  That claim  was  rejected  and  his
    subsequent appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal was  dismissed
    on 17 September 2004 by Judge Phillips.

 3. On 25 April 2013, the appellant again claimed asylum.  The basis of his
    claim arose from the cessation of South Sudan in 2011 from Sudan.   The
    appellant claimed that his father was from the  north  and  his  mother
    from the south and, as a result of his "mixed heritage", he was at risk
    on return to Sudan.  He also claimed to be at risk because of  his  sur
    place activities with the Justice and Equality Movement  (JEM)  in  the
    UK.  On 7 November 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
    claim for asylum, for humanitarian protection and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 12 March 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judges Page and G
    Solly) dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not accept that the appellant had engaged in sur  place  activities  in
    the UK and was at risk on return as a consequence.  Further, the First-
    tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant had failed to establish that
    he was at real risk on return based upon his "mixed ethnicity" or as  a
    failed asylum seeker.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  On 8 April 2015, the First-
    tier Tribunal (DJ J  M  Lewis)  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

 6. On 22 May 2015, the  Secretary  of  State  filed  a  Rule  24  response
    opposing  the  appellant's  appeal  and  arguing  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to find that the appellant was  not  at  risk  on
    return to Sudan.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

 8. Mr Edwards, on behalf of the appellant relied upon the four grounds  of
    appeal.  First, he submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  wrongly
    relied upon the findings of  Judge  Phillips  in  the  2004  appeal  in
    finding that the appellant had failed to establish that he was at  risk
    because of his "mixed heritage".  Secondly,  in  reaching  its  adverse
    credibility finding, the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  take  into
    account that the appellant's claim now was based on information that he
    had volunteered in 2003 and 2004 which, at the time, was not  a  matter
    which the appellant could  foresee  would  now  be  relevant  and  that
    supported a positive credibility finding in this appeal.   Thirdly,  Mr
    Edwards submitted that the FTT had failed to consider all the objective
    evidence concerning the risk to a person of "mixed  heritage"  such  as
    the appellant on return.  Fourthly, Mr Edwards submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal had been wrong to take into  account  in  applying  Judge
    Phillips findings in  2004  that  the  appellant  had  not  then  (when
    unrepresented) relied upon any objective evidence.

 9. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Divnycz relied upon the Rule 24  notice
    that the First-tier Tribunal reached a sustainable adverse  credibility
    finding based upon Judge Phillips' decision in 2004.  He submitted that
    there was  no  error  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  reaching  that
    conclusion in the light of the objective evidence which, the First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to conclude, did not establish that the appellant
    would be at risk because of his "mixed heritage" or as a failed  asylum
    seeker.

Discussion

10. Mr Edwards accepted before me that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  adverse
    findings in relation to the appellant's sur place activity  in  the  UK
    were not challenged.  He relied solely upon the risk to  the  appellant
    on return based upon his "mixed  ethnicity"  and  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.

11. In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal's decision discloses two errors
    of law.

12. First, in relation to its finding that the appellant would  not  be  at
    risk on return to Sudan,  the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  all  the
    background evidence.

13. At para 62, the Tribunal said this:

         "There is no reliable evidence before us in the  extant  appeal  to
         establish that the appellant would face a real risk on the  grounds
         of his claimed mixed ethnicity.  There is no evidence  before  this
         Tribunal to meet the  low  standard  of  proof  to  show  that  the
         appellant  would  be  at  risk  upon  return  by  reason  of  mixed
         ethnicity, should he be returned in 2015."

14. Then at para 65, having referred to a document from Waging Peace  dated
    2 March 2015 that failed asylum seekers would be at risk on  return  to
    Sudan, the Tribunal stated:

         "There is no country guidance to say  that  failed  asylum  seekers
         cannot be returned to Sudan and in the absence of  clear  objective
         evidence of country guidance on the point from the Upper  Tribunal,
         we are unable to conclude that the appellant would be at risk  upon
         return as a failed asylum seeker per se."

15. In  its  consideration  of  the  background  material,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal focused on a number of written  expert  reports  by  Mr  Peter
    Verney dated 3 November 2011, 12 November 2012 and  26  February  2015.
    Also, unusually, Mr Verney gave oral evidence before the Tribunal.  The
    Tribunal did not accept that Mr Verney's evidence, based  on  a  single
    report by Waging Peace, established that there was a real risk  to  the
    appellant on return based upon his "mixed heritage".

16. However, Mr Verney's evidence, although important,  was  not  the  only
    evidence before the Tribunal.  There was in  addition  the  Operational
    Guidance Note for Sudan dated August 2012.  In  s.3.6  "Civilians  from
    South Sudan" that report at paras  3.6.1,  3.6.3  and  3.6.7  describes
    changes to the nationality law in Sudan in relation to  those  who  are
    from the south and the removal of citizenship from  those  who  acquire
    "de jure or de facto" the nationality of South Sudan.  It appears  from
    para 3.6.4 of the OGN that, under the nationality law of South Sudan  a
    person will be considered a South Sudanese national  if  any  of  their
    parents were born in South Sudan.  Potentially,  that  applies  to  the
    appellant if his account were accepted.

17. Further, there is a report written by Bronwen Manby entitled "the right
    to a nationality and the cessation of South Sudan: a commentary on  the
    impact of the new law, 2012."  That document also  contains  statements
    concerning the impact of the amendment to the Sudanese nationality  law
    which raises the possibility that a  person  with  one  South  Sudanese
    parent will lose their Sudanese nationality (see pages 3, 6  and  7  of
    the report).  The report speaks of the potential risk of  statelessness
    for someone of "mixed ancestry".

18. Mr Edwards indicated  in  his  submission  that  he  had  not  directly
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant would loose his
    Sudanese nationality.  However, he submitted that that was implicit  in
    his argument based upon the appellant's "mixed heritage" argument  and,
    indeed, I note that was part of the skeleton argument submitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (see paras 12-18 of that document).

19. It may well be because of the emphasis of Mr  Edwards'  submissions  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  it  did  not  fully  engage  with  the
    background evidence as to the impact upon the appellant if returned  to
    Sudan.  Mr Verney's evidence, taken as a whole, may well have not  been
    sufficient in itself to make good the appellant's  claim.   But,  there
    was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which  resonated  with  his
    claim to be at risk in Sudan because of his claimed  "mixed  heritage".
    In reaching its  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not  produced  any
    evidence to meet the low standard of proof to show that he was at  risk
    on return by reason of his mixed  ethnicity,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    fell  into  error  by  failing  to  consider  the  evidence  concerning
    nationality and, bound up in that, the impact upon him  as  someone  of
    "mixed heritage" in Sudan.

20. I say no more about the background material as it will be a matter  for
    the First-tier Tribunal on the remittal  of  this  appeal  to  consider
    what, if any, risk it establishes to a person who claims/is  of  "mixed
    heritage".

21. Neither in the  grounds,  nor  in  Mr  Edwards'  submissions,  was  any
    challenge  raised  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that   the
    appellant had not established that he would be at risk on return  as  a
    failed asylum seeker per se.  That finding, therefore, stands.

22. Secondly, however, the issue of risk on return as a  person  of  "mixed
    heritage" would be of no moment if the First-tier Tribunal had  made  a
    sustainable finding that the appellant was not of "mixed heritage".  It
    is not entirely clear to me whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  did,  in
    fact, based upon Judge Phillips' 2004 determination conclude  that  the
    appellant had  not  established  he  was  of  "mixed  ethnicity".   The
    relevant passage in the determination is in para 62  where  the  First-
    tier Tribunal says this:

         "Firstly, we agree with the conclusions reached by  Judge  Phillips
         in his determination promulgated on 17 September  2004.   He  found
         the appellant to have invented his asylum  claim.   It  would  have
         been surprising if any other conclusion had been reached given  the
         appellant's evidence of having been set up for arrest by  his  half
         brother and then escaping  dressed  as  a  woman.   There  is  much
         overlap between what the appellant said then now.  His  claim  then
         was based upon adverse treatment by his family on  the  grounds  of
         his mixed ethnicity.  There was no objective evidence to enable the
         appellant to succeed on the grounds  of  h  is  objective  evidence
         before Judge Phillips."

23. Para 62 continues thereafter but is solely concerned with  whether  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal established an  objective  risk
    to those of "mixed ethnicity".  It may well be implicit in the words  I
    have set out that the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  accepting  that  Judge
    Phillips rejected the appellant's claim to be of "mixed ethnicity".  Mr
    Edwards sought to argue that the First-tier Tribunal had  misunderstood
    Judge Phillips' findings in 2004 because, although  the  background  to
    the appellant's claim then was that he  had  problems  with  his  step-
    family because of his mixed heritage, the substance of  his  claim  was
    that he was at risk  because  of  his  political  opinion  having  been
    accused of distributing political anti-government leaflets.  So far  as
    it goes, that submission has  some  merit.   However,  Judge  Phillips'
    conclusion in 2004 set out at para 22 of his determination as follows:

         "My conclusion is that this is an appellant who gave  a  completely
         false story on arrival in the United Kingdom.  He has changed  that
         story and replaced it with a different one but every aspect of  the
         new story is beyond  rational  belief.   The  appellant  is  not  a
         truthful witness, his word cannot be relied  upon  and  I  make  an
         adverse credibility finding.  In my finding the  appellant  is  not
         telling the truth about any  aspect  of  his  account.   I  do  not
         believe his account of his problems  with  his  family;  I  do  not
         believe his account of his arrest, his detention, his escape or his
         travel to the United Kingdom."

24. That, in my judgment, is a comprehensive rejection of  the  appellant's
    account integral to which was that he was put  at  risk  by  his  step-
    family who did so because of his mixed heritage.

25. Nevertheless, although with some hesitation, I have concluded that  the
    First-tier Tribunal in this appeal  has  not  properly  considered  the
    issue of the appellant's credibility in relation to his  claimed  mixed
    heritage.  First,  there  is  no  clear  finding  in  para  62  of  its
    determination one way or another.  Secondly, in any event, a finding on
    that issue could only properly be made in the light of  the  background
    evidence including, for example,  problems  faced  by  those  of  mixed
    heritage including within families.  As the First-tier  Tribunal  makes
    plain in  para  62,  there  was  no  objective  evidence  before  Judge
    Phillips: it would appear  because  the  appellant  did  not  have  the
    benefit of legal representation.  In this appeal,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, I do not consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
    considered all the background evidence and therefore, even if  para  62
    can be interpreted as reaching a clear finding, that finding  was  made
    without proper consideration of all the background evidence.

26. Consequently, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's decision to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of
    an error of law.  Its adverse credibility finding in  relation  to  the
    appellant's risk on return (unrelated to any sur place activity) cannot
    stand and neither can its finding (if there be one) that the  appellant
    has failed to establish his "mixed heritage".

27. It will be for the First-tier Tribunal on  remittal  to  make  a  clear
    finding on the appellant's mixed heritage and, if established,  whether
    he is at risk on return in the light of the background  evidence  which
    has been more fully explored before me than, it would appear,  was  the
    case before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

28. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error of law.  That decision is set aside.

29. The First-tier Tribunal's finding in relation to  the  appellant's  sur
    place activities and risk arising therefrom is  preserved.   Otherwise,
    none of the First-tier Tribunal's findings are preserved.

30. Applying para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, bearing
    in mind the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding  involved  and  the
    material to be considered, this is an appropriate case to remit to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to rehear the appeal to  the  extent  indicated  in
    this decision.

31. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Page or Judge G Solly.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
