
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10912/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                           Simbarashe Mandizvidza
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muzenda of Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant has appealed against a decision of Judge  Saffer  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 16th February 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Zimbabwean citizen born  7th  August  1978  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 22nd  July  2014  with  a  valid  visa
    enabling him to enter as a visitor.  The Appellant  claimed  asylum  on
    20th August 2014, and his claim was based upon his  political  opinion,
    as an MDC member.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 26th November  2014  and  the
    Appellant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 12th February 2015.  The FTT
    found the Appellant to be incredible and did not accept that  he  would
    be at risk if returned  to  Zimbabwe.   His  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  FTT  had
    failed to make factual findings on many of the matters detailed in  the
    Appellant's witness statement, and the lack of detailed findings  might
    suggest an inadequacy of reasoning.

Error of Law

 5. On 6th October 2015 I heard submissions from both parties  in  relation
    to error of law, and concluded that the FTT decision must be set  aside
    with no findings  preserved.   Full  details  of  the  application  for
    permission, the grant of  permission,  the  submissions  made  by  both
    parties, and my conclusions are contained  in  my  decision  dated  7th
    October 2015, promulgated on  13th  October  2015.   I  set  out  below
    paragraphs 12 - 24 which contain my conclusions and reasons for setting
    aside the FTT decision;

         "12. I firstly consider ground (a) of  the  application.   The  FTT
             found in paragraph 28 of the decision that the  Appellant  had
             no MDC profile and could return to Zimbabwe, and in particular
             his home of Chikomba and there was no real risk that he  would
             have to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF.   The  Appellant  had
             failed to establish that it  was  reasonably  likely  that  he
             would be going to a high density area, or feature on a list of
             those targeted for harassment, or would  otherwise  engage  in
             political activities likely to attract the  adverse  attention
             of ZANU-PF.  He would not need to internally relocate  because
             it was safe for him to return to his home.

         13.  The Appellant's evidence (paragraph 6 of his witness statement
             dated 5th February 2015) was that he came from Chikomba  which
             is a rural area, although he had not in fact  been  living  in
             Chikomba immediately before leaving Zimbabwe  because  he  had
             been serving as a police officer.  It was however his case  as
             presented to the FTT, that if returned he  would  have  to  go
             back to Chikomba and the FTT found that it was safe for him to
             do so and did not consider any option of relocation to another
             area.

         14.  I find there is merit in the contention that the FTT  did  not
             properly apply the guidance in CM and I set out below for ease
             of reference, paragraphs (1) and (2) of the headnote  to  that
             decision;

             '(1)  As  a  general  matter,  there  is  significantly   less
                  politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared  with
                  the situation considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular,
                  the evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the
                  return of a failed asylum seeker from the United  Kingdom,
                  having no significant MDC profile, would  result  in  that
                  person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty
                  to the ZANU-PF.

             (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise  in  the
                  case of a person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning
                  from the United Kingdom after a significant absence  to  a
                  rural area of Zimbabwe, other  than  Matabeland  North  or
                  Matabeland  South.   Such  a  person  may  well  find   it
                  difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to serious
                  ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF authority  figures  and  those
                  they control.  The adverse attention may  well  involve  a
                  requirement to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF,  with  the
                  prospect of serious harm in the event of failure.  Persons
                  who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to
                  ZANU-PF are entitled to international protection,  whether
                  or not they could and would do whatever might be necessary
                  to demonstrate loyalty (RT Zimbabwe).'

         15.  As the Appellant claimed that Chikomba was a rural  area,  the
             FTT should have assessed the risk to him,  in  line  with  the
             guidance in CM which is  set  out  above.   The  FTT  did  not
             explain why the Appellant would be able to avoid  the  adverse
             attention of ZANU-PF in a rural area, having returned from the
             United Kingdom after a significant absence.

         16.  I find that the FTT erred in law on this issue by  failing  to
             properly apply  the  guidance  in  CM,  and  failing  to  give
             adequate reasons for the conclusions reached in paragraph 28.

         17.  The remainder of the grounds can be  dealt  with  together  as
             they relate to findings made by the FTT  in  relation  to  the
             Appellant's credibility, and the contention that findings were
             not  made  on  material  matters,  and  adequate  reasons  for
             findings were not given.

         18.  In relation  to  adequacy  of  reasoning,  the  principles  in
             Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)
             should be taken into account and for ease of reference  I  set
             out below the headnote to that decision;

                  'It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier
                  Tribunal judgments  to  rehearse  every  detail  or  issue
                  raised in a case.  This leads to judgments becoming overly
                  long and confused and is not a proportionate  approach  to
                  deciding cases.  It is, however, necessary for  judges  to
                  identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
                  explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that
                  the parties can understand why they have won or lost. '

         19.  In paragraph 25 the FTT simply  records  that  the  'delay  in
             claiming asylum adversely affects his credibility.'  There was
             a conflict between the parties as to the length of  delay  and
             the judge did not make findings to resolve this  conflict.   I
             find this to be an error of  law.   The  Respondent  contended
             that the delay in claiming asylum was relevant to section 8 of
             the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act
             2004 (the 2004 Act) and  specific  reliance  was  placed  upon
             section 8(2) which I set out below;

             '(2) This section applies to any  behaviour  by  the  claimant
                  that the deciding authority thinks -

                  (a)  is designed or likely to conceal information;

                  (b)  is designed or likely to mislead, or

                  (c)  is designed  or  likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the
                      handling or resolution of the claim or the taking  of
                      a decision in relation to the claimant.'

         20.   Presumably  the  Respondent  was  relying  upon  8(2)(c)  and
             referring to the delay in claiming asylum.   In  my  view  the
             judge erred by not considering the principles in JT (Cameroon)
             [2008] EWCA Civ 878 and in particular paragraphs 19  -  21  of
             that decision.  Behaviour falling within  section  8  must  be
             taken into account in assessing credibility, but the weight to
             be given to such behaviour is entirely a matter for the  fact-
             finder, and there may be cases in which behaviour of the  kind
             identified in section 8 is held to carry no weight at  all  in
             the overall assessment of credibility.  It  was  confirmed  in
             paragraph 19  that  a  global  assessment  of  credibility  is
             required.

         21.   The  FTT  should  have  recorded  whether  it  accepted   the
             Appellant's account that he telephoned the Home Office on  1st
             August 2014, the Appellant having arrived on 22nd  July  2014,
             and that the Appellant was then given an  appointment  by  the
             Home Office to make his asylum  claim  on  20th  August  2014.
             This in my view was relevant  to  the  overall  assessment  of
             credibility.

         22.  As pointed out by the judge granting permission, there are  no
             factual findings on many aspects of the Appellant's account as
             set out in his witness statement.  The  FTT  appears  to  have
             placed significant weight upon the delay  in  claiming  asylum
             and the fact that the Appellant lied to obtain a visa in South
             Africa, did not disclose to  an  Immigration  Officer  at  the
             airport that he had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  claim
             asylum, and lied by stating that he  intended  to  leave  this
             country at the conclusion of his visit.

         23.  The FTT does not fulfil the duty set out in Budhathoki to give
             adequate reasons so that the Appellant knows  why  his  appeal
             has been  dismissed.   The  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
             granted asylum in South Africa appears to have  been  rejected
             simply on the basis that no documentary evidence was produced.
              The documentary evidence purporting to confirm  this  was  in
             fact provided after the hearing, indicating that the Appellant
             had been granted refugee status in South Africa in 2008.

         24.  I conclude that for the reasons given above  the  decision  of
             the First-tier Tribunal is unsafe and must be set  aside.   No
             findings are preserved."

 6. The hearing on 6th October 2015 was  adjourned  so  that  the  decision
    could be re-made by the  Upper  Tribunal  after  further  evidence  was
    given.

Re-Making the Decision

The Law

 7. The Appellant is entitled to asylum if he is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee as defined in  regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

 8. The Appellant would  be  eligible  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules if he does  not  qualify  as  a
    refugee, and establishes substantial grounds for believing that  if  he
    was removed from the United Kingdom, he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling
    to avail himself of the protection of the country of return.

 9. The Appellant claims that to remove him from the United  Kingdom  would
    breach Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).  The Appellant  must  therefore  establish  that
    there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  returning  him  to
    Zimbabwe would create a real risk that he would be killed, or subjected
    to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

10. In relation to risk on return, the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
    and can be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood  which  is  a
    lower standard than  the  normal  civil  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The Tribunal must consider the circumstances as at  the
    date of hearing.

The Appellant's Claim

11. The Appellant's claim as initially presented to the Respondent  is  set
    out in his screening interview  record  dated  20th  August  2014,  his
    Asylum Interview Record dated  11th  November  2014,  and  his  undated
    witness statement contained at  pages  A1  -  A4  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  The claim may be summarised as follows.

12. The Appellant joined the MDC in Zimbabwe in 1999.   He  was  an  active
    member.

13. He is married, and he and his wife  have  four  children.   They  lived
    together as a family in Zimbabwe before fleeing to South  Africa.   Two
    of the children were born after the family had left Zimbabwe  and  were
    living in South Africa.

14. The Appellant was born and grew up in Chikomba which is a  rural  area.
    He was involved in clashes and skirmishes  with  ZANU-PF  youths.   The
    Appellant was injured in an attack which caused him and his  family  to
    flee to South Africa in February 2008 and in that month he was  granted
    asylum.

15. The Appellant was an active MDC member while in South  Africa  although
    he did not hold an official position  within  the  party.   He  briefly
    returned to Zimbabwe in December 2012, for a period of  three  days  to
    visit his gravely ill father.  He then returned to South Africa.

16. The Appellant applied for a Zimbabwean passport while in South  Africa.
    He did not travel to Zimbabwe to make this application, but  authorised
    his sister who lived in Zimbabwe to submit his application, and collect
    his passport.  This she did, and his passport was given to a friend  of
    the Appellant who operated a bus service  between  Zimbabwe  and  South
    Africa.  For reasons unknown to the Appellant, the bus driver  had  his
    new passport stamped at the border which is why there is  a  2014  date
    stamp in the passport.

17. There was unrest in the Zimbabwean  community  in  South  Africa.   The
    Appellant believed that the community had been infiltrated by the  CIO,
    and  there  was  hostility  against  Zimbabweans  from  South   African
    citizens.  The police did not offer  protection.   There  was  a  split
    within the MDC,  the  Appellant  supporting  Tsvangirai,  while  others
    supported another faction led by Tendai Biti.

18. On 10th May 2014 the Appellant was detained and  taken  away  by  three
    men, two Zimbabweans and one South African.  He was threatened  with  a
    pistol and questioned as to why he was supporting Tsvangirai.   He  was
    assaulted and told that he had three weeks to leave South Africa or  he
    would receive worse treatment.  After being held for four hours he  was
    released.

19. The Appellant thereafter  discovered  that  his  church  was  having  a
    conference in the UK between 23rd and 25th July 2014  and  applied  for
    and was granted a visa enabling him to  visit  the  UK  to  attend  the
    conference.

20. The Appellant did not claim asylum when he arrived at  the  airport  in
    the UK, as he did not know he was able to claim asylum  at  that  time.
    Shortly thereafter he sought advice and attempted to telephone the Home
    Office to make an asylum claim.  He first called  the  Home  Office  on
    23rd July but could not get through.  He eventually made  contact  with
    the Home Office by telephone on  1st  August  2014  and  was  given  an
    appointment to claim asylum on 20th August 2014, which is when he  made
    his asylum claim and underwent a screening interview.

21. The Appellant indicated that he feared persecution and ill-treatment if
    forced to return to Zimbabwe, because of his support and  activism  for
    the MDC.

The Refusal

22. The reasons for refusal are set out in a  letter  dated  26th  November
    2014 which may be summarised as follows.

23. It was accepted that the Appellant had provided a wealth of documentary
    evidence, including photographs, to prove his MDC membership.   He  had
    correctly answered a number of questions about the MDC.  Therefore  his
    identity, nationality and membership of the MDC were accepted.

24. In relation to his problems in Zimbabwe, the Respondent  accepted  that
    the Appellant's account was broadly consistent with background evidence
    and that his account had been internally consistent.  There was however
    no objective external evidence to  confirm  the  threats  to  him,  and
    therefore this aspect of his claim would be considered when the benefit
    of the doubt was considered.

25. In relation to the Appellant's claimed problems in  South  Africa,  the
    Respondent noted a lack of  objective  evidence  to  confirm  that  MDC
    supporters are targeted in South  Africa.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's account was internally consistent, and therefore this  part
    of his claim would also be considered when the benefit of the doubt was
    considered.

26. The Respondent believed that the Appellant had returned to Zimbabwe  to
    collect his passport which was  issued  on  3rd  January  2014  despite
    having claimed to have been granted asylum in South Africa.  It was not
    accepted that the Appellant  had  such  a  profile  that  he  would  be
    targeted by the CIO.

27. The Respondent contended that the Appellant's credibility was adversely
    affected by the fact that he did not claim asylum when  he  arrived  at
    the airport in the UK.  It was noted that he had arrived on  22nd  July
    2014 but did not claim asylum until 20th August 2014.

28. When considering the benefit of the  doubt  the  Respondent  considered
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules together with section 8 of  the
    2004  Act.   The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  satisfied
    paragraph 339L(i), (ii), and (iii).  However sub-section (iv)  required
    an individual to have made an asylum claim  at  the  earliest  possible
    time, and because the Appellant had not done this, the Respondent found
    that he did not satisfy paragraph  339L(iv)  and  because  he  had  not
    claimed asylum without delay, it was  not  accepted  that  his  general
    credibility had been established  as  required  by  paragraph  339L(v).
    Therefore the Respondent did not extend to the Appellant the benefit of
    the doubt and did not accept that he had given a credible account.

29. The Respondent went on to consider internal relocation contending  that
    it would be reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Bulawayo.

30. Because the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk if returned to Zimbabwe, as he would not be of adverse interest to
    the Zimbabwean authorities, the Respondent did not accept that  he  was
    entitled to be granted asylum, or humanitarian protection, and  it  was
    not accepted that Articles 2 or 3 would be breached  if  the  Appellant
    returned to Zimbabwe.

31. The Respondent did not consider that the Appellant  had  established  a
    family or private life in the UK that would engage  Article  8  of  the
    1950 European Convention.

The Appellant's Response to Refusal

32. The Appellant prepared a witness statement  dated  5th  February  2015.
    The statement may be summarised as follows.   The  Appellant  confirmed
    that he had joined the MDC in the UK.  He is the secretary of the South
    Yorkshire branch, and the vice secretary of the northern  district  for
    UK and Ireland.

33. With reference to the refusal letter the Appellant  confirmed  that  he
    had not returned to Zimbabwe in 2014 to collect his passport.   He  had
    only visited in 2013 for a short period to visit his father.

34. The Appellant contended that he was  in  fact  a  founding  member  and
    chairperson of the MDC group in the Strand area of Cape Town from 2008.
     He had a high profile in that area.

35. The Appellant contended that the short delay in claiming asylum  should
    not mean that his claim should be dismissed as incredible.

36. The Appellant contended that he could not relocate to  Bulawayo  as  he
    would suffer ethnic discrimination as he is of Shona ethnicity and does
    not speak Ndebele.

The Hearing

Preliminary Issues

37. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I established that  there  was  no
    need for an interpreter.

38. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely and that each party had served the other  with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle with Annexes A - C, and in addition had the refusal
    decision and a typed copy of the asylum interview dated  11th  November
    2014.  I also had the Appellant's bundle  of  documents  comprising  55
    pages.

39. Mr Muzenda confirmed that the Appellant claimed asylum based  upon  his
    political opinion, that being his membership of the MDC.   He  did  not
    make a separate humanitarian protection claim.   The  Appellant  relied
    upon Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 Convention, but  placed  no  reliance
    upon Article 8.

Evidence

40. The Appellant gave oral evidence, confirming the accuracy  of  his  two
    interview records, and his two witness statements.  He  was  not  asked
    additional questions by Mr Muzenda but was cross-examined by Mr  Mills.



41. I recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings and it
    is not necessary to reiterate them in full here.  If relevant,  I  will
    refer to the Appellant's evidence when I set  out  my  conclusions  and
    reasons.

The Respondent's Submissions

42. In submitting that the appeal should be  dismissed  Mr  Mills  accepted
    that evidence had now been produced, which had not been before the FTT,
    to indicate that the Appellant had been granted asylum in South African
    in 2008.  He submitted that this added little to the claim, because the
    situation in Zimbabwe had now changed.

43. Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  most  recent  country  guidance  to  be
    considered is CM Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC)  although  in
    relation to risk at the airport, the authority to be considered  is  HS
    (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094.  In relation
    to the airport, Mr Mills submitted that  questioning  by  the  CIO  was
    intelligence led, and the Appellant would not be of  adverse  interest.
    If it was accepted that the Appellant had  a  significant  MDC  profile
    which attracted the attention of the CIO, then Mr Mills  accepted  that
    he may be at risk at the airport, but it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a profile that would attract the attention of the CIO.

44. I was asked to take into account that the Appellant  accepted  that  he
    had not been truthful when he applied for a visa to visit the  UK.   He
    had indicated that he intended only a visit, but his true intention, as
    he accepted, was to claim asylum and remain in the UK.  This  indicated
    a propensity to lie.

45. I was also asked to note the delay in claiming asylum.

46. I was also asked to note a discrepancy in the Appellant's  evidence  in
    that when interviewed (questions 88 - 90) he had stated that he held no
    position within the MDC in South Africa, but he now contended  that  he
    was in fact the founder of one of the branches and chairperson of  that
    branch and he had submitted a letter from an official of that branch in
    South Africa, confirming this.  The Appellant  when  asked  about  this
    discrepancy had accepted that he had not disclosed his position  within
    the MDC branch in Cape Town, when  interviewed  because  he  could  not
    prove it.  Mr Mills submitted this was not a satisfactory  explanation.



47. I was asked to  note  that  the  Appellant  had  returned  to  Zimbabwe
    voluntarily after he had been granted  asylum  in  South  Africa.   His
    evidence was that he had not encountered any road blocks,  and  he  had
    not encountered any problems.  I was asked to find that this  indicated
    that the authorities had no interest in  him.   Alternatively,  if  the
    Appellant had encountered road blocks, he must have been able to pass a
    ZANU-PF loyalty test.

48. In relation to the  Appellant's  passport  and  the  2014  stamp  which
    indicated that the passport had been in Zimbabwe,  Mr  Mills  submitted
    that the only sensible explanation was that the Appellant had  actually
    used that passport in Zimbabwe in 2014.

49. It was accepted that  there  was  violence  in  South  Africa  directed
    towards Zimbabweans in 2013 - 14, but it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    South African authorities were involved in that violence.  I was  asked
    to note that the Appellant's  evidence  was  that  his  wife  and  four
    children are still  in  South  Africa,  Mr  Mills  questioned  why  the
    Appellant would leave his family in  South  Africa  if  there  was  any
    danger.

50. In addition Mr Mills pointed out that the Appellant had indicated  that
    his activities for the MDC in the UK were in  the  public  domain,  and
    questioned why he had publicised those activities as this might put his
    wife and children in danger in South Africa.

51. In relation to risk on return,  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  if  it  was
    accepted that the CIO would have no interest in the  Appellant  at  the
    airport, then the Appellant could relocate to  Bulawayo.   CM  Zimbabwe
    indicated that even if the Appellant had an MDC profile he would not be
    at risk there and I was asked to note paragraphs 206 - 209 of CM  which
    reaffirms the position initially set out in EM  Zimbabwe  which  stated
    that there are just over a million people in Bulawayo, and 20% of  them
    are Shona.  There is therefore a very significant Shona population, and
    there is no reason why the Appellant as a Shona should be discriminated
    against in Bulawayo.

The Appellant's Submissions

52. Mr Muzenda pointed out that the Respondent accepted that the  Appellant
    was and is an MDC member.  It  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed in interview to state  his  role  as  founder/chairperson  of  a
    branch in Cape Town.  There is however a  letter  at  page  18  of  the
    Appellant's bundle confirming his  role  in  that  branch.   There  are
    photographs of the Appellant in the Respondent's bundle, which show the
    Appellant's activities in South Africa.

53. Mr Muzenda submitted that  the  Appellant  had  reinvigorated  the  MDC
    branch in South Yorkshire and had now risen to district level and  this
    proved that he had a significant MDC profile.  The CIO would  therefore
    have an interest in him and he would be at risk at the airport.

54. I was asked to find the Appellant's account credible and to accept that
    he had a good reason to visit Zimbabwe to see his father, who died very
    shortly after the visit.  I was asked to note that it was the Appellant
    who had  volunteered  information  to  indicate  that  he  had  visited
    Zimbabwe for three days in December 2012 and January 2013.

55. I was asked to accept that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  at  the
    airport if returned, and that he would not have a reasonable relocation
    option if he managed to pass through the airport, either in  Harare  or
    Bulawayo.  In relation to Bulawayo, the Appellant has no family  there,
    cannot speak the Ndebele  language  and  would  not  be  able  to  find
    accommodation or employment.

56. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

57. I have taken into account all the oral and documentary evidence  placed
    before  me,  together  with  the  oral   submissions   made   by   both
    representatives.  I take into account the lower standard of proof  that
    applies, which can be described as a reasonable degree  of  likelihood,
    and I accept that it is important that I view the  Appellant's  account
    in the context of conditions in Zimbabwe.

58. I have considered the evidence in the round, and with anxious scrutiny,
    and consider this appeal in the light of the  provisions  of  paragraph
    339L of the Immigration Rules which for ease of  reference  I  set  out
    below;

          "339L.  It is the duty of the person to  substantiate  the  asylum
                claim  or  establish  that  he  is  a  person  eligible  for
                humanitarian protection or  substantiate  his  human  rights
                claim.  Where aspects of  the  person's  statement  are  not
                supported by documentary or other  evidence,  those  aspects
                will  not  need  confirmation  when  all  of  the  following
                conditions are met:

                (i)    the person has made a genuine effect to  substantiate
                    his asylum claim  or  establish  that  he  is  a  person
                    eligible for humanitarian protection or substantiate his
                    human rights claim;

                (ii)   all material factors at the  person's  disposal  have
                    been submitted, and a satisfactory explanation regarding
                    any lack of other relevant material has been given;

                (iii)  the person's statements are found to be coherent  and
                    plausible and do not run counter to  available  specific
                    and general information relevant to the person's case;

                (iv)   the person has made an  asylum  claim  or  sought  to
                    establish that he is a person eligible for  humanitarian
                    protection or made a human rights claim at the  earliest
                    possible time, unless the person  can  demonstrate  good
                    reason for not having done so; and

                (v)    the  general  credibility  of  the  person  has  been
                    established."

59. I find as a fact that the Appellant is a Zimbabwean citizen and an  MDC
    member.  This has been accepted by the Respondent.

60. I take into account that the Respondent in the refusal  letter  accepts
    that the Appellant satisfies paragraph 339L(i), (ii), and  (iii).   The
    Respondent attaches significant weight  to  the  Appellant's  delay  in
    claiming asylum,  and  because  of  this,  does  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's general credibility has been established.

61. I find as a fact that the Appellant arrived in  the  UK  on  22nd  July
    2014.  It is a fact that he underwent a  screening  interview  on  20th
    August 2014.  It is also accepted that he did not claim asylum  at  the
    airport.

62. It is not disputed by the Respondent that it is now common practice for
    an appointment to be given for  an  asylum  claim  to  be  made.   This
    supports the Appellant's contention that he made a  telephone  call  to
    the Home Office to claim asylum and was given an appointment.  I accept
    the Appellant's evidence that he initially called  the  day  after  his
    arrival but was unable  to  get  through.   I  accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he then spoke to a solicitor who gave him another  number
    to call, and having called this number,  the  Appellant  was  given  an
    appointment to claim asylum.  I therefore do take into account pursuant
    to section 8 of the 2004 Act, that the Appellant did not  claim  asylum
    at the airport.  I find however that he then attempted to  contact  the
    Home Office the following day.

63. I do not find that the short delay in claiming asylum  means  that  the
    Appellant's account must be dismissed as incredible.

64. I have also taken into account that the Appellant accepts that  he  was
    not truthful when he applied for as visit visa, as it was his intention
    to claim asylum when he arrived in the United  Kingdom.   I  take  this
    into account when assessing  credibility,  but  have  to  look  at  the
    evidence  in  the  round,  and  take  into  account   the   Appellant's
    explanation that he was not truthful when he applied for his visit visa
    because he feared for his life.

65. I accept that the Appellant was attacked by  ZANU-PF  members  when  in
    Zimbabwe.  I find that this was because of his MDC activities.  I  make
    this finding because the Appellant has given a  consistent  account  on
    this issue.  His oral evidence did not differ significantly  from  what
    he said in his screening and substantive  asylum  interviews.   I  also
    place weight upon  the  fact  that  the  Respondent  accepts  that  the
    Appellant's  account  accords  with  background  evidence,  which   was
    accepted in paragraph 18 of the refusal letter.

66. I also take into account that the Appellant was granted asylum in South
    Africa in February 2008.  I accept this to be the case, based upon  the
    Appellant's evidence which has been consistent on this point, and which
    is supported by documentary evidence contained within  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  It was not  disputed  at  the  hearing  before  me,  that  the
    Appellant had been granted asylum in South Africa.  I am satisfied that
    the  document  from  the  South  African  authorities  confirming   the
    Appellant's refugee status can be relied upon.

67. I accept as credible  the  Appellant's  account  that  he  returned  to
    Zimbabwe on 30th December 2012 in order to visit  his  father  who  was
    very seriously ill.  I place weight upon  the  fact  that  it  was  the
    Appellant who disclosed  this.   It  was  initially  disclosed  in  his
    screening interview (2.1).  I find that this enhances  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  He chose to disclose that he had gone back  to  Zimbabwe,
    and he did not exaggerate or embellish his  evidence.   It  would  have
    been open to him to say that he encountered difficulties from  ZANU-PF.
    He did not make such a claim, explaining that he had  travelled  across
    the border, and thereafter for a considerable distance  into  Zimbabwe,
    without encountering difficulty.  He did not encounter any difficulties
    in his home area although he did keep a low profile and  only  remained
    there relatively briefly.  I accept this account and find the Appellant
    credible on this issue.

68. I am satisfied that the Appellant did not travel to Zimbabwe to collect
    his passport in 2014.  I do not  find  that  he  has  a  reason  to  be
    untruthful about this.  The Appellant has already accepted that he  has
    travelled back to Zimbabwe after being granted asylum in  South  Africa
    and encountered no difficulty.  Taking into account the low standard of
    proof, I accept that the Appellant made an application for  a  passport
    while in South Africa, and that he authorised his sister to collect the
    passport and send it to him in South Africa.  There is  a  letter  from
    his sister confirming this and I find that this letter  can  be  relied
    upon.  The Appellant has not been able to explain exactly why  the  bus
    driver who transported his passport chose to have a stamp put in it and
    again, I find that he did not  seek  to  exaggerate  or  embellish  his
    evidence on that point.

69. There is an inconsistency in the Appellant's account as to  whether  or
    not he was the founder and chairperson of an MDC branch in  Cape  Town.
    In interview he specifically said that he held no position  within  the
    party.  In my view he was unable to give a satisfactory explanation  as
    to why he said that, if in fact he was the founder and chairperson.   I
    am satisfied that the Appellant did undertake MDC activities  in  South
    Africa but I am not satisfied, even to the  lower  standard  of  proof,
    that he was the chairman and founder of a branch of the MDC.   If  that
    was the case, I find that he  would  have  said  so  in  interview.   I
    therefore reject that aspect of his claim, although I  accept  what  he
    said in interview, that in  Cape  Town  he  strongly  supported  Morgan
    Tsvangirai, and that he did not have a position in  the  party  but  he
    actively mobilised people as he had done in Zimbabwe.

70. It was accepted at the hearing that background evidence indicated  that
    there had  been  violence  perpetrated  against  Zimbabweans  in  South
    Africa, by South African citizens.  There was  a  newspaper  report  at
    page 38 of the Appellant's bundle making reference to this.  I  do  not
    accept that the South African authorities were involved in ill-treating
    Zimbabweans.  The Respondent's reasons for rejecting this aspect of the
    Appellant's account, according to the refusal letter,  is  because  his
    credibility had been damaged due to his delay in  claiming  asylum.   I
    found the delay in claiming asylum to be very minor, and I accept  that
    the Appellant was threatened by individuals with a weapon, in May 2014.
     I accept the Appellant's account that  he  was  told  to  leave  South
    Africa.  I do not accept that the CIO from Zimbabwe  were  involved  in
    this.

71. Turning to the Appellant's activities in the UK, I accept that  he  has
    joined the MDC, and there is documentary evidence in the form of emails
    at pages 19 - 31 of the Appellant's bundle, indicating that he  is  the
    secretary of the South Yorkshire branch, and holds an official position
    as claimed in the northern district of  the  UK.   One  of  the  emails
    confirms that the Appellant  was  co-opted  to  the  position  of  vice
    organising secretary for the north district on 19th September 2015.   I
    accept that this evidence as to the Appellant's position within the MDC
    in the UK is in the public domain.

72. I therefore have to assess the risk on return, based upon the facts  as
    I have set out above.

73. A primary submission made on behalf of  the  Respondent  was  that  the
    Appellant could relocate to an area of Zimbabwe  other  than  his  home
    area of Chikomba, and in particular he could relocate to Bulawayo.  The
    Appellant does not  accept  this.   On  this  issue  I  find  that  the
    Appellant does in fact  have  a  reasonable  option  of  relocation  to
    Bulawayo, and this would not be  unduly  harsh.   Paragraph  6  of  the
    headnote to CM confirms that a returnee to Bulawayo will not in general
    suffer the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces,
    even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.   I  accept  that  the
    Appellant is Shona, but I do not accept that he would be unable to find
    employment  or  accommodation.   A  significant   proportion   of   the
    population in Bulawayo are Shona, and the  country  guidance  case  law
    indicates that this is approximately 20% of a population of 1  million.
    I do not find that the evidence indicates there would be discrimination
    against the Appellant which would amount to persecution, or which would
    breach Articles 2 or 3 of the 1950 Convention.  The Appellant is an MDC
    activist, and the background evidence indicates that  all  the  MPs  in
    Bulawayo are MDC MPs.  Bulawayo is not an area that supports ZANU-PF.

74. However I must firstly consider whether the Appellant would be at  risk
    at the airport if returned to Zimbabwe, and it  was  accepted  by  both
    representatives that the relevant country guidance case law in relation
    to risk at the airport is HS Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT  00094.   I  note
    that paragraph 205 of CM indicates that the Tribunal was satisfied that
    the fresh evidence considered, failed to disclose  any  change  in  the
    position as described in HS, and there was no  heightened  scrutiny  of
    returnees.  It was also noted in the same paragraph, that there  is  no
    evidence to show that the CIO are likely to detain at the  airport  and
    torture a person for attending an MDC branch meeting in the UK.

75. HS confirms that the process of screening returning passengers  at  the
    airport is an intelligence led process and paragraph 3 of the headnote,
    indicates  that  the  CIO  will  generally  have  identified  from  the
    passenger manifest in advance,  based  upon  such  intelligence,  those
    passengers in whom there is any possible interest.  HS refers  back  to
    the risk categories in SM and Others Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKAIT 00100  as
    adopted, affirmed and supplemented  in  AA  Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
    00061.

76. In SM the Tribunal found at paragraph 51a that there is a real risk  of
    persecution for individuals  perceived  to  be  politically  active  in
    opposition to the regime in Zimbabwe.  Some categories are more  likely
    to be at risk than others, such as MDC activists and campaigners rather
    than supporters.

77. In AA the Tribunal confirmed at paragraph 244 that  those  at  risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe continue to fall into the risk categories identified
    and set out in SM.  Paragraph 248 indicated that  persons  arriving  at
    the airport in Zimbabwe identified as deportees will  be  diverted  for
    questioning by CIO officers.

78. At paragraph 249 the Tribunal found that the  purpose  of  the  initial
    interview is to establish whether the deportee is of  any  interest  to
    the CIO or the Security Services and an individual will be of  interest
    if questioning reveals that  he  has  a  political  profile  considered
    adverse to the Zimbabwean regime.   If  such  a  political  profile  is
    suspected, the  individual  would  be  taken  away  for  interrogation.
    Paragraph 251 of AA is relevant and is set out below;

         "251.    This second stage interrogation carries  with  it  a  real
             risk of serious mistreatment sufficient to constitute a breach
             of Article 3.   If  the  reason  for  suspicion  is  that  the
             deportee has a political profile considered to be  adverse  to
             the Zimbabwean regime that is likely to be sufficient to  give
             rise to a real risk of persecutory ill-treatment for a  reason
             that is recognised by the Refugee Convention.  That  will  not
             necessarily be the case where the only matter of interest is a
             relevant military history or outstanding criminal issue.  Each
             case must be considered on its particular facts."

79. I find it reasonably likely, applying the above  principles,  that  the
    Appellant would be questioned upon his return to the airport.  The fact
    that he holds secretarial positions within the MDC in the UK is in  the
    public domain, and it is reasonably likely that the CIO would be  aware
    of this.  If questioned, the Appellant could not be  expected  to  lie,
    and I find following the initial interview,  it  is  reasonably  likely
    that the Appellant would be taken away for a second stage interrogation
    as it would be suspected that he does have a political profile  adverse
    to the Zimbabwean regime.  It is that second interrogation which  would
    give rise to  the persecutory ill-treatment.

80. For that reason, I find that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  at  the
    airport in Zimbabwe, because  of  his  political  opinion,  and  he  is
    therefore entitled to a grant of asylum.

81. I do not find the treatment that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    receiving would amount to a breach of Article 2, but there would  be  a
    real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the  1950  Convention.
    For those reasons the Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Article 3  of  the
1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal and I see no reason to  make  an
anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    26th November 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    26th November 2015

