
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA106842014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2016                           |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     rm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Palmer, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer in this decision to the appellant as the  respondent  and
    the respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
    the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant was born  in  1977  and  is  a
    female citizen of Sri Lanka.  By a decision of the respondent dated  20
    November 2014, she was refused asylum and  it  was  directed  that  she
    should be removed from the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Steer)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 18 December 2015, allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal do not dispute the findings of fact made  by  the
    judge.  The judge found that the appellant was a credible witness [51].
     The judge found that,

         "... For the above reasons I find that the appellant  was  arrested
         in 2002, that her cousin, S,  was  killed  in  2007  and  that  the
         appellant was arrested, on suspicion of assisting S,  in  2008  and
         that she was detained in both 2002 and 2008 that she  was  released
         unconditionally in 2002, but  was  released  subject  to  reporting
         conditions in 2008, that her cousin MG was arrested in  2014  while
         staying at the appellant's  family  home  and  that  the  appellant
         remains of interest to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  due  to  her
         previous arrests and her membership of the BTF [British Tamil Form]
         in the UK."

 3. The judge went on to find at [52] that,

         "The fact that the appellant's cousin was arrested  at  her  family
         home and remained in detention  as  at  March  2015  and  that  the
         appellant is a member of the BTF, I find that the  appellant  would
         be at risk of ill-treatment upon return to Sri Lanka now.   I  find
         that the appellant has established that she is a refugee."

 4. As I have said, those findings of facts are not disputed.  However, the
    Secretary of State challenges the judge's application of those facts to
    the country guidance of GJ and Others (Post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). The Secretary of State  submits  that
    the "facts that a person attends demonstrations and is a member of  the
    BTF is unlikely to attract persecution.  There was no evidence that the
    appellant had played a  "significant  role"  in  post-civil  war  anti-
    government activity in Sri Lanka or  abroad.   The  respondent  submits
    that it was also unclear why the judge found that the appellant  should
    appear on a "watch list" or, if she did appear  on  such  a  list,  why
    there would  be  the  likelihood  of  ill-treatment.   The  Sri  Lankan
    government is currently concerned with identifying those who might seek
    to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  internal  armed
    conflict (see GJ at 356).  The judge, however, found that the appellant
    would be at risk of ill-treatment because of her  cousin's  arrest  and
    detention in March 2015 and because of her own membership of  the  BTF.
    Those factors were insufficient to indicate that the appellant would be
    at risk.

 5. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I  have  reached  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    judge has misunderstood GJ as the grounds of appeal assert.  First, the
    judge makes a point at [51] of finding the appellant had been  released
    "subject to reporting conditions in  2008".   She  has  breached  those
    conditions, having fled to the United Kingdom.  Although not  expressly
    stated by the  judge,  it  clearly  follows  from  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has breached her reporting conditions that there may exist an
    arrest warrant or police record which could be acted  upon  should  she
    return to Sri Lanka. Alternatively,  her name may  appear  on  a  watch
    list.  It seems reasonably likely that an  individual  who  had  broken
    reporting conditions following a release  from  detention  and  who  is
    brought in for questioning because his or her name appears on  a  watch
    list, may have to explain why he or she has fled abroad.  In  addition,
    quite recently the appellant's cousin had been arrested at  the  family
    home and it is clear from [51] that it  was  the  combination  of  that
    recent arrest, the appellant's activities with  a  banned  organisation
    (the BTF) and her own breach of the reporting conditions  on  her  2008
    release from detention, which led the judge to conclude that she  would
    be at real risk on return to Sri Lanka.  That particular combination of
    circumstances may not be expressly set  out  in  the  account  of  risk
    categories given in  GJ  but  I  find  that  the  judge  was  entitled,
    following that country guidance and having  regard  to  the  background
    material, to conclude, on the facts as she found them in  this  appeal,
    that the appellant would be at risk.  I  accept  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities are particularly concerned  with  those  who  may  wish  to
    destabilise the Sri Lankan state or reignite internecine conflict but I
    do not read GJ as  indicating  that  the  authorities  are  exclusively
    interested in an individual's campaigning to reignite  the  civil  war.
    The Sri Lankan authorities would find in the appellant a person who has
    a personal history of activity in Tamil politics and who has a personal
    relationship with an individual whom they considered  it  necessary  to
    arrest as recently as March 2015.  In the circumstances,  I  find  that
    the judge was entitled to reach the conclusions which  she  did  as  to
    risk on return on the basis of the facts as  she  found  them  in  this
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 30 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
