
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP/DH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10439/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th July 2015                    |On 4th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     n t
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant has appealed against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Monaghan (the judge) promulgated on 12th Mach 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of  Albania  born  4th  June  1999  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 12th November 2013.  His
    asylum claim was refused on 13th November 2014.

 3. However because the Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  an
    unaccompanied  minor  for  whom  there  were  no   adequate   reception
    conditions in Albania, he was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    until 4th December 2016.  The Appellant appealed pursuant to section 83
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).
    His appeal was heard by the judge on 25th February 2015.

 4. The judge accepted the Appellant as a credible  witness,  and  accepted
    his claim that  there  was  in  existence  a  blood  feud  between  the
    Appellant's family and another  unknown  Albanian  family.   The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant had established that  there  was  a  threat
    against himself, and accepted that the Appellant  was  a  member  of  a
    particular social group with reference to the 1951 Geneva Convention.

 5. The judge however dismissed the appeal, finding that the Appellant  had
    the option of reasonable internal relocation within Albania,  and  that
    there existed in Albania a sufficiency of protection.

 6. The Appellant was subsequently granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 7. The appeal came before me on 29th May 2015.  It was contended that  the
    judge had erred in law in his consideration both of internal relocation
    and sufficiency of protection.

 8. The Respondent accepted that the judge had erred in law, noting that in
    considering internal relocation  the  judge  had  failed  to  make  any
    findings as to whether the Appellant was actually in contact  with  his
    family members in Albania.  The  Respondent's  view  was  that  if  the
    Appellant is in contact with his family, the  Tribunal  could  consider
    whether it would be viable for  the  Appellant  to  relocate  with  the
    support of family members.  The Respondent did not  challenge  findings
    of fact made by the judge to the effect that there was in  existence  a
    blood feud, and that the Appellant had established  that  there  was  a
    threat against himself.

 9. I found that the judge had erred in law in not taking into account that
    the Appellant was from Shkoder in the north of Albania where Kanun  law
    predominates, and that EH (blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348
    (IAC) indicated that there was no sufficiency of  protection  in  those
    areas where Kanun law predominates.

10. I found that the judge had erred in considering internal relocation, by
    not making findings as to whether the Appellant  was  in  contact  with
    family members.

11. With the agreement  of  both  representatives,  I  indicated  that  the
    findings of fact made in relation to the blood feud were preserved, and
    these findings of fact were set out in paragraph 5 of  the  Appellant's
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal.  The
    hearing was adjourned for a continuation hearing to take place so  that
    an interpreter could be provided and  evidence  given  in  relation  to
    internal relocation and sufficiency of protection.

12. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, and my reasons for finding an error of law are contained in
    my decision dated 1st June 2015.

Re-Making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

13. The Appellant attended the hearing together with an appropriate  adult.
    I explained the procedure that would be adopted to the  Appellant,  and
    the roles of those within the hearing room.  There was no difficulty in
    communication between the Appellant and interpreter  and  the  language
    used was Albanian.

14. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  I had on  file
    the  documents  submitted  before   the   First-tier   Tribunal.    The
    Appellant's solicitors had submitted a further bundle, comprising three
    sections, which included both the Appellant's bundle  and  Respondent's
    bundle that had been before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. I received from Mr Collins case law, MF (Albania) [2014] EWCA Civ  902,
    and TN and MA (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40.

Oral Evidence

16. The Appellant adopted as his evidence his witness statements dated 30th
    January 2014 and 17th February 2015, and the contents of his  interview
    record dated 2nd April 2014 as his evidence.  His evidence as contained
    in those documents may be briefly summarised as follows.

17. The Appellant is from a village in the  Shkoder  district  in  northern
    Albania.  He lived with his parents, and had  two  brothers  and  three
    sisters.

18. The whereabouts of his brothers are unknown, although he believes  they
    may be in Greece.  They left Albania for  economic  reasons  about  two
    years before the Appellant left Albania.

19. The Appellant has three sisters who are all married and living  in  the
    Shkoder area.

20. One of the Appellant's cousins  was  arrested  in  Italy,  following  a
    shooting, in which it was alleged that the Appellant's cousin had  shot
    another Albanian.  Arrests were made by  the  Italian  police  and  the
    Appellant's cousin and others were arrested and were discovered  to  be
    armed, and in possession of a large quantity of stolen goods.

21. The family of the  Albanian  man  who  had  been  shot  threatened  the
    Appellant's family with a  blood  feud.   Due  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's cousin's father was deceased, the threats were passed on to
    the Appellant's father.

22. The Appellant's father left Albania due to the threats.  The  Appellant
    was told to stay indoors.  His  mother  and  her  cousin  had  made  an
    attempt to try and have him excluded from the blood feud but the  other
    family refused.

23. In the middle of August 2013 shots  were  fired  into  the  Appellant's
    house.

24. Arrangements were made for the Appellant  to  leave  the  country.   He
    travelled by air to Italy on 30th August 2013 remaining  in  Italy  for
    two weeks before travelling  to  Belgium  and  staying  there  for  two
    months.  On 12th November 2013 he entered the United Kingdom hidden  in
    the back of a lorry.

25. The Appellant has four paternal uncles in Albania, but  all  have  gone
    into hiding.  Before he left Albania the Appellant's  family  contacted
    the police but they could not offer protection.  The Appellant  was  in
    telephone contact with his mother when he left  Albania,  but  he  lost
    contact with her when he was in Italy.  He has tried to  telephone  her
    but there has been no response to his calls.

26. The  Appellant  was  questioned  by  both  representatives.   His  oral
    evidence may be briefly summarised as follows.

27. The Appellant described the name of the town where  his  family  lived,
    stating that 500 or 600 households comprised the town.   His  home  did
    not have a postal address.  He had never visited Tirana in Albania.

28. The Appellant explained that when he  telephoned  his  mother's  number
    there was no ring tone.  Social services had not advised him to contact
    the Red Cross.

29. When cross-examined the Appellant confirmed that he had  three  married
    sisters in Albania, four paternal uncles, three paternal  aunts,  three
    maternal uncles and two maternal aunts.  He  had  previously  disclosed
    this in interview.  He did not have the contact details of these family
    members.  He said that they all used to live in villages  near  to  his
    family home.  They had telephones.

30. The Appellant confirmed that female family members were not targeted in
    a blood feud.  He agreed that there  would  be  no  reason  for  female
    family members to leave their homes because they were not targeted.  It
    was put to the Appellant that if he returned to  Albania  he  might  be
    able to contact his mother and sisters, and his response  was  that  he
    would be killed if he went back.  The  Appellant  denied  that  he  was
    being untruthful when stating that he  could  not  contact  his  family
    members.

31. The Appellant was asked whether, if he could contact  his  mother,  she
    would move with him to Tirana.  His  response  was  that  he  would  be
    killed, and he did not think his mother would move to Tirana,  and  she
    would be unable to protect him even if she went to Tirana with him.

32. The Appellant confirmed that he had never met the other family involved
    in the blood feud, and he did not know if they had any  influence  with
    the police in Albania.

33. The Appellant was asked about the Italian newspaper  article  that  had
    been produced to show that the Appellant's cousin had been involved  in
    a shooting incident in Italy and had been arrested, and he stated  that
    this was obtained via the internet.

34. When re-examined the Appellant  was  how  many  of  his  members  lived
    outside the Shkoder area, and he confirmed that none did.

The Respondent's Submissions

35. I was asked to make a finding that the  Appellant  has  family  members
    living in Albania.  Mr Clark submitted that the Appellant had not given
    evidence about the reach, influence and commitment of the other  family
    in the light of the feud, to prosecute that feud.

36. Mr Clark submitted that the Appellant's family members could assist him
    if he went back to Albania, and pointed out that they had helped him to
    leave the country.  I was asked  to  find  that  it  would  it  not  be
    credible that the Appellant could not contact his family.

37. Mr Clark also submitted that it would be reasonable for the Appellant's
    mother to travel to Tirana with him to relocate there.

38. Mr Clark also submitted that  the  Appellant  was  16,  and  background
    information on Albania indicated that many children left school earlier
    than that, and it would not be unduly  harsh  for  a  16  year  old  to
    relocate to Tirana, even without an adult.

39. Mr Clark submitted that the Appellant had not given any evidence as  to
    the commitment of the aggressor family to prosecute the blood feud, and
    on that basis the appeal should fail.

40. The Supreme Court decision TN and MA related to tracing, and  Mr  Clark
    submitted that it was difficult to  see  how  the  Appellant  had  been
    prejudiced because his family  had  not  been  traced.   There  was  an
    indication in the Home Office minute contained within the  Respondent's
    bundle, which sets out the reasons for granting discretionary leave  to
    remain, that some steps had been taken by the British Embassy in Tirana
    to carry out verification checks on the  Appellant  and  to  trace  his
    family.  That minute showed that the family certificate for the family,
    confirmed that they were living at an unspecified address  in  Shkoder,
    Albania, and that the Appellant left Albania for Italy by air  on  30th
    August 2013, which was consistent with his account.

41. I was asked to dismiss the appeal on the basis that the Appellant had a
    reasonable  option  of  internal  relocation,  and  a  sufficiency   of
    protection existed in Albania.





The Appellant's Submissions

42. Mr Collins referred to the third paragraph of  the  head  note  to  EH,
    submitting that this confirmed that on the facts as found in this case,
    there was no sufficiency of protection in the Appellant's home area.

43. I was reminded that the Appellant's account had been accepted as to the
    existence of a blood feud, and that he was at risk because of that.

44. I was asked to note that the Appellant had provided to  the  Respondent
    details of the village where he lived and had given as full an  address
    as existed.  It was not clear from the Home Office  minute  what  steps
    had been taken to trace the Appellant's family.

45. Mr Collins submitted that as the Appellant's evidence was that  he  was
    unable to contact his mother, it  was  difficult  to  draw  a  rational
    conclusion that his mother could accompany him to Tirana.  I was  asked
    to conclude that it was unreasonable for a 16  year  old  boy  to  live
    alone in a city that he had never previously visited.

46. Mr Collins pointed to the Appellant's Statement of Evidence Form and in
    Part A, he had given his address in Albania, and had named  the  school
    that he had attended.  In Part B he had given the names of  his  family
    members, and the addresses of his mother and sisters.  The  comment  in
    the  Home  Office  minute  that  the  Appellant  had  provided  limited
    information about his family members, and  failed  to  provide  contact
    details and an address, was not accepted.

47. I was asked to accept the Appellant's evidence that he had lost contact
    with his family and had not been able to contact them since he  reached
    the United Kingdom.

48. I was asked to find that this appeal  could  be  distinguished  on  the
    facts, from the appeal considered in MF (Albania).  In that case it had
    been found that the Appellant's mother could if necessary live with him
    in Tirana and provide support.  That finding was made on the basis that
    the Appellant's mother could be  contacted.   Mr  Collins  referred  to
    paragraph 20 of MF (Albania) in which it was accepted that if  a  minor
    Appellant's mother was not prepared to move  with  him  to  Tirana,  it
    could properly be argued that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  a  minor
    Appellant to live in Tirana on his  own.   Mr  Collins  summarised  the
    Appellant's case as being that if he returns to Albania, there  was  no
    sufficiency of protection in his home area,  and  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for him, as a child, to live in Tirana with no family support.

49. In relation to tracing family members, I  was  asked  to  consider  the
    evidence in the round and to  bear  in  mind  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided the Respondent with all the information that he could, and  it
    was not clear what attempts had been made by the  Respondent  to  trace
    the Appellant's family members.  I was asked to find as  a  fact,  that
    the Appellant had been unable to contact his family.

50. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

Preserved Findings

51. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal that are preserved are set  out
    below;

         "32. The Appellant's credibility is not damaged by his  failure  to
             claim asylum in various safe  countries  en  route.   This  is
             because he has provided a reasonable and credible  explanation
             for that failure; namely that he  was  under  the  control  of
             those agents to whom his family had paid money  to  facilitate
             his journey to the United Kingdom.  A particular striking part
             of his oral evidence was the fact that he hold me that  whilst
             in Belgium he stayed with the people he was with and was  kept
             for a two month period in a room in an old house.

         33.  I do  not share the Respondent's concern  as  to  the  alleged
             discrepancies in the account given of  the  shooting  incident
             which predicated the alleged blood feud.  I  accept  that  the
             differing answers given by the Appellant were not inconsistent
             or contradictory.  He first said  that  they  had  heard  that
             there had been a shooting outside a club.  He later said  that
             he knew that  there  was  an  argument,  and  that  they  were
             together having coffee in a coffee shop and then  an  argument
             started and then fighting took place,  the  shooting  happened
             that sort of thing.  The Appellant  explains  that  these  are
             different parts of one and the same story - it did start in  a
             coffee shop and then carried on to the nightclub.   Further  I
             take into account that the Appellant was only 14 years of  age
             when these events occurred and that he has  consistently  said
             throughout that his family  did  not  tell  him  many  of  the
             details of the incident because he was so young.  That too  in
             my view is an entirely credible explanation on his part.    He
             cannot be expected to know all  the  precise  details  of  the
             event in those circumstances, just the substance of  it.   For
             similar reasons he is unlikely to know whether the  victim  of
             the shooting was wounded or killed.  Similarly he is  unlikely
             to know the name of the family of the victim.

         34.  The Respondent's further concerns that there was no  objective
             evidence to support the claim that the incident  was  reported
             in the media have now  been  resolved  by  the  production  in
             evidence of an online report from a known  Italian  newspaper,
             the translation of which appears at  P18  of  the  Appellant's
             bundle.  This records that on 03/02/13 there was  a  fight  in
             front of a pub involving four Albanians and  that  shots  were
             fired.  Subsequently  two  men  ZP  and  NT  (the  Appellant's
             cousin) were arrested a couple of days  later  after  a  raid.
             The two young men were said to be armed and were in possession
             of stolen goods with a value of more  than  EUR50,000  at  the
             time of their arrest.  The gun which fired the shots could not
             be found.  The report was  dated  19/10/13.   The  report  had
             appeared because the two men had appeared the  day  before  in
             court for a  preliminary  hearing  and  were  sentenced.   The
             Appellant says this was the  report  his  family  saw  but  of
             course it cannot be given that it was dated a month  after  he
             left Albania.  I accept however that given the seriousness  of
             the incident, the fact that guns were  fired  and  that  there
             followed a police  raid  involving  dozens  of  police  and  a
             significant amount of valuable stolen items were found that it
             is highly likely it was reported in the Italian media  at  the
             time of the incident itself or shortly thereafter when the men
             were arrested.  The fact that this is an online  report  means
             that I attach no less weight to it than the paper version.

         35.  Given the report  and  given  that  I  find  the  Appellant  a
             credible  witness  who  did  not  attempt  to  exaggerate   to
             embellish his story and has been consistent about what  little
             he knew I accept and find there is in existence a  blood  feud
             between his family and another unknown Albanian family.

         36.  In making this finding I have also had regard to the  case  of
             EH.  I have  considered  the  history  of  the  feud  and  the
             notoriety of the incident which led to it which  is  shown  by
             the newspaper report.  I cannot be certain whether the  victim
             was killed or seriously wounded.  The Appellant  himself  does
             not know.  However it was clearly a most violent  incident  as
             confirmed by the report which states that iron bars were  used
             first of all and that three shots were  heard  and  that  7.65
             calibre shell casings from the gun were found  on  the  floor.
             It was also noted that  upon  the  police  raid  a  pistol,  a
             replica of a Smith and Wesson (which had been  fired),  dozens
             of other bullets and a long rifle were recovered.

         37.  EH also reminds me  that  the  Appellant  must  establish  his
             profile as a potential target and whether he or  other  family
             members  are  or  have  been  in  self-confinement.   As   the
             Appellant is the youngest male  cousin  and  given  that  NT's
             father is deceased the threat has been passed on  to  his  own
             father,  brothers  and  himself.   His  profile  is  therefore
             established in this regard.  As I find him a credible  witness
             I accept his account that he was  himself  in  confinement  in
             Albania before he fled after shots were fired into  his  house
             whilst  he  was  at  home.   Therefore   the   Appellant   has
             established that there is a threat against himself.

         38.  I accept it is reasonably likely therefore that the  Appellant
             is the subject of a blood feud in Albania and therefore he  is
             a member of  a  particular  social  group  which  engages  the
             Convention."

My Conclusions and Reasons

52. I have taken into account all the evidence both  oral  and  documentary
    placed  before  me,  together  with  the  submissions  made   by   both
    representatives.  I have considered the evidence in the round and taken
    into account the circumstances at the date of hearing.

53. The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the standard of  proof  can
    be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood.  I am  conscious  of
    the  need  to  take  great  care  before  making  adverse  findings  of
    credibility in asylum cases.

54. The issues before me relate to a sufficiency of protection and internal
    relocation.  I will deal firstly with sufficiency of protection in  the
    Appellant's home area.  I set out below paragraph 3 of the head note to
    EH;

         3.    The  Albanian  state  has  taken  steps  to   improve   state
             protection,  but  in  areas  where  Kanun   law   predominates
             (particularly in northern Albania)  those  steps  do  not  yet
             provide sufficiency of protection  from  Kanun-related  blood-
             taking if an active feud exists  and  affects  the  individual
             claimant.  Internal relocation to  an  area  of  Albania  less
             dependent on  the  Kanun  may  provide  sufficient  protection
             depending  on  the  reach,  influence,   and   commitment   to
             prosecution of the feud by the aggressor clan.

55. The First-tier Tribunal found that an active blood exists, and affected
    the Appellant.  The Appellant lived  in  Shkoder  in  northern  Albania
    where Kanun law predominates.  Applying the principles in  EH,  to  the
    facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal, I  find  that  there  is  no
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant in his home area.

56. Therefore I have to consider whether there is a  reasonable  option  of
    internal relocation, to another area where there would be a sufficiency
    of protection.  I have carefully considered the evidence given  by  the
    Appellant, which is contained  within  his  interview  record,  witness
    statements, and oral evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal.  I accept that he has proved to the lower  standard  of
    proof that he is not in contact with any family members in Albania, and
    has not been in contact with them since  he  travelled  from  Italy  to
    Belgium, en route to the United Kingdom.

57. I find that the Appellant's evidence on this point has been consistent.
     I accept that consistency does not automatically mean that an  account
    is true, but taking into account that the Appellant has not  only  been
    interviewed on this point, but has been cross-examined on two  separate
    occasions,  I  find  it  is  appropriate  to  place  weight  upon   the
    consistency of his evidence.

58. It is not the Appellant's case that he has no relatives in Albania.  He
    has explained that his two brothers left for economic reasons prior  to
    the existence of the blood feud, and that his father  left  because  of
    the blood feud.  The Appellant confirmed, and I  accept  his  evidence,
    that his mother and his three married sisters remain in  Albania.   The
    Appellant disclosed in his  Statement  of  Evidence  Form,  answers  in
    interview, and witness statements, the addresses that he  had  for  his
    mother and  sisters.   The  Appellant  explained,  and  I  accept  this
    evidence, that their houses do not have an exact postal  address.   The
    Appellant also disclosed to the Respondent in his Statement of Evidence
    Form, the name of the school that he attended.

59. The Appellant provided in interview, the names of his  paternal  uncles
    and explained that they had also gone into hiding because of the  blood
    feud.

60. In my view the  Appellant  has  provided  to  the  Respondent  as  much
    information as possible in relation to the whereabouts  of  his  mother
    and sisters.  It is clear that some steps were  taken  to  verify  this
    evidence, as the Respondent refers in the Home Office  minute  granting
    leave, to the family certificate of the Appellant's family, in the area
    where he explained they lived,  and  also  finding  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had left Albania by air on the  date  that  he  claimed,  and
    travelled to Italy which supports his account in that respect.

61. I am satisfied that as at the date of the hearing before me,  that  the
    Appellant was not in contact with his family, and had  been  unable  to
    make contact with them since travelling from Italy to  Belgium  on  his
    way to the United Kingdom.  I accept the Appellant's  account  that  he
    did have a telephone contact number for his mother but that  when  that
    number is called there is no ring tone.

62. Internal relocation was considered in  EH  and  in  paragraph  69,  the
    Respondent's current guidance on internal relocation  contained  within
    the May 2012 Operational Guidance Note is set out.  The Upper  Tribunal
    recorded the following at paragraph 70 of EH;

         "Internal relocation will be effective to protect an Appellant only
         where the risk does not extend beyond the  Appellant's  local  area
         and he is unlikely to be traced in  the  rest  of  Albania  by  the
         aggressor clan.  A crucial factor in establishing whether  internal
         relocation is a real possibility is the geographical and  political
         reach of  the  aggressor  clan:  where  that  clan  has  government
         connections, locally or more widely, the  requirement  to  transfer
         civil registration to a new area, as set out at 2.4.4  above  would
         appear to obviate the possibility of 'disappearing' in another part
         of the country, and would be likely to drive the male members of  a
         victim clan to self-confinement in the home area as an alternative.
          Whether internal relocation is reasonable in any particular appeal
         will always be a question of fact for the fact-finding Tribunal."

63. The Appellant has been unable to give any comprehensive  details  about
    the aggressor clan.  He has not for example claimed  that  they  are  a
    powerful clan with influence  either  in  government  or  police.   His
    response when asked about the other family involved in the blood  feud,
    is that he does not know any details.  The First-tier Tribunal found it
    credible that his family  would  not  have  informed  him  of  all  the
    details, because of his young age.

64. The fact that the Appellant is not  able  to  give  evidence  that  the
    aggressor clan is a powerful clan with  influence  throughout  Albania,
    does not assist his case, but in my view is not fatal to it.

65. What is clear from the facts found by the First-tier Tribunal, is  that
    the incident that led to the  blood  feud  occurred  in  Italy  not  in
    Albania.  The aggressor clan were able to locate the Appellant's family
    in their home area, and shots were fired  into  the  Appellant's  home.
    These findings made by the First-tier Tribunal were not challenged  and
    are preserved.  The issue is whether the Appellant  could  relocate  to
    another area without that relocation being unjustly harsh, and  whether
    he would receive sufficiency of protection in  the  area  to  which  he
    relocated.

66. Internal relocation must be considered in the  light  of  the  findings
    that I have made that the Appellant is not in contact with  his  family
    and is 16 years of age.

67. The Court of Appeal in MF (Albania) agreed with  the  Tribunal  finding
    that it would not be unduly harsh to expect a minor Appellant's  mother
    to relocate to Tirana to provide him with support.  In this case it  is
    suggested that the Appellant could reasonably relocate to Tirana.

68. I set out below in part paragraph 20 of MF (Albania);

         "20. In my view there is force in Ms Laughton's point, so far as it
             goes.  If there were evidence that the Appellant's mother  was
             not prepared to move to Tirana, even though it  would  not  be
             unreasonable for her to do so, the  Appellant  could  properly
             argue that conditions for him as a minor living alone in a big
             city would be unduly harsh."

69. In this case, there is no evidence as to whether the Appellant's mother
    would agree to relocate to Tirana.  The Appellant has  been  unable  to
    contact his  mother.   Therefore  on  those  facts,  if  the  Appellant
    relocated he would do  so  alone.   He  has  never  previously  visited
    Tirana.  He would not have family support.  As he is a minor, I find on
    those facts, that it would be unduly  harsh  for  him  to  relocate  to
    Tirana.

70. I therefore conclude that there is no sufficiency of protection for the
    Appellant, and in the absence  of  contact  with  his  family  and  the
    absence of family support, means that he does  not  have  a  reasonable
    internal relocation option open to him.  He is therefore entitled to  a
    grant of asylum.

71. As this is an appeal pursuant to section 83  of  the  2002  Act,  human
    rights are not in issue.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction.   This  is  continued
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  a  contempt
of court.  This order is made because the Appellant is a minor.


Signed   Date 25th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 25th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
