
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10039/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2016                             |On 27 April 2016              |



                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    D A J
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, Counsel, instructed by Nandy and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pooler (the judge), promulgated on 22 January  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  That  appeal
    was against the Respondent's decision of 15 October 2014 to remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom by way of directions under section 10
    of the immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica. He arrived in  this  country  in
    2000. He married his British wife, Ms [J]  in  2011.  The  Respondent's
    decision arose from an asylum claim made by the  Appellant  on  14  May
    2014. On appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant  initially
    relied on protection grounds as well as Article 8.

The judge's decision

 3. It is noted at paragraph 7  of  the  decision  that  Mr  Gaisford  (who
    appeared below as well) formally  withdrew  the  protection  claim,  on
    instructions from the Appellant. Therefore, only the  Article  8  claim
    was pursued.

 4. The judge accepted that the Appellant's relationship with his wife  was
    genuine and subsisting (paragraph 11). He goes on to  consider  whether
    EX.1 was satisfied. In respect to the Appellant's daughter  (with  whom
    he did not have contact at the time), the judge concluded that  EX.1(a)
    was not met (paragraphs 13 and 14). In terms of EX.1(b), the judge went
    through various matters in paragraphs 15 to 22. Then, in  paragraph  23
    the judge concludes that the difficulties facing Ms [J]  in  moving  to
    Jamaica were not such that they could not be overcome. He also observes
    that it appeared as though the Appellant could meet the requirements of
    the Rules in respect of  obtaining  entry  clearance  into  the  United
    Kingdom. Ultimately, he concludes that the Rules were not met  in  this
    appeal (paragraph 24).

 5. Looking at the Article 8 claim outside of the Rules,  the  judge  finds
    that the best interests of any relevant  children  were  not  adversely
    affected by removal (paragraph 25). Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  is
    cited in paragraph 26. Finally, in paragraph  27  the  judge  considers
    that the Appellant could and should be expected to return to Jamaica in
    order to seek  entry  clearance  to  re-join  his  wife  here  (on  the
    alternative basis that she did not go with him): Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL
    40 is cited. The appeal is dismissed on this ground as well.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. I will deal with the seven  grounds  of  appeal  when  setting  out  my
    decision on error of law, below.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on  28
    May 2015.

The hearing before me

 8. The Appellant and his  wife  attended  the  hearing.  I  heard  helpful
    submissions  from  both  representatives,  a  full  note  of  which  is
    contained in the Record of Proceedings.

Decision on error of law

 9. I emphasise here that in  deciding  whether  the  judge  made  material
    errors of law I am not applying a test of whether I would have come  to
    the same conclusions as he did. It  may  well  be  that  I  would  have
    reached a different decision at first instance.

10. Having considered the arguments put forward, oral  and  in  writing,  I
    conclude that there are no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision. I will take each of the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  in
    turn.

Ground 1

11. It is right that in paragraph 27 the judge appears to have thought that
    the Appellant's leave  to  remain  expired  in  April  2001  (see  also
    paragraph 2). Having heard Mr Gaisford's uncontested submission on this
    point, I accept that the leave in fact expired on 2  August  2003.  The
    judge therefore erred. However, taking the decision as a  whole,  I  do
    not see that this made a material difference  to  the  judge's  overall
    conclusion on the Chikwamba issue or any other matter.  The  leave  may
    have continued for a touch over two years after the  judge  apprehended
    it did, but it remained the case that he had had no leave for something
    approaching twelve years up to the date of the hearing.  On  any  view,
    the judge would have been fully entitled  to  conclude  that  this  was
    "significant".

Ground 2

12. This is linked to the first ground in some respects. It  is  said  that
    the judge failed to take account of the Appellant's attempts  to  chase
    the Respondent after he had submitted further representations. In turn,
    it is suggested that the Appellant's immigration  history  was  not  as
    poor as the judge thought.

13. I reject this point. At paragraph 4 of his decision (cited  and  relied
    on in the  grounds)  the  judge  expressly  recognises  the  volume  of
    correspondence   in   the   Appellant's   bundle   relating   to    the
    representations. He records that the Respondent believed there had been
    no response to requests for further information. In my view, the  judge
    did not overlook any relevant materials. Given the express reference to
    the Appellant's bundle in paragraph 4 it  is  highly  likely  that  the
    judge had this information in mind when considering the Article 8 claim
    outside the Rules. Even if he had left it out of account in error, I do
    not see that it could have  made  a  material  difference,  whether  in
    isolation or combination with  the  point  discussed  under  ground  1,
    above. The fact was that the Appellant had had no leave since 2003.

Ground 3

14. This is the Chikwamba point. The Appellant's challenge faces an initial
    and insuperable obstacle: the judge's conclusion in paragraph  23  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to Ms [J] moving to Jamaica with
    the Appellant. This conclusion has not been expressly challenged in the
    grounds. Therefore, any error in approach on  the  Chikwamba  issue  is
    immaterial.

15. Even if that primary conclusion had not been made or was  wrong,  there
    is no material error here. The judge did have in mind the fact (or  the
    assumed fact) that the Appellant could meet the requirements  of  entry
    under Appendix FM (paragraph  23).  He  had  in  mind  the  short  visa
    processing times in Jamaica. He correctly directed himself to the  case
    of Jeunesse [2014] ECHR 1036. As has been discussed previously, he  was
    entitled to take account of the Appellant's  immigration  history.  The
    focus in the grounds is somewhat limited and does not reflect the  fact
    that Chikwamba does not lay down a rule of law precluding return to the
    country of origin as being a relevant consideration in Article 8 cases.
    In addition, given the judge's other findings in  this  appeal,  it  is
    clear enough that the judge had concluded  (at  least  by  implication)
    that a temporary separation would not  be  disproportionate.  In  other
    words, the Appellant had not proved this element of his claim (see, for
    example, paragraph 39 of R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department) (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
    separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)).

Ground 4

16. This ground was not specifically referred to in oral  argument.  It  is
    said that the judge should have factored into account the nature of  Ms
    [J]'s excellent work for the NHS.

17. There is no specific reference to this fact in  the  judge's  decision.
    However, in respect of the question of whether Ms  [J]  could  move  to
    Jamaica, it would not in my view have had a  material  bearing  on  the
    outcome. In addition, when considering the Chikwamba  point  the  judge
    was not expecting her to leave this country in any event.

18. I would just add that there is no doubt that Ms [J]'s  work  is  in  my
    opinion an extremely valuable contribution to society.

Ground 5

19. Although the Appellant had withdrawn his protection  claim,  the  judge
    accepted that he retained a subjective fear of going to Jamaica because
    of the murder of his brother in 2005. The  judge  placed  "very  little
    weight" on the subjective fear (paragraph 16). Weight is essentially  a
    matter for the judge. In this case, whilst another  tribunal  may  have
    attributed more weight to the subjective fear, it was open to the judge
    to conclude as he did. The Appellant could have pursued his  protection
    claim on the basis of a subjective fear (after all, each case is  fact-
    sensitive).

Ground 6

20. In paragraph 19 the judge found  that  there  was  no  family  life  as
    between the Appellant and his wife and other relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The grounds assert that this conclusion was irrational. It  is
    debatable whether the elevated threshold created  by  an  irrationality
    challenge is met here. This is in reality by-the-by because  the  judge
    correctly directed himself that the relationships  in  question  formed
    "important aspects" of private live in any event. Thus,  the  substance
    of the relationships were taken into account.

21. Paragraph 27.3 of the grounds is a simple disagreement with the judge's
    conclusion at paragraph 20.

Ground 7

22. This ground relates to children. There is no error in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's own daughter.  This  issue  is  adequately  dealt  with  in
    paragraphs 14 and 25. The judge was entitled to  take  account  of  the
    absence of contact and any family proceedings.

23. In respect of Ms [J]'s grandchildren, having looked at the evidence  in
    the bundle before the  judge,  I  note  that  it  was  rather  thin  in
    substance and could not properly be said to show (on any rational view)
    that the Appellant's temporary departure from the United Kingdom  would
    have a significant impact on them. The same would apply to the issue of
    Ms [J] herself moving to Jamaica. I can  see  no  evidence  of  matters
    which would have the effect of permitting the judge to  find  that  her
    departure would have had such an impact  on  the  grandchildren  as  to
    create an insurmountable obstacle for her under EX.1(b) and EX.2.

Other matters

24. For the sake of completeness, I would add that there are no  errors  in
    terms of  the  judge's  consideration  of  Ms  [J]'s  health  situation
    (paragraph 18) and the care of her parents (paragraph 20). Whilst these
    were clearly difficult issues, the judge was entitled  to  find  as  he
    did.

Summary

25. I appreciate that my decision will come as a big disappointment to  the
    Appellant and his wife. I have sympathy for their  situation.  However,
    as I have stated previously, my role has been to decide whether or  not
    the conclusions reached by the judge were  open  to  him,  and  to  not
    whether I would have made the same decision on the case.

Anonymity

26. Given the withdrawal of the protection claim there is  no  need  for  a
    direction, and I do not make one.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date: 25 April 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  25 April 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
