

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/10863/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields          |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                |Promulgated                          |
|On 28 January 2016              |                On 4 February 2016   |
|Prepared on 28 January 2016     |                                     |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between


                                    S. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Counsel instructed by Brar & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq. He was refused asylum and  a
           decision was made to remove him from the UK on 24 November 2014.


        2. The Appellant duly appealed against those immigration  decisions
           and his appeal was heard by  Judge  Manchester  and  allowed  on
           Article 8 grounds in a decision promulgated on 9 June 2015.
        3. The Respondent's application to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was granted by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Shimmin on 25 June 2015.
        4. The Appellant filed no  Rule  24  response,  and  neither  party
           applied to introduce further evidence.  Thus  the  matter  comes
           before me.

      The grounds of appeal


        5. The Appellant has lodged no cross appeal.
        6. The Respondent's grounds, as drafted asserted that the Judge had
           erred in allowing the appeal in the light of the best  interests
           of the Appellant's two children, because he had failed  to  give
           sufficient weight to the public interest as set out  in  s117A-5
           of the 2002 Act.  It  was  asserted  in  amplification  of  this
           argument  that  the  Appellant  had  made  what  amounted  to  a
           fraudulent     claim to asylum, did not speak English,  was  not
           self sufficient, and that his family had been and would continue
           to be, a  burden  upon  the  public  purse.  Since  the  medical
           conditions of the two  children  did  not  meet  the  Article  3
           threshold, it was asserted the Judge must have  converted  their
           best interests from a primary consideration,  into  the  primary
           consideration.
        7. Before me Mr  Diwnycz  accepted  that  it  was  plain  when  the
           decision was read as a whole that the Judge had  considered  the
           provisions of s117A-B, and that the Judge had  not  fallen  into
           the trap of converting a primary  consideration  into  the  sole
           consideration. He accepted that it was not open to him to  argue
           that the Judge had failed to consider the  provisions  of  s117B
           because he had made express reference to them. He accepted  that
           the conclusion reached upon the balance between the interests of
           the individuals and the public interest, was one that  was  open
           to the Judge upon the evidence before him, and that  the  weight
           to be given to individual features of the appeal  was  a  matter
           for the Judge. Thus he accepted that the grounds were exposed as
           no more than a disagreement with the Judge's decision, and  that
           they identified no arguable error of law.
        8. It follows that,  despite  the  terms  in  which  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal was framed, this is a challenge  that  must
           be dismissed. I reject the Respondent's argument that the  Judge
           made any material error of law that requires his decision to  be
           set aside and remade.


   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      9 June 2015 did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to allow the appeal that requires that  decision  to  be  set
      aside and remade. The decision to  allow  the  appeal  is  accordingly
      confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  him.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 28 January 2016
