
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
| on 20th October 2016              |On 29th November 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR. AJW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Middleton, Kirklees Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The claim

    1. The appellant claimed protection in March 2015. He claimed he was
       Somali and had lived all his life on the Bajuni islands of Chula and
       Mdova. He said he was a member of the Bajuni, a minority clan.

    2. Although married he began a relationship with a woman on the island.
       On 25 December 2014 he returned after fishing and was told Al Shabaab
       were on the island looking for him. He had not realised the woman was
       also married but Al Shabaab came to know of this. Consequently they
       stoned her to death and were seeking to punish the appellant. He left
       the island and travelled to Yemen where he remained for several
       months. He then travelled to the United Kingdom by air via another
       country and made his claim the day after he arrived.

The refusal

    3. The respondent refused his claim in July 2015. The respondent had the
       benefit of report from Sprakab which concluded he was Tanzanian. The
       respondent did not accept he was Somali or from a minority clan. It
       was acknowledged that if he were a minority clan islander then his
       claim would succeed.

The First tier Tribunal

    4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon who dismissed
       the appeal. The judge placed reliance upon the Sprakab report,
       describing it as compelling. The judge indicated this was not the
       sole basis for the decision which resulted from a consideration of
       all of the evidence in the round. The judge made various negative
       credibility findings. The judge concluded that the appellant was more
       than likely Tanzanian as the respondent believed. The appellant's
       representatives had engaged an expert; Prof Nurse, who commented that
       the appellant had displayed considerable and accurate local knowledge
       and that he spoke Swahili with a Bajuni accent.Prof Nurse challenged
       the conclusions of the Sprakab report.

Permission to appeal

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon did not give adequate reasons for
       rejecting the views of Prof Nurse.

The Upper Tribunal

    6. The respondent made a rule 24 response opposing the appeal. It was
       submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon had engaged with the
       case law regarding Sprakab reports and gave valid reasons for
       rejecting Prof Nurse's assessment. Furthermore the judge did not rely
       solely on the report of Sprakab but considered all of the evidence.

    7. At hearing, Mr. Middleton relied on the grounds advanced when
       permission to appeal was sought. In turn, Mrs Petersen relied on the
       rule 24 response.

Consideration

    8. When preferring the evidence of one expert over other reasons must
       clearly explain the basis for the preference. The fact there is an
       expert opinion is not of itself an adequate reason for its adoption
       if challenged.

    9. When I first looked at the decision I was initially concerned that
       the judge might have produced large extracts from the Upper Tribunal
       and Supreme Court judgements on Sprakab reports and then reached a
       conclusion without explanation. The Supreme Court in SS HD -v-MN and
       KY (Scotland )[2014] UKSC 30 emphasised the importance of the
       tribunal itself examining a Sprakab report critically in the light of
       all of the evidence and the reasoning supporting its conclusion. To
       simply adopt a report gives rise to the risk of prejudging issues.
       However, on careful reading of the decision it is my conclusion this
       clearly was not the case here.

   10. At paragraph 51 onwards the judge stated that the Sprakab report was
       preferred over the report from Prof Nurse. Reasons for doing so were
       given. Firstly, the criticisms by Prof Nurse of Sprakab reports had
       been rejected by the Upper Tribunal in RB linguistic evidence
       -Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UK UT 329. At paragraph 45 of First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Moxon's decision the relevant extract is provided.
       Prof. Nurse had expressed concern about the shortness of some
       interviews, the type of questioning and unsatisfactory telephone
       lines. However the Upper Tribunal said this was not a proper basis
       was saying the opinions given by Sprakab were wrong. Furthermore,
       Prof Nurse's survey of Sprakab reports only related to negative
       reports.

   11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon gave reasons for finding the Sprakab
       report compelling. Firstly the reports relied upon two qualified and
       experienced linguists. Secondly, the reason for the outcome in the
       report is explained. Prof Nurse had questioned the evidential basis
       for the conclusions. However the report referred to elements of
       Tanzanian Swahili in the appellant's speech. The judge found this
       particularly compelling given the claim that the appellant had never
       been away from the islands.

   12. The judge refers to Prof Nurse emphasising the appellant's use of
       Bajuni words. However the judge raised the possibility of this
       arising through contact with Bajuni islanders in Tanzania. The judge
       commented that this could tie in with Prof Nurse's comment that the
       appellant's Bajuni accent was only "slight/light".

   13. The decision indicates that First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon had
       careful regard to the relevant case law and has extracted key
       passages. The judge did not simply adopt the Sprakab report but has
       evaluated it against the contentions of Prof Nurse and looked at the
       claim in the round and has given a reasons decision for preferring
       the Sprakab conclusion.

   14. The two reports were not looked at in isolation. The central issue in
       the appeal was the appellant's nationality. Whilst the two reports
       are central to this his overall credibility is also relevant in
       assessing the truthfulness of his claim.

   15. The appellant had demonstrated considerable knowledge of Somalia and
       its islands but on some questions came unstuck. The explanation put
       forward was that he had not travelled outside the islands and was
       uneducated. However the judge felt there were some issues such as the
       national anthem and the geography of Kismayo he should have known,
       particularly as the Bajuni islands are off its coast.

   16. The judge concluded that the appellant's knowledge could have been
       learnt and he may have had direct contact with islanders or may
       indeed have visited the islands.

   17. The appellant had been questioned as to the length of time it would
       take to walk from the seashore to the village. The judge commented on
       his initial inability to answer; and then the varied from 15 to 30
       minutes. The judge commented that someone who had lived on the island
       all their lives should have been able to give a precise answer.

   18. The judge went on to comment about the credibility of the index
       event. It was not credible he would know nothing about his lover's
       situation or family given the small population on the island and the
       claim they had been seeing each other for a year.

   19. The judge went on to comment on the country evidence which indicated
       that Al Shabaab were not present on the islands though there were
       sympathisers. The appellant's evidence had been that he was told that
       Al Shabaab had gone onto the island and were looking for him.

   20. The judge did not attach significance to the fact the appellant used
       a Bajuni interpreter at the hearing. The judge pointed out that over
       80% of the words in Bajuni and Swahili are identical.

   21. In the grounds it was suggested that the judge erred in law by
       relying on the fact the appellant did not speak Somali. At paragraph
       58 of the decision the judge in fact referred to the appellant's
       evidence that his family were from Somalia and it was in this context
       that he would have expected some ability in Somali. However, the
       judge pointed out that the issue was not determinative. I found this
       comment by the judge does not constitute an error of law.

Conclusions

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon dismissing the appellant's
appeal shall stand. No material error of law has been demonstrated.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
