
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11951/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st March 2016                       |On 25th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  Master md
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Samimi, promulgated on 21st January 2016, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 17th December 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on [  ]
    1997.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State refusing his application  for  refugee  status  and  humanitarian
    protection dated 19th March 2012, following  which  the  Appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave until 18th March 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he lived in Qalai Village in  a  district
    of Kabul Province and that his father was a teacher at the  School  and
    also community leader.  Some six months before the  Appellant  came  to
    the UK two masked men visited the Appellant's home and told his  father
    to stop teaching and being a community leader.  Some  two  weeks  later
    four masked armed men went to  the  Appellant's  home  and  killed  his
    parents and younger brother whilst the Appellant  was  in  the  toilet.
    The Appellant took a  bus  to  Sara-e-Shamali  and  there  one  of  his
    father's friends arranged for the Appellant to  travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join his uncle Izat Ullah.  The Appellant now fears that  if
    returned to Afghanistan he would be killed by the people who killed his
    family.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how, "The core issue in his case relating to firstly
    the fact that his father had been threatened by the Taliban on  account
    of teaching girls, together with  the  fact  his  father  worked  as  a
    community leader has not been challenged" (see paragraph 18).  However,
    both the Appellant and his uncle returned to Afghanistan  in  2012,  as
    his grandmother was unwell and dying and had requested them to see them
    one more time (paragraph 19).  The judge  did  not  find  there  to  be
    satisfactory evidence as to  the  killing  of  the  Appellant's  family
    members.

 5. However, the Appellant's account of his father having  been  threatened
    by the Taliban and his work as a teacher and community leader "has  not
    been challenged either in the refusal letter or at the  hearing  before
    me" and that being so the judge held that, "I am prepared to  give  the
    Appellant the benefit of the doubt in regard  to  this  aspect  of  his
    claim" (paragraph 20).

 6. The judge referred to the applicable  authorities  in  this  area  (see
    paragraph 21) he went on to note how  the  Appellant  had  been  looked
    after in this country by his uncle since his arrival  at  14  years  of
    age.  He went on to hold that,

         "The Appellant is still  extremely  close  to  his  uncle  and  the
         relationship has now developed to a relationship akin to father and
         son.  I accept the Appellant's removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,
         would effectively disrupt and deprive him of  a  relationship  that
         has been the main support of emotional, and  psychological  support
         for him in the United Kingdom".

    The judge went on to hold that the Appellant was now 18 years old  but,
    "The bond between them does extend beyond normal family ties" and  that
    there was compelling circumstances  in  this  case,  referring  to  the
    established authorities on this point (see paragraph 24).

    The judge  went  on  to  also  hold  that  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the continuation of family life between the Appellant and
    his uncle who clearly did visit Afghanistan for family visits, but

         "The Appellant has developed a close family bond akin to parent and
         child (with his uncle Mr Ullah) during the last four years.   I  do
         not  find  that  the  Appellant's  immigration  status   has   been
         precarious during the last four years" (paragraph 26).

    The judge then went on to allow the appeal both on asylum  grounds  and
    on human rights grounds with reference to Article 8.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law by failing
    to make  adequate  findings  on  the  availability/protection  and  the
    possibility of  internal  relocation.   Moreover,  in  respect  of  the
    judge's Article 8 findings, it was said that he erred in  finding  that
    the Appellant's status in the UK was not precarious, when he  had  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor.

 8. On 5th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me Ms Brocklesby-Weller, appearing as Senior Home
    Office Presenting Officer on behalf of the Respondent,  submitted  that
    the judge had not taken a holistic  approach  to  the  evidence.    The
    Taliban would not have the time or the inclination or  the  ability  to
    seek out the Appellant if he had internally relocated  elsewhere.   The
    judge had no basis for concluding (at paragraph 23) that, "There  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant does  not  have  any
    relatives in Afghanistan".  Moreover, individuals are returned to Kabul
    without any difficulty and this has always historically been the  case.
    Reference was made to the case  of  AK  (Afghanistan)  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00613.  Therefore, to allow the appeal on  asylum  grounds  was  simply
    wrong.

10. Second, as far as Article 8 was concerned the judge had said that there
    were "insurmountable obstacles" and had referred to the case of Agyarko
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440, but this overlooks the fact that  the  Appellant's
    uncle had in 2012 taken the Appellant to Afghanistan to see  his  dying
    grandmother, and the Appellant returned safely back  to  this  country.
    There was no proper Rule base assessment by the  judge.   It  was  also
    wrong for the judge to say that the Appellant's immigration status  was
    not precarious because in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 it was held that
    a person's immigration  status  was  "precarious"  if  their  continued
    presence in the UK will be dependent upon  their  obtaining  a  further
    grant of leave.  This was a case where the Appellant was a minor and he
    was granted discretionary leave in accordance  with  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy in relation to unaccompanied minors.   This  meant  that
    the factors that were central to his grant  of  leave  were  no  longer
    extent, after he had reached the age  of  majority  and  the  Appellant
    would have no legitimate expectation of being allowed to  remain  here.
    Whilst the Appellant here studied in the UK, there was no reason why he
    could not use these skills to benefit himself in Afghanistan.  There is
    no reason why his uncle and the uncle's wider family would be incapable
    of offering familiar support and remittances to assist him while he was
    in that country.

11. For his part, Mr Collins submitted that he would have to  concede  that
    the Appellant's asylum appeal could not have been allowed, on the basis
    of the findings made by the judge.  He would have to concede  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal by the Secretary of State were correct  at  paragraph
    4(b) in that the judge had  failed  to  make  lawful  findings  on  the
    availability  and  sufficiency  of  state   protection   or,   in   the
    alternative, the possibility of internal relocation  to  another  area,
    such as Kabul.  The facts are clear in the determination (see paragraph
    8(a)) that the Appellant comes from Qalai Village which is  a  province
    of Kabul.  People are being returned to Kabul and it would be  entirely
    feasible for him to be returned there, provided that the judge was able
    to show circumstances which prevented that, which she had not been able
    to do in this determination.

12. However, on the Article 8 issue,  the  judge's  findings  are  entirely
    sustainable and this appeal by the Secretary  of  State  could  not  be
    allowed on that basis.  This is because the Appellant had been  out  of
    Afghanistan since the age of 14, he had no family  there,  and  he  had
    developed a relationship of father and son with his uncle, Mr Ullah.

13. The judge had found family life to be in existence (see paragraph  24).
    The judge had  observed  that  there  were  "compelling  circumstances"
    (which have not been considered under the Rules) and  with  respect  to
    which the appeal could be allowed outside the Rules.  He  had  referred
    to the leading cases of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Dube  [2015]
    UKUT 90.  The judge had regard to the fact  that  whilst  expressed  in
    mandatory terms, the considerations in Sections 117A to 117D,  are  not
    expressed as being exhaustive.

14. This meant that given what had  been  taken  into  account  it  was  an
    entirely sustainable decision by the judge to have concluded as he did.
     Mr Collins helpfully submitted that it was unfortunate that the  judge
    had used the word "precarious" in unintended manner  given  that  which
    had already been shown by the Tribunal in AM (Malawi).

15. In reply, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the  judge  had  confined
    himself to a consideration of a localised threat but had not considered
    whether internal relocation would be  available.   Kabul,  the  capital
    city, was not the same as living in the provinces.  It was not accepted
    that the Appellant would face a risk of  ill-treatment  or  killing  in
    Kabul.  Second, as far as Article 8 was concerned the judge did use the
    word "precarious" and this had a clear statutory meaning to  it,  which
    arguably led him into error.

Error of Law

16. The Rules make it clear that the Upper Tribunal may (but need not)  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (see  Section  12(2)(a)).
    I find that the judge fell into error in allowing the appeal on  asylum
    grounds  because  he  simply  failed  to  consider   whether   internal
    relocation to Kabul would be a viable option for the Appellant, and not
    least given that the Appellant actually  hails  from  the  district  of
    Kabul.  The judge has not made findings that  are  sustainable  on  the
    availability of sufficiency of state protection in this regard.

17. Notwithstanding this to be the case, I do not set  aside  the  decision
    quite simply because the  appeal  could  have  been,  and  was  indeed,
    properly allowed under Article 8 ECHR.  The judge  made  findings  that
    the  "Appellant  is  clearly  extremely  close  to  his  uncle  and   a
    relationship has now developed to a relationship  akin  to  father  and
    son" and that "there are compelling circumstances in this case" because
    "the  bond  between  them  does  extend  beyond  normal  family   ties"
    (paragraph 25).

18. As to the question whether there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the
    Appellant returning back to Afghanistan,  the  judge  held  that,  "the
    Appellant has built a family and private  life  during  the  period  of
    discretionary leave, in the form of extensive friendships and has  done
    well in his education" and a letter from  Sankofa  Care  described  the
    Appellant's progress and conduct as "exemplary"  (paragraph  26).   The
    fact that the judge refers to the Appellant's immigration status as not
    being "precarious" is unfortunate and wrong in the light of the decided
    cases, but is not an error as such that it would  undermine  the  final
    outcome of his decision with respect to Article 8.

19. The recent case of Rajendran [2016] UKUT  00138  makes  it  clear  that
    notwithstanding  the  fact  that  Section  117B  sets  out  a  list  of
    relationships, when one is considering  matters  outside  the  statute,
    "This does not mean that family  relationships  outwith  the  scope  of
    Section 117B are to be ignored" (see paragraph 38).   This  is  because
    the considerations there "are inexhaustive and courts and Tribunals are
    obliged by Section 117A(2)-(3) to  apply  such  considerations  in  the
    context  of  answering  the  wider  'public  interest'  question"  (see
    paragraph 38).

20. The judge in this case  performed  a  fact-finding  exercise  that  did
    indeed lead to findings of fact that are fettered in. with these  wider
    considerations and he is entitled to so do.

21. It must not be overlooked that the judge concluded  that,  "At  a  time
    when the Respondent has accepted  that  there  is  a   high  degree  of
    conflict, and where the Appellant effectively has lost contact with all
    forms of social and family support network" that this does  "Amount  to
    factors that amount to 'exceptional circumstances'" (see paragraph 26).



22. The judge was correct to find that the  Appellant's  removal  in  these
    circumstances would be disproportionate as  against  the  interests  in
    immigration  control  and  the  economic  wellbeing  of  this   country
    (paragraph 26).

Notice of Decision

In the circumstances the determination of the judge shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th April 2016
