
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/11355/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On July 22, 2015                     |On July 23, 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                           MS SEKINA ABOSEDE BELLO
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Ephraim-Adejumo, Counsel, instructed by Calices Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria.  The  appellant  and  children
    applied for asylum. The appellant's  children's  appeals  were  refused
    without a right of appeal and the appellant's application was  refused,
    with a right of appeal, by the respondent on November 28, 2014. At  the
    same time a decision was taken to remove her as an illegal entrant.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on December 18, 2014 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The matter came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andonian  on
    March 20, 2015 and in a decision promulgated  on  March  31,  2015  the
    Tribunal upheld the refusal and dismissed the appellant's appeals.

 4. The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  on  April  21,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew on May 5, 2015 on  the  grounds
    it was arguable that the Tribunal had  not  engaged  with  any  of  the
    medical evidence when considering what was in the best interests of the
    appellant's child.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 6. At the outset of the hearing I raised with Ms Ephraim-Adejumo the basis
    on which permission was being sought. The grounds of  appeal  were  not
    clear but Ms Ephraim-Adejumo confirmed that permission was being sought
    on Article 8 grounds only on the basis that the Tribunal had failed  to
    deal with the best interests of the children during the hearing and  in
    its decision. Furthermore, the Tribunal had failed to  have  regard  to
    evidence about the children's private life and had erroneously recorded
    the amount of money that was owed to the NHS.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7.  Ms  Ephraim-Adejumo  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed,   in
    particular,  to  take  into  account  the   fourteen-year-old   child's
    interests. The child had been present  in  court  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing and the appellant's claim was based on  what  has  happened  to
    him. The Tribunal should have taken evidence from the child  or  sought
    his views. Lady Hale made clear in ZH (Tanzania)  (FC)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4 that a Tribunal plays an important part in discovering a child's
    views and the Tribunal should, in this current appeal, have sought  the
    child's views in light of the fact that he was  present.  The  Tribunal
    failed to carry out the appropriate assessment and  based  its  refusal
    under Article 8 on its assessment of the appellant's own  evidence  and
    disregarded the evidence and other private life evidence that had  been
    submitted. The Tribunal failed to carry out  a  proper  proportionality
    assessment and as such there was an error in law.

 8. Mr Walker rejected the claim that there had been an error. He noted the
    Tribunal was being criticised for not seeking  evidence  from  a  child
    witness but he submitted the fault, if any, lay with the appellant  and
    her representatives. The child had not provided a witness statement and
    although he was at court a conscious decision had  been  taken  not  to
    call him. Witnesses can only give evidence where they have  provided  a
    written statement and it was therefore outside of the Tribunal's  remit
    to request evidence from a witness who had not provided a statement. In
    any event, the Tribunal was fully aware of the child's position due  to
    the documents that were before it  and  the  Tribunal  also  heard  the
    appellant's representative's submissions. The Tribunal did have  regard
    to the best interests of the children and  concluded  that  their  best
    interests would be with their mother. The issue for  the  Tribunal  was
    whether that should be  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  Nigeria  and  the
    Tribunal gave reasons for  saying  removal  to  Nigeria  would  not  be
    disproportionate. There was no material error  of  law  and  permission
    should be refused.

 9. Having heard submissions, I asked  Ms  Ephraim-Adejumo  what  questions
    should have been put by the Tribunal  to  the  child  and  Ms  Ephraim-
    Adejumo indicated that the Tribunal should have sought his views on the
    possibility of being removed and what he had been up to in  the  United
    Kingdom and why he did not want to return to Nigeria.

10. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

11. The appellant lodged an application for asylum on behalf of herself and
    her children. For reasons I do not need to go into the children did not
    have a right of appeal in the United Kingdom and the appellant's appeal
    was the matter heard by the Tribunal earlier this year.

12. In a detailed decision the Tribunal examined the appellant's claim  and
    in paragraphs [12] to [16] of its decision gave reasons  for  rejecting
    her claim. The Tribunal was unimpressed that the appellant did not know
    the name of the cult that was said to have abducted her son or how many
    members were in the cult.  The  Tribunal  concluded  she  had  provided
    limited details of the cult and further found that  the  fact  she  met
    with a person associated to the cult further undermined the credibility
    of the claim. The Tribunal went on to consider the  alternative  namely
    that the appellant's son was abducted but  it  rejected  the  claim  as
    lacking credibility and gave its reasons.

13. The fact there has been no challenge to the Tribunal's findings on  the
    asylum claim and the fact that  permission  to  appeal  is  limited  to
    Article 8 issues sets the background to this appeal.

14. Ms Ephraim-Adejumo criticised the Tribunal for not calling the  witness
    and my attention was drawn to Lady Hale's comments in  paragraphs  [34]
    onwards of ZH.  I have considered  ZH  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was represented by both counsel and  solicitors  and  if  the
    appellant had wanted her son  to  give  evidence  then  he  would  have
    provided a witness statement and a decision could then have been  taken
    by the Tribunal as to whether he was needed to give evidence.

15. I reject the submission that the Tribunal erred by not asking the child
    any questions. The child had neither provided a witness  statement  nor
    been called or tendered to give evidence.

16. The Tribunal  was  aware  of  what  he  said  because  it  had  various
    documents. It was apparent that he did not wish to return  to  Nigeria.
    There was little else that could have been obtained from the child over
    and above what was already known. This was not a case where  there  was
    no evidence presented to the Tribunal and the Tribunal did not know the
    child's view or account. There were medical reports from two  different
    places that clearly set out the child's  position.  There  were  school
    reports and whilst the Tribunal did not  refer  to  the  reports  I  am
    satisfied those documents were  available  to  the  Tribunal  and  were
    considered as part of a private life assessment. None of  the  findings
    on private life were not open to the Tribunal.

17. The medical evidence in  respect  of  this  child  covered  the  period
    November 2013 to November 2014. The most recent report made clear  that
    the child was no  longer  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress.  The
    medical report in respect of one of the other children was  dealt  with
    by the Tribunal. School reports and letters from football team  do  not
    on their own mean a child's best interest would now be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

18. This was a failed asylum application and the family were to be  removed
    together. The Tribunal had found there was no risk and that the  family
    itself could be returned. There was no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    that children could not  be  educated  in  Nigeria  and  there  was  no
    evidence that  any  necessary  medical  treatment  was  unavailable  in
    Nigeria.

19. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the Tribunal  was  entitled
    to reach the conclusions it did and to  make  the  findings  that  were
    made.

20. In all the circumstances I do not find there is any material  error  in
    this case and I dismiss the appeal.

    DECISION

21. There was no material error.  I uphold the decision.


[pic]
Signed:     Dated:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made as the appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Signed:     Dated:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
