

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11839/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22nd July 2015                        |On 29th July 2015                 |
|                                         |..................................|
|                                         |.....                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                     D V
                        (An anonymity order is made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms L. Turnbull, instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on 2nd September 1992, is  a  national  of
      Sri Lanka. He entered the United Kingdom on 5th March 2011 as a Tier 4
      (General) Student but on 9th  January  2012  the  Appellant's  college
      informed the Respondent that it was no longer sponsoring him.


   2. The Appellant applied for asylum on 12th March  2013  and  attended  a
      screening interview. His substantive asylum interview was conducted on
      24th November 2014. It was his case that he collected  money  for  the
      LTTE between January and September 2007 and  hid  grenades  and  other
      weapons for them between January and April 2009. He also said that  in
      2010 he helped the LTTE obtain documents in Colombo and  was  arrested
      there on 2nd October 2010. In addition, he asserted that he  was  held
      in detention until 22nd December 2010 and tortured during this period.
      The Appellant's application was refused on 10th December 2014.

   3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Plumptre  and  she
      dismissed his appeal in a decision and reasons,  promulgated  on  28th
      April 2015.

   4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against her decision on
      the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  made  a  defective
      assessment of the medical evidence and, in particular,  that  she  had
      not  engaged  with  Professor  Lingam's  clinical  findings.  He  also
      asserted that the Judge erred in her assessment of credibility of  the
      Appellant's account of his release from detention, his departure  from
      Sri Lanka and his membership of the TGTE.

   5. On 22nd May 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted the Appellant
      permission to appeal but she restricted her permission to the  grounds
      relating to Professor Lingam's report. She found that  the  Judge  may
      have erred in substituting her own clinical judgment for his. She also
      found that it was arguable that the Judge may have  erred  in  stating
      that he should have been in a position to be clearer as to the age  of
      the scars. Finally, she found that it was arguable that the Judge  may
      have erred in substituting her own judgment as to whether some of  the
      scars could have been self-inflicted. She  found  that  the  remaining
      grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with the  findings  of
      fact made by the Judge.


 Error of Law Hearing

   6. At the hearing counsel for the Appellant's counsel accepted  that  she
      had only been given permission to appeal on the grounds which  related
      to the Judge's approach to the expert evidence provided  by  Professor
      Lingam.  She also submitted that contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the
      Respondent's Rule 24 Reply, Professor Lingam had  been  provided  with
      copies of the Appellant's screening and substantive asylum interviews.
       She then submitted that the Judge had substituted her own opinion for
      that of Professor  Lingam  and  noted  that  he  had  found  that  the
      Appellant's scars had been caused by heated metal equipment  and  were
      clearly old. She also asserted that  it  could  be  inferred  that  he
      believed that the scars were over four years  old.  In  addition,  she
      submitted that the Judge had not given sufficient weight to  Professor
      Lingam's opinion.


   7.  The Home Office Presenting Officer replied and submitted  that  there
      were no material errors of law in the Judge's  decision  and  reasons.
      She noted that the Judge had set out Professor  Lingam's  findings  in
      paragraphs 30 to 37 and then given her own findings on his evidence in
      paragraph  48.  She  also  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  correctly
      considered the evidence in  the  round  before  coming  to  her  final
      decision about the credibility of the Appellant's account.


   8. In his grounds of appeal the Appellant asserted  that  the  Judge  had
      failed to engage with  Professor  Lingam's  rationale  as  to  why  he
      reached his clinical conclusion.  However, in paragraphs 30  -  37  of
      her decision and reasons the Judge reminded herself of the main points
      of his evidence. In particular, at paragraph 32 she noted that he  had
      stated that "the  scars  shown  on  the  photographs  cannot  be  from
      anything other than burn with heated  hot  metal  iron  rod  and  that
      characteristic features of burn are evident on each scar". She did not
      reach any findings later in her decision and reasons  which  suggested
      that she had not accepted this clinical finding.


   9. At paragraphs 34 and  54  she  correctly  points  out  that  Professor
      Lingam's  evidence  was  contradictory  about  the   timing   of   the
      Appellant's injuries, as he had said that the scars were  clearly  old
      and were certainly over two years old but  then  referred  to  a  burn
      injury in 2010. When doing so she was not seeking  to  substitute  her
      own view for his but merely commenting on his evidence. The timing  of
      the scars was clearly relevant to her decision as the  medical  report
      had been prepared more than three  years  after  his  arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom.


  10. On page 31 of the Appellant's Bundle Professor Lingam stated  that  in
      his opinion the injuries suffered by the Appellant could not have been
      self-inflicted. The Judge did not challenge  his  findings  about  the
      scars on the Appellant's back but did find  that,  absent  a  clinical
      explanation, she could not accept that he would not have been able  to
      cause the burn on his left upper arm. This was  a  finding  which  was
      open to her on the evidence before her.


  11. At paragraph 60 of her decision and reasons the Judge  said  that  "in
      short summary I am unable to accept the conclusions  Professor  Lingam
      has  reached  about  the  Appellant's  scars".   In  his   conclusions
      Professor Lingam said that his findings are typical  of  the  incident
      described.  Therefore,  the  Judge  was  not   reaching   an   adverse
      credibility finding about his clinical findings but was not  accepting
      his conclusion about the causation of the injuries. This was a finding
      which was open to her when the clinical  findings  did  not  date  the
      injuries and when Professor Lingam had also found that  "there  is  no
      way I nor any other medical expert in  his  field  can  scientifically
      differentiate between deliberately inflicted wounds (say  at  a  third
      party's behest) from wounds inflicted from any trauma".


  12. In paragraph 46 of her decision and reasons the Judge  also  correctly
      reminded herself that she must consider all the evidence in a case  in
      the round before coming to a  decision,  as  found  in  Karanakaran  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]  EWCA  Civ  11).  In
      paragraph 48 she also directed herself to relevant case  law  relating
      to the correct approach to medical evidence.

      13. For all of these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  there  were  no
          material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
          decision and findings and that it should stand.



          Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and  reasons  did  not
         include material errors of law.

      2. It should not be set aside.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.












                                    Date 24th July 2015






[pic]









Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
