
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11342/2014
                                                               AA/11404/2014
                                                               AA/11405/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2015                 |On 8 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     GT
                                     MF
                                     GN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellants who claim  asylum  and  two  of
    whom are children.  This order prohibits  the  disclosure  directly  or
    indirectly (including by the parties) of the identity  of  any  of  the
    appellants.  Any disclosure and breach of this order may  amount  to  a
    contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless revoked  or
    varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan who were  born  on  5  November
    1973, 10 December 2005 and 10 September 2009 respectively.   The  first
    Appellant is the mother of the second and third appellants.

 3. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 July  2014  and  were
    granted leave as visitors valid until 2 January  2015.   On  20  August
    2014, the first appellant applied for asylum with the second and  third
    appellants as her dependants.  The basis of the first appellant's claim
    was that she was a victim of domestic violence by  her  husband.   This
    had occurred before they had left Pakistan to come  to  the  UK  and  a
    final incident, in her mother's home in the UK, on 4 or 5  August  2014
    had resulted in the police being called.  He had left before the police
    arrived and some ten  days  later  he  had  called  the  appellant  and
    threatened to harm her on return to Pakistan including  threatening  to
    throw acid in her face and take the children.

 4. The appellant claimed asylum and a screening interview was held  on  20
    August 2014 and a full asylum interview on  25  November  2014.   On  4
    December 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for
    asylum and humanitarian protection and under Arts 2, 3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.  On 5 December 2014, the Secretary  of  State  made  a  decisions
    refusing to vary the leave of each appellant and also made decisions to
    remove each of them to Pakistan by way of directions under s.47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Suffield-Thompson on 31 March 2015.  At that hearing, in
    addition to the documentary evidence, the  judge  heard  oral  evidence
    from the appellant, the appellant's mother and the appellant's  sister.
    In her determination promulgated  on  7  April  2015,  Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson  dismissed  each  of  the  appellants'  appeals.   First,  she
    rejected the first  appellant's  account  that  she  was  a  victim  of
    domestic violence.  Secondly, in any  event,  she  concluded  that  the
    first appellant could safely and reasonably internally relocate  within
    Pakistan.  Thirdly, she dismissed the appeal under Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The
    grounds are somewhat discursive.  First,  they  argue  that  the  judge
    erred in law in reaching her adverse  credibility  finding.   Secondly,
    they argue that the judge erred in  law  in  concluding  that  internal
    relocation was a possibility.   Thirdly,  they  argue  that  the  judge
    failed to  have  regard  to  the  second  and  third  appellants'  best
    interests and s.55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009.

 7. On 12 May 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Cruthers)  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal.  Principally, he granted permission on
    the basis that the judge had  arguably  failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the second and third  appellants.   His  reasons  were  as
    follows:

         "3.  Unfortunately, the 6 pages of grounds on which  the  appellant
             seek permission to appeal takes a scatter-gun approach (rather
             than focussing on  allegedly  significant  alleged  errors  of
             law).  Without restricting this grant, I record  my  suspicion
             that there is little substance in the  vast  majority  of  the
             complaints made in the grounds.  But it may be that the  judge
             did err in some of the ways alleged.

         4.   In particular, the judge's  treatment  of  article  8  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights seems confined to the last
             sentence  in  her  paragraph  57.   I  therefore  consider  it
             arguable, as per paragraph 2 of the grounds,  that  the  judge
             has failed to sufficiently factor in the best interests of the
             two minor appellants (ie the second and third appellants - the
             children of the first appellant).

         5.   The appellants should not take this grant of permission as any
             indication that the appeals will ultimately be successful.   I
             suspect that even with the operation  of  section  55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  this  is  the
             sort of case that is  unlikely  to  succeed  by  reference  to
             article 8.  But because I cannot be sufficiently confident  of
             that, it is appropriate to grant permission at this stage."

 8. On 4 June 2015, the respondent filed a  Rule  24  notice  opposing  the
    appellants' appeals stating that:

         "In summary, the respondent will submit inter alia that  the  Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal directed  himself  (sic)  appropriately.
         The Secretary of State considers that the grounds are in reality  a
         disagreement with the findings of the judge.  He (sic) did not find
         the appellant credible and gave clear and sound  reasons  for  that
         conclusion.  His (sic)  other  findings  must  be  viewed  in  that
         light."

 9. Thus, the appeal was listed for hearing on 21 September 2015 before me.



The Hearing

10. Prior to the date of hearing, on 17 September 2015, the first appellant
    (in person) made a paper application to  adjourn  the  hearing  on  the
    basis that her representative was unable to prepare for the hearing and
    represent her.

11. On 18 September 2015, a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  refused  that
    application on the basis that there was no reason to believe  that  the
    first appellant had  not  had  sufficient  time  to  consult  with  her
    representative.

12. On 18 September 2015, the appellants' representative, Bukhari  Chambers
    faxed to the Tribunal a letter indicating  that  they  were  no  longer
    instructed to represent the appellant and that the  appellant  intended
    to attend court and represent herself.

13. At  the  hearing,  the  appellant  was  not  represented.   No  further
    application for an adjournment was made.

14. The first appellant indicated that she was happy to continue without an
    interpreter at the hearing and it was clear as the  hearing  progressed
    that the appellant spoke and understood  English.   She  was,  however,
    assisted by her sister who sat with her and, at times, aided the  first
    appellant.  I explained to the  first  appellant  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing  which  was  to  identify  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appellants' appeals involved the making  of  an
    error of law and should be set aside.  The purpose of the  hearing  was
    not to reconsider the merits of the first appellant's claim.

15. In the circumstances, I indicated that it might be helpful if the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Diwnycz made his  submissions  first  and
    then the first appellant responded.  With the agreement  of  the  first
    appellant, the hearing proceeded in that way.

Discussion

16. The appellants' first challenge is to the judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding, namely that she did not accept that the  first  appellant  had
    been a victim of domestic violence.

17. The first appellant claimed that she had been a victim  of  abuse  from
    both her husband and mother-in-law over a long  period  of  time.   She
    claimed that she had only had the courage to do something about it when
    she came to the UK in 2014 on a family visit with her two children  and
    husband.

18. In her determination, Judge Suffield-Thompson set  out  at  length  the
    first appellant's case and the written and oral evidence from the first
    appellant, her mother and her sister given at the hearing.

19. At para 37, the judge noted the  absence  of  any  supporting  evidence
    concerning the incidents or injuries she claimed:

         "37. This is not a case where the Appellant left  Pakistan  fearing
             for her life.  She came on a planned visit  with  her  husband
             and then stayed with her mother once  her  husband  had  left.
             Despite the fact that the Appellant  claimed  asylum  in  this
             measured way she has not produced any  supporting  documentary
             evidence, in particular medical, about her marriage.  There is
             no letter from Mrs. Osmani who, she states, she very close too
             and who knew  of  the  abuse.   There  are  no  medical  notes
             relating to the alleged miscarriage where she states that  her
             husband kicked her.  The Appellant has had sufficient time  to
             contact her doctor and ask for these notes to be sent over  to
             the UK.  Again she alleges she has been burnt by  her  husband
             but there is nothing from a doctor to corroborate her scarring
             from this incident.  Both of these documents I find  would  be
             accessible to the Appellant and would have been easy to obtain
             for the hearing.  The Appellant states that she took  her  son
             to hospital after the cricket bat attack on her by her husband
             and yet there are no records before me about the child's  head
             injury."

20. The grounds argue that the judge, in taking the absence  of  supporting
    evidence into account, failed to have regard to the fact that the first
    appellant came to the UK not in order to claim asylum and  so  did  not
    come, so to speak, equipped with the documents.  The point made by  the
    judge, however, remained open to her, namely  that,  despite  the  time
    that the first appellant has been in the UK,  she  has  not  sought  to
    obtain any supporting documents including supporting  medical  evidence
    in the UK of her injuries.  As the  Court  of  Appeal  observed  in  TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  40  at  [20]  in  the  absence  of  a
    credible explanation - and there was none here - the failure to produce
    that supporting evidence is a relevant factor in assessing credibility.



21. Returning now to the  judge's  reasoning,  at  the  hearing  the  first
    appellant relied upon two incidents of claimed abuse by her  husband  -
    one where he had made her take her clothes off and  humiliated  her  in
    front of her family and a second where, she claimed, he had raped  her.
    Those matters had not been raised prior to the hearing at the screening
    interview, in the asylum interview or indeed in the appellant's witness
    statement prepared for the hearing.

22. At paras 38-41 the judge dealt with the first  appellant's  failure  to
    mention either of these incidents prior to the hearing as follows:

         "38. The Appellant was interviewed  by  a  female  member  of  Home
             Office staff on the 25 November 2014.  By her account the last
             time she saw her husband was 4 August 2014.  This  means  that
             over 3 months had passed between then and the interview.   The
             Appellant knew that she was safe in the UK with her family and
             that the interview was her chance to tell the Home Office  why
             she was seeking Asylum.  This Appellant is an  educated  woman
             with a degree in Psychology and I find this to be significant.
              I find that she would have been aware of  the  importance  of
             this interview  and  the  account  that  she  gave.   She  was
             sufficiently prepared for the interview in that she took  with
             her a letter of support from her mother and the police  report
             reference number from the incident at her mother's house.

         39.  The Appellant told the interviewer that she had been subjected
             to abuse by her husband many times in her home country.  (Q7).
              She recounted that he had another woman in his life and  that
             he was a landowner with  a  lot  of  connections  (Q47).   She
             stated that he was a heavy drinker  (Q.54).   He  would  abuse
             her, pull her hair and hit her on the head with shoes (Q  55).
             She stated that he kicked her in the stomach  whilst  she  was
             pregnant causing her to miscarry.  She told the  officer  that
             he had, on one occasion, burnt her on the chest  area  with  a
             cigarette.

         40.  The Appellant stated in her evidence that she had not told the
             officer about other things because she was too ashamed.  I  do
             not find this credible.  Had the Appellant said nothing at all
             to the interviewing officer  then  that  would  be  different.
             However the Appellant has told the  interviewing  officer  all
             manner of abuse that her husband meted out to her and yet  she
             did not tell her about being locked out naked and being raped.
              I do not find it credible that the Appellant would have  left
             this out of her interview had they really happened.

         41.  It is only in the hearing that she has told  the  Tribunal  of
             this other conduct.  She had not even told her Solicitor.   As
             an intelligent woman  she  would  have  known  that  this  was
             significant evidence that her  lawyer  would  have  wanted  to
             hear.  I find that her conduct at  the  interview,  her  with-
             holding things from her solicitor and then her  oral  evidence
             significant in assessing her credibility."

23. The grounds argue that the judge failed to take into account  that  the
    first appellant might not feel able to disclose this abuse earlier.  In
    fact, as is clear  from  the  judge's  reasoning,  she  did  take  that
    argument fully into account.  She noted that the  first  appellant  had
    been interviewed by a female member of the Home Office  staff  and  had
    given a detailed account of abuse and  had  not  even  told  her  legal
    representative of the two incidents of her being locked out  naked  and
    being raped.  The judge also noted that  the  first  appellant  is  "an
    educated woman with a degree in psychology".  This was a  matter  which
    the judge was entitled to take into account in  assessing  whether  the
    appellant had a good explanation for why she had not  referred  to  the
    two incidents prior to the hearing.

24. The assessment of the first appellant's evidence  and  her  explanation
    was primarily a matter for the judge.  At para 44,  the  judge,  having
    the benefit of hearing the first  appellant  give  evidence,  made  the
    following observation:

         "44. At the start of the hearing the Appellant's lawyer  asked  her
             if her statement covered all she wanted to say.  She was  very
             forthright and adamant that here were things she  had  to  say
             and that she was going to say them whatever her lawyer wanted.
              She said a very similar thing at the  Home  Office  interview
             (Q80).  I do not find this behaviour consistent with a  person
             who says she is too frightened to make certain disclosures  to
             strangers.  In  two  formal  and  authoritarian  settings  the
             Appellant made it clear that she had  an  agenda  and  it  was
             going to be followed."

25. Clearly the judge was alive to the first appellant's claimed history of
    domestic violence and her explanation of why she did not  disclose  the
    two incidents prior to the hearing.  However, the  judge  also  clearly
    took the view, having heard the first appellant give evidence, that she
    did not accept that explanation.  I am unable to say  that  that  is  a
    conclusion which the judge was not entitled in law to reach.  As I have
    said, the assessment of the evidence - in particular the oral  evidence
    of a witness - is primarily a matter for the first instance judge.   It
    was not irrational, in my judgment for the judge to take  into  account
    as a factor adverse to the first appellant's credibility that  she  had
    only raised these two particular incidents of claimed domestic abuse at
    the hearing itself.

26. Turning  again  to  the  judge's  reasoning  in  reaching  her  adverse
    credibility finding at para 42, the judge turned to the incident  which
    the first appellant had claimed had occurred in her mother's house on 4
    or 5 August 2014.  The judge found, as damaging of her credibility, her
    account that her husband had left her mother's house after  the  police
    were called simply by grabbing a bag with all his unpacked clothes  and
    belongings which had been there for nearly a  month.   The  judge  said
    this:

         "42. I turn now to the night of the  incident  at  the  Appellant's
             mother's house.  The Appellant stated that her husband grabbed
             a bag and ran out.  This bag just so happened to  contain  his
             clothes, passport and his ticket back to Pakistan.  I  do  not
             find this credible.  They had been staying with the mother for
             nearly a month.  They had travelled as a family so I  question
             why  their  tickets  and  passports  would  not  all  be  kept
             together.  Why the Appellant's husband or the Appellant  would
             not have unpacked his clothes and hung them up or placed  them
             somewhere for nearly a month.   It  makes  little  sense  that
             there just  happened  to  be  a  bag  packed,  to  hand,  with
             everything he needed in it to leave the UK.   It  is  entirely
             possible that  this  has  been  a  fabrication  involving  the
             husband and that he is still here in the UK (as  there  is  no
             Home Office record of him leaving  the  UK)  with  the  family
             planning  to  come  and  live  here  with  the  rest  of   the
             Appellant's immediate family."

27. Then at para 43, the judge added:

          "The Appellant says her husband is  back  in  Pakistan.   She  has
          produced no evidence of this  and  the  British  authorities  have
          checked and there is no record of him having left the UK.  I  find
          it highly probable that he is in the UK."

28. The grounds argue that the judge's  conclusion  is  an  assumption  not
    based upon any evidence.  It is argued that the Secretary of State  has
    "the mechanism in place" to provide the information as to  whether  the
    appellant's husband is or is not in  the  UK.   In  my  judgment,  this
    ground is wholly unsustainable.  It was properly open to the  judge  to
    take into account the implausibility that the first appellant's husband
    would leave "unpacked" his bag at the house of  the  first  appellant's
    mother for almost a month after arriving in the UK.   Further,  as  the
    judge made clear in para 43, checks had been  made  and  there  was  no
    record of the  appellant's  husband  having  left  the  UK.   That  was
    evidence upon which the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  first
    appellant's husband was, probably still  in  the  UK  and  not  as  she
    claimed back in Pakistan.

29. Turning once more to the judge's reasoning, at para 45 the  judge  took
    into  account  in  assessing  the  first  appellant's  claim  and,   in
    particular, whether she had any relatives in Pakistan evidence that the
    appellant's mother had sponsored a person, who was a relative,  in  the
    past.  The judge said this:

         "45. The Appellant, her mother and  sister  were  all  asked  about
             relatives in Pakistan and stated they had none  at  all.   The
             Representative for the Respondent produced a visa  application
             form made for an individual named MI.  The Sponsor's name  was
             that of the Appellant's  mother  and  her  home  address  also
             appeared on the form.  It was stated that it was not her phone
             number.  All the women denied any knowledge of this person  or
             his application.  I did not find this to be credible.  I  find
             that this was a member of the Appellant's family and that  her
             mother had sponsored him to come to the  UK.   The  fact  that
             they all denied this has a significant impact on my assessment
             of their credibility as witnesses of truth.  It is clear  that
             they wanted the court to find they have no other relatives  in
             Pakistan."

    Then at para 46  the  judge  dealt  with  the  evidence  of  the  first
    appellant's mother given at the hearing and the manner in which it  was
    given as follows:

         "46. When the mother gave here evidence she was asked  if  she  had
             seen the Appellant in Pakistan.  She said that  she  had  seen
             the Appellant in Pakistan on one occasion and then  she  began
             to expand her answer saying that the Appellant  told  her  how
             happy she was in her life and her marriage.   The  Appellant's
             representative jumped in at that point and asked her to  stick
             to  the  questions  asked.   I  find  this  was  an  important
             intervention of (sic) the part of the representative."

30. At the hearing, the first appellant claimed, as did  her  mother,  that
    she had no idea what that application related to.  In effect, the claim
    was that the application was made without the knowledge  of  the  first
    appellant's mother and had nothing to do with her.  The  fact  remains,
    however,  that  that  application   properly   identified   the   first
    appellant's mother as the sponsor.  In her submissions before  me,  the
    first appellant told me that she had made a specific complaint  to  the
    Home Office that the earlier application  amounted  to  an  immigration
    crime.  She was unable to provide the email in which she had made  this
    complaint but she did  produce  a  response  dated  20  May  2015  from
    "Immigration Enforcement" confirming that she had provided on 25  April
    2015 information concerning a suspected  immigration  crime.   However,
    the email continues that: "We have  investigated  the  information  you
    provided but we have not been able to take any further action on it  at
    this time."

31. This information was, of course, not available to the judge  since  the
    complaint was made subsequent to the hearing  which  was  on  31  March
    2015.  In any event, the  fact  that  the  first  appellant  made  that
    complaint which was, in the circumstances, not proceeded  with  by  the
    Home Office would not make it irrational  for  the  judge  to  conclude
    that, given that the name and home address of  the  appellant's  mother
    was on the form, that the evidence that they had no knowledge  of  this
    person was not credible.

32. Finally at paras 47-48 drew together her reasons for  disbelieving  the
    first appellant's account of domestic violence as follows:

         "47. Finally I turn to the Appellants education.   I  do  not  find
             this to be of significance.   The  Appellant's  representative
             said it makes no difference if you are educated or  not.   You
             can still be a victim of domestic violence and you  can  still
             return to Pakistan and be at risk.  In a general sense  he  is
             of course right but  I  find  that  this  Appellant  is  in  a
             different situation.  Firstly as I have already  stated  I  do
             not  find  it  credible  that  she  withheld  two  significant
             instances' of abuse back in her asylum claim and then suddenly
             disclosed them to the Tribunal.  Also  the  Appellant  studied
             Psychology and as part of that she  would  be  well  aware  of
             issues   surrounding   domestic   violence   and   how   abuse
             psychologically  affects  individuals.   I   find   that   the
             Appellant has used her education  to  create  a  false  asylum
             claim which, at the last minute,  she  sought  to  bolster  by
             adding in the allegations of rape and  being  locked  outside,
             naked.

         48.  It was clear that the Appellant has no desire for her children
             to be brought up in Pakistan.  She became  very  forceful  and
             agitated when asked about her childrens'  future  in  Pakistan
             saying that her son would grow up  in  the  same  way  as  his
             father and that her daughter would have no life or  future  at
             all as a woman in Pakistan and that even if she  were  working
             she would just be 'married off  to  the  same  kind  of  man'.
             Although I can sympathise with the Appellant's desire for  her
             children to grow up in a Western Society that is not a  choice
             that is open for her, or indeed many  others,  to  make.   The
             Appellant has, within the last few years, been  reunited  with
             her blood family and they are now here in the UK.  I find that
             the Appellant wishes to make a life here now to  be  with  her
             family and that this is the motivation behind  her  claim  for
             refugee status."

33. The grounds criticise the judge  for  taking  into  account  the  first
    appellant's education, in particular her psychology background.  I have
    already touched upon this point earlier.  It was a matter which clearly
    the judge was entitled to take into account.  Contrary to what is  said
    in the grounds and was repeated by the first appellant before  me,  the
    judge was not saying that an educated person could not  be  subject  to
    domestic violence.  Rather, the judge was assessing whether  the  first
    appellant's account of domestic violence, and the circumstances of  her
    claim,  chimed  consistently  with  her   educational   background   in
    particular her  knowledge  and  understanding  of  psychology.   I  see
    nothing in the judge's reasoning that did not entitle her to reach  the
    conclusion that the first appellant's account was not to be believed.

34. One matter arose at the hearing which was not directly  raised  in  the
    grounds.  That concerned a  document  which,  at  least  on  its  face,
    appeared to relate to contact between the first  appellant  and  police
    and the police in relation a  domestic  violence  enquiry.   Under  the
    heading of "initial risk management and intervention",  handwritten  is
    the following: "Advised to lock the door and secure the house,  contact
    police immediately if he returns."

35. The document is undated.  It is said by the first  appellant  to  be  a
    document that was produced by the police following their visit  to  her
    mother's house on 4 or 5 August 2014 when she claims her husband abused
    her physically.

36. Mr Diwnycz accepted that this document had been submitted to  the  Home
    Office on 20 August 2014.  There is no record of it in  the  Tribunal's
    file and it does not appear to have been placed before the judge at the
    hearing.  Certainly, no reference is made to it by the judge.

37. It is not clear to me why this  document  was  not  placed  before  the
    judge.  It was clearly relevant.  However, it is undated  and  although
    it is, in general terms, consistent with the appellant's claim that her
    mother called the police on 4 or 5 August 2014 to her house because the
    first appellant was being abused, it provides no details  of  what  the
    first appellant claims occurred.  It was,  however,  a  document  which
    should have been placed before the judge in order for her  to  consider
    it as part of all the evidence.  However, the failure was  not,  in  my
    judgment, material to the judge's  adverse  credibility  finding.   Her
    reasons,  which  I  have  set  out  above,  were  cogent   and   wholly
    sustainable.  I do not consider that even if the judge  had  considered
    this document her adverse finding would have been any  different.   For
    that reason, any procedural error  was  not  material  to  the  judge's
    finding that she did not accept that the first appellant was  a  victim
    of domestic violence.

38. In any event, the judge went on in her determination to find  that  the
    appellant  could  safely  and  reasonably  internally  relocate  within
    Pakistan.  She gave her reasons at paras 53-56 as follows:

         "53. As I do not find that the Appellant is a victim of abuse there
             is no need  for  me  to  look  at  a  detailed  assessment  of
             relocation or state protection.  However I make the  following
             observations.  It may be that the Appellant's husband is still
             here and they will move back to  Pakistan  together.   If  the
             Appellant's husband has left her then the Appellant will  have
             to return to Pakistan with her children.  There are may  NGO's
             in Pakistan that I  find  would  help  the  Appellant  on  her
             return.  It states n the case of FS (domestic  violence)  that
             although these services were not as many as one would wish for
             'it cannot be said that women returning to Pakistan  who  seek
             access to such shelters would be at real risk of being  denied
             assistance or of receiving ill-treatment'".  On the  basis  of
             my earlier finding regarding the visa  application  for  MI  I
             find it likely that the Appellant does have other relatives in
             Pakistan who will assist her in rebuilding her life.

         54.  She is a bright and educated woman and she  had  a  job  as  a
             researcher in  a  hospital  so  she  would  be  able  to  find
             professional work and support her children  in  that  way.   I
             accept that the Appellant's husband is of some  importance  in
             the local area  but if the Appellant  wanted  to  make  a  new
             start in Pakistan it is a vast country with over  175  million
             people and there is  no  evidence  that  state  agencies  keep
             sophisticated data bases on their citizens.  So the  Appellant
             could move to another part of the country and build a new life
             there.

         55.  In the case  of  FM  the  Appellant  was  a  woman  of  little
             education, no history of employment and  away  from  her  home
             area with no male support.  The court found in this case  that
             the Appellant and her children would face a degree of hardship
             but that they were all in good health, and had shown a  degree
             of resourcefulness by leaving their home country  and  seeking
             asylum.  I find that this Appellant has many  more  advantages
             than the Appellant in FM and that she will manage.

         56.  I do not seek to make  light  of  the  difficulties  that  the
             Appellant will face as I am sure there will be  some  but  the
             background information makes it clear that in the  big  cities
             there are many lone women who successfully work and  bring  up
             their children and she will not be subject to the  same  level
             of scrutiny as she would be if she moved back  home  or  to  a
             rural area."

39. The reference to the case of FM in paragraph 55 of the determination is
    clearly a reference to FS  (Domestic  violence  -  SN  and  HM  -  OGN)
    Pakistan CG [2006] UKAIT 000283.  That decision  was  approved  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in KA and Others (Domestic violence -  risk  on  return)
    Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC).  As the head note of KA  and  Others
    sets out the correct approach is:

         "In assessing whether women victims of  domestic  violence  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative, regard must be had not only
         to the availability  of  such  shelters/centres  but  also  to  the
         situation women will face after they leave such centres."

40. In her determination, despite stating that it was not necessary to make
    a detailed assessment, the judge in effect  did  precisely  that.   She
    considered that the first appellant  had  the  advantage  of  being  an
    educated woman, with a  professional  background  and  the  ability  to
    support her children.  That was a finding the judge was fully  entitled
    to make on the evidence.  Further, the judge noted that Pakistan was  a
    "vast country with over 175 million people", it was  properly  open  to
    the judge to find that  the  appellant  could  safely  relocate  within
    Pakistan without coming to the attention of her husband or, indeed, his
    family.  In my judgment, Judge Suffield-Thompson approached  the  issue
    of internal relocation in  accordance  with  the  leading  cases,  most
    recently KA and Others.  She considered  fully  the  first  appellant's
    circumstances and was entitled to conclude that, despite  difficulties,
    it was not unreasonable for the first appellant with her  two  children
    to live elsewhere in Pakistan away from her home area where  she  would
    not be at risk from her husband or his family.  Consequently, the first
    appellant also failed to establish her claim - even if her account were
    accepted - on the basis  that  she  could  internally  relocate  within
    Pakistan.

41. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not  materially  err  in
    law in dismissing the appellants' appeals on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

42. I now turn to consider the final issue raised in  the  grounds,  namely
    that the judge failed to consider the "best interests"  of  the  second
    and third appellants.

43. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that the judge had only very briefly dealt with
    Art 8 in para 57.  There she said this:

         "I find there is nothing exceptional  in  this  appeal  for  me  to
         consider the case outside the Rules and therefore Article 8 of  the
         ECHR does not apply."

44. I accept that this is not a wholly adequate  consideration  of  Art  8.
    However, I do not consider it to be a material error.   The  appellants
    had no claim under the Rules and  the  judge  was  required  to  assess
    whether there were "compelling" circumstances so as to justify a  grant
    of leave outside the Rules (see Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
    74).  As part of that assessment, a  "primary"  consideration  was  the
    "best interests" of the second and third appellants.  The judge  failed
    to consider those circumstances and  made  no  reference  to  the  best
    interests of the second and third appellants.  That was,  in  my  view,
    also an error.

45. However, the Upper Tribunal will only set aside an adverse decision  if
    there is a realistic prospect  that  a  favourable  decision  could  be
    reached.  In my judgment, the appellant had no prospect  of  succeeding
    under Art 8.  The appellants had only been in the UK since  July  2014.
    That was less than twelve months at  the  date  of  the  hearing.   The
    second and third appellants were 10 and 5 years old at the date of  the
    hearing.  They are now aged 10 and 6 years old.  Whilst  they  live  in
    the UK with both their  mother  and  immediate  family,  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge that it was not in their  best  interests  to
    return to Pakistan with their mother.  There was no evidence that their
    educational prospects would suffer or that there  would  be  any  other
    significant detriment to them.  The judge, of course, had rejected  the
    first appellant's claim to be subject to domestic violence.   In  those
    circumstances, despite the family links in the UK, there was  no  basis
    upon which the judge could have  found  that  there  were  "compelling"
    circumstances to justify the grant of leave to each of  the  appellants
    outside the Rules.  Their appeals under Art 8 were  inevitably,  in  my
    judgment, dismissed.

46. For that reason, no point would be served by setting aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss their appeal under  Art  8.   Those
    decisions, therefore, stand.

Decision

47. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals did not involve the making of a material  error  of
    law.  Those decisions stand.

48. The  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are,  accordingly,
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
