
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11200/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 11 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     MM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Mills, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (DRC),
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision by the  respondent
   of 5 November 2014 to refuse his  application  to  revoke  a  Deportation
   Order. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Afako dismissed the  appeal.  The
   appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

2. In summary the background to this appeal is that  the  appellant  arrived
   in the UK on 24 April 1991 on a false  passport  and  claimed  asylum  on
   arrival. That application was refused on 14 October 1996. In October 1997
   the appellant was arrested by the French authorities en route to  Belgium
   for possession of a false Belgian passport. He was returned to the UK and
   made a further application for asylum which was refused.   The  appellant
   accrued a number of convictions in 1998, 2002 and 2006 for which  he  was
   sentenced to periods of imprisonment. On 25 April  2005  a  decision  was
   taken to make a Deportation Order against him and his appeal against that
   decision was dismissed on 9 September 2005. Upon conviction of possession
   of a false or improperly obtained identity document  in  2006  the  court
   recommended that he should be deported. A Deportation Order was  made  on
   11 February 2008 and his appeal against that decision was dismissed on  4
   December 2008 and on 30 November 2009 the  appellant  was  listed  as  an
   absconder. On 30 May 2012 the appellant's legal representatives lodged an
   application for asylum which was treated as an application to revoke  the
   Deportation Order. The Secretary of State refused that application  on  8
   August 2012 and following the appellant's application for Judicial Review
   of that decision the High Court gave the appellant permission  to  submit
   further submissions in relation to the refusal to revoke the  Deportation
   Order. Those submissions were rejected in the Secretary of State decision
   dated 5 November 2014, the decision subject to the current appeal.

3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had   not
   demonstrated a genuine political commitment to opposition  activities  in
   the UK and that accordingly his activities in the UK would not  therefore
   be mistaken by the DRC authorities for genuine political  commitment  and
   would be viewed as opportunistic. He found that the current  organisation
   with which the appellant is affiliated (the  High  Council  of  Congolese
   Resistance (HCCR)) appears to be little known and there  is  no  evidence
   that it is perceived to be a threat to the  Congolese  authorities  [29].
   The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the respondent accepts that  the
   appellant left the DRC with forged documents and considered the  findings
   of the Upper Tribunal in the country  guidance  case  of  BM  and  Others
   (returnees -  criminal  and  non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]  00293  (IAC)
   (hereinafter BM1) in relation to the risk to those who committed document
   fraud when leaving the DRC. The Judge concluded that the findings of  the
   Upper Tribunal in that case are limited  to  the  more  recent  political
   dispensation of the DRC and does not apply to those, like the  appellant,
   who left during the Mobutu  era  [32].   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  under  Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights.

4. In his grounds of appeal  the  appellant  contends  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in two ways. It is firstly contended that, in  light
   of the respondent's acceptance that the appellant left the  DRC  using  a
   forged passport, the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  properly  apply  the
   guidance in BM1 in assessing the risk of return.  The  second  ground  is
   that the Judge erred in his assessment of the evidence of the appellant's
   sur place activities. It is contended that the Judge wrongly stated  that
   the General Secretary of the HCCR was not called to  give  oral  evidence
   and could  not  therefore  be  cross-examined  on  the  standing  of  the
   organisation [24] whereas he had in fact been called and had been  cross-
   examined. It is further contended that the Judge erred in failing to have
   proper regard to the expert  report  of  Dr  Seddon  which  assessed  the
   appellant's claimed activities with the HCCR.

5. The first ground relates to the application of the country guidance  case
   of BM1. Mr Mills also relied on the supplementary decision in  BM  (false
   passport) DRC [2015]  UKUT  00467  (IAC)  (hereinafter  BM2).  The  Upper
   Tribunal in BM1 concluded (as summarised in head note 4);

    "4.    The DRC  authorities  have  an  interest  in  certain  types  of
    convicted or suspected offenders,  namely  those  who  have  unexecuted
    prison sentences in the DRC or in respect of whom there are  unexecuted
    arrest warrants in the DRC or who allegedly committed an offence,  such
    as document fraud, when departing the DRC. Such  persons  are  at  real
    risk of imprisonment for  lengthy  periods  and,  hence,  of  treatment
    proscribed by Article 3 ECHR."

6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said at paragraph 32;

    "Whilst one can more readily recognise the  DRC  authorities'  need  to
    target  those  who  escaped  from  the  country  or  left  the  country
    irregularly under their watch, it is  difficult  to  see  why  the  DRC
    authorities would want to target those who left Zaire unlawfully during
    the Mobutu era. It is clear that the findings of the Upper Tribunal are
    limited to the more recent political dispensation of the DRC  and  does
    not apply to those who might have  fled  Mobutu's  regime,  among  whom
    would be supporters of this government. In the appellant's case,  given
    what is  said  on  his  behalf  about  the  authorities'  knowledge  of
    individuals in exile, it will be clear to them that  he  had  left  the
    country well before the existence of the DRC. There is no  evidence  to
    show that a Mobutu-era escapee would  be  targeted  for  leaving  on  a
    forged Zairean travel document and I  do  not  accept  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal intended to suggest that this was the case."

7. Mr Mills accepted that the Tribunal decision in BM2 was issued after  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge signed the determination in this  case,  albeit
   it was before the First-tier Tribunal determination was  promulgated.  In
   any event he submitted that and in BM2 did not make  any  distinction  in
   terms of risk to those who departed the DRC before or  after  the  Mobutu
   regime.

8.  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that  the  Judge  did  consider  the   relevant
   paragraphs of BM1 at paragraph  30  of  his  determination  and  that  he
   considered the evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal  from  Dr  Kennes  at
   paragraph 46 of the decision in BM1. She submitted  that  the  Judge  was
   entitled to conclude that this  evidence  relates  to  those  'currently'
   perceived as a threat to the DRC authorities.

9. However the Tribunal in BM1 made no such  distinction.  At  paragraph  78
   the Tribunal found;

    78.    ..., based on all the evidence, that the DRC authorities have an
    interest  in  returning  nationals  in  respect  of  whom   there   are
    uncompleted  prison  sentences,  unexecuted  arrest  warrants  or   the
    suspected commission of criminal offences, such as document fraud, when
    leaving the country. ..."

10. I accept that the evidence before the Upper Tribunal  concerned  current
   circumstances in the DRC. However there is nothing  in  the  decision  to
   qualify the guidance in relation to the risks to returning nationals  who
   have committed document fraud. The  Judge  has  failed  to  set  out  the
   evidence on which he based his finding that the  guidance  given  by  the
   Upper Tribunal does not apply where document fraud was committed in 1991.
   He failed to set out the evidence on which he decided not to  follow  the
   country guidance set out in BM1.

11. In BM2 the Tribunal  considered  this  part  of  the  guidance  in  more
   detail. The Tribunal in BM2 proceeded on the basis that leaving  the  DRC
   using a false passport 'constitutes the offence  of  document  fraud,  or
   something kindred, under the domestic laws of DRC' [3]. The Tribunal went
   on to find that the appellant in that case had not  established  that  he
   had left the DRC on a false passport. The Tribunal set out the  procedure
   for the grant of an Emergency Travel Document (ETD) to DRC nationals  who
   are the subject of enforced return  to  their  country  of  origin.  This
   procedure includes the provision of information to the DRC authorities as
   to when and how the person left the DRC and about their passport.

12. The Tribunal provided further guidance in BM2 as summarised in the  head
   note as follows;

    "The mere fact that an asylum claimant utilised  a  false  passport  or
    kindred document in departing the DRC will not without more engage  the
    risk category specified in  [119(iv)]  of  BM  and  Others  (Returnees:
    Criminal and Non-Criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC).  The  application
    of this guidance will be dependent upon the fact sensitive  context  of
    the individual case. The Tribunal will consider, inter alia, the likely
    state of knowledge of the DRC authorities pertaining to the  person  in
    question. A person claiming to belong to any  of  the  risk  categories
    will not be at risk  of  persecution  unless  likely  to  come  to  the
    attention of the DRC authorities. Thus in every case there will  be  an
    intense focus on matters  such  as  publicity,  individual  prominence,
    possession of  a  passport,  the  standard  emergency  travel  document
    arrangements (where these apply) and how these matters  impact  on  the
    individual claimant."

13. Both Mr Mills and Ms Fijiwala submitted that BM2  makes  it  clear  that
   the mere use of a false  document  is  not  enough  to  show  a  risk  of
   persecution but that consideration must also  be  given  to  whether  the
   appellant would come to the attention of the DRC  authorities.  Mr  Mills
   submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did in fact  find  that  the
   appellant would come to the attention of the authorities as he  found  at
   paragraph 28 that it is reasonable to conclude that the  DRC  authorities
   will have a proper appraisal of the HCCR and of the appellant. He went on
   to find; "Without evidence of a genuine political commitment on his part,
   the apparent activities and public denouncements of the government  would
   not be mistaken by the authorities for genuine political  commitment  and
   would be viewed as opportunistic". Ms Fijiwala submitted that  the  Judge
   found that  the  appellant  would  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities.

14. In my view the Judge found that the appellant  would  be  considered  by
   the DRC authorities to pose no threat. The difficulty is  that  this  may
   require the authorities to carry  out  an  assessment  of  the  appellant
   during which his previous use of a false passport may come to light. This
   issue then is whether this would be sufficient to mean that the appellant
   would be at risk of persecution upon return to the DRC. I do  not  accept
   Mr Mills' submission that the findings of the Judge  on  this  issue  are
   sufficiently clear to enable me to remake the  decision  based  on  those
   findings.

15. The Tribunal in BM2 made clear that the assessment of risk  requires  an
   'intense focus' on matters relating to the individual case. The  Tribunal
   said;

    "16.    ...  The  country  guidance  on  this  discrete  issue  is,  of
    necessity, broad and general in nature, having regard  particularly  to
    the evidence upon which it is based. Its application to a given  asylum
    claimant will be dependent upon the fact  sensitive  context  of  their
    individual case. Predictably, one of  the  enquiries  for  the  primary
    decision maker and, on appeal, the FtT, in  every  case,  will  be  the
    likely state of knowledge of the  DRC  authorities  pertaining  to  the
    person in question. All necessary findings of  fact  and/or  evaluative
    assessments and/or predictions relating to this issue will be  made  on
    the basis of primary evidence and sustainable inferences  from  primary
    evidence or concessions. Fundamentally, a person claiming to belong  to
    any of the risk categories will not be at risk of persecution unless he
    or she is likely to come to the attention of the DRC  authorities  upon
    return. Thus in every case there will be an intense  focus  on  matters
    such as publicity, individual prominence, possession of a passport, the
    standard ETD arrangements where they apply and how these matters impact
    upon the individual claimant. We emphasise that this is not intended to
    operate as an exhaustive list."

16. The application of this guidance is linked with  the  second  ground  of
   appeal. Mr Mills produced counsel's notes of the hearing and  the  record
   of proceedings indicates that the General Secretary of the HCCR gave oral
   evidence. Ms Fijiwala accepted that the General Secretary did  give  oral
   evidence at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, however she  submitted  that
   the Judge's error in relation to this matter is not material  given  that
   the Judge considered other evidence and that  there  was  no  independent
   evidence about the HCCR. However the First-tier Tribunal Judge identified
   the profile of the HCCR as providing the context for the appellant's  own
   profile [23] and went on to rely on the lack of profile of  the  HCCR  in
   finding that the appellant himself has  no  genuine  opposition  profile.
   Whilst the Judge did briefly consider the expert's  report  at  paragraph
   25, I cannot  be  sure  that  the  Judge  would  have  reached  the  same
   conclusion on the basis of this evidence had he properly  considered  the
   evidence of the General Secretary. This is because a main basis for  this
   finding was the fact that the General  Secretary  of  the  HCCR  was  not
   called to give evidence and be cross-examined as to the standing  of  the
   organisation [24].

17. In these circumstances I find that the Judge's mistake as  to  the  lack
   of oral evidence from the HCCR General Secretary undermines his  findings
   as to the organisation and the appellant's profile. Sustainable  findings
   on these matters are crucial to the likelihood of the appellant coming to
   the attention of the authorities of the DRC and the assessment of risk on
   return as set out in BM2. I therefore set aside all of  the  findings  of
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

18. The decision in this appeal should be remade by consideration of all  of
   the evidence with reference to the guidance given by the  Upper  Tribunal
   in BM1 and BM2.

19. In light of the issues with the Judge's findings  I  am  satisfied  that
   none of the findings can stand. I am satisfied that the appellant has not
   therefore had his case properly considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   The parties were in agreement with my view that the nature and extent  of
   the judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the decision to
   be remade is such that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule
   2 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to  remit
   the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed      Date: 10 November 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed      Date: 10 November 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

