
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11330/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 21 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Warnapala &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of  Immigration  Judge  Eldridge
    given on 2 April of this year  whereby  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  in  December  of
    2014 refusing his claim for asylum.

2.   The appellant arrived in this country in 2009 having  fled  Afghanistan
    because he said his father, who was a local commander of  the  Taliban,
    had tried to compel him  to  become  a  suicide  bomber  following  the
    example of his older brother, who had in fact been killed in a  suicide
    attack.  He refused to comply with his father's  wishes  and  with  the
    assistance of an uncle (Mr D) he managed to escape.  Shortly after  his
    arrival he claimed asylum.  The initial decision was to  refuse  asylum
    but, because  he  was  only  14  years  old,  was  given  three  years'
    discretionary leave as was the practice in force  at  that  time.  When
    that period of leave expired in December of  2012  he  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his asylum claim.

3.   The Secretary of State took what we regret  to  say  is  so  often  the
    usual failure to deal with the matter in  time.   This  necessitated  a
    claim for judicial review which was compromised on the basis  that  the
    Secretary of State agreed to make a decision within  three  months  and
    did so in December of 2014.

4.   In that decision the Secretary of State did not accept the  appellant's
    account that his father had attempted to force him to become a  suicide
    bomber.  There were one or two discrepancies which were pointed out and
    relied on but that conclusion essentially meant that the  asylum  claim
    was rejected.

5.   The Immigration Judge on the appeal heard  the  appellant  and  clearly
    was very impressed by the appellant as a  witness  and  essentially  he
    concluded that the witness' claim as to what had led to his fleeing the
    country was correct.  He had given, as the judge indicated,  a  broadly
    consistent account throughout as a witness and essentially he concluded
    that the witness's claim as to what had led to his fleeing the  country
    was correct.  The judge found that  the  appellant  indicated  when  he
    could not be sure about issues because information about his father and
    his brother had to a considerable extent been relayed to him  from  his
    mother, and that this was not unexpected since he was still very  young
    when all this was happening.

6.   There was a significant letter before the First-tier  Tribunal  from  a
    Mr A and it explains that Mr A had had  contact  with  the  appellant's
    uncle (Mr D) and produced various documentary evidence  in  support  of
    the travel arrangements that Mr A had  made;  in  evidence  before  the
    Immigration Judge was also an email from the appellant's uncle  (Mr  D)
    and the statement of Mr A which indicated that the  appellant's  father
    had obviously formed the view that the  appellant  was  in  essence  an
    enemy of the Taliban and had tried to get in touch with him  or  rather
    to find out where he was and had circulated a photograph of him.   This
    of course was highly significant evidence in the context of considering
    the possibility of safety through internal  relocation  because  having
    accepted his account of the reasons why he had  left  the  country  the
    Immigration Judge took the view that it would  be  unsafe  for  him  to
    return to his home area, which is we gather some  thirty  miles  or  so
    from Kabul.

7.   That being so the  only  question  so  far  as  the  asylum  claim  was
    concerned was whether internal relocation was a reasonable possibility.
     The Immigration Judge referred to a quotation which  was  said  to  be
    included in the respondent's Operational Guidance Note of February 2015
    at paragraph 2.4.2 from an EASO report which stated, and we quote:

         "If a low profile person quits his activity and can flee  the  area
         and resettle in a safer area, such as Kabul  City,  Mazar  City  or
         Herat City, he can normally escape targeting by insurgents,  unless
         there are specific individual circumstances  which  would  preclude
         this possibility."

8.   We should say that it has not been possible  to  locate  the  quotation
    from the EASO report in Section 2.4.2 nor has it been possible to  find
    that quotation anywhere in the Guidance Note.   However,  perhaps  that
    matters not because it must be clear that that  particular  observation
    cannot assist the contention that this  was  a  proper  case  in  which
    internal relocation could provide safety.  We say  that  because  there
    are clearly specific individual circumstances in this case, namely  the
    fact that it has been accepted that his father has in essence  regarded
    him now as an enemy of the Taliban because of his refusal to follow the
    wishes of his father and his father is an  influential  member  of  the
    Taliban.  That being so, he  cannot  be  regarded  simply  as  a  "low-
    profile" person.

9.   The Immigration Judge went on to say that he did not  accept  that  the
    father had as he put it 'reach into Kabul', and also that the appellant
    had an uncle there who was concerned for him and had  assisted  him  in
    the past and could do so if  he  were  to  internally  relocate  there.
    Clearly the judge accepted the uncle was not suspected by the father of
    having assisted in the appellant's escape from Afghanistan.  If he  had
    there can be little doubt that he would have taken some action  against
    the appellant's uncle.  Thus, to expect the appellant to return and  be
    looked  after  by  his  uncle  in  Kabul  is  unrealistic  in  all  the
    circumstances as it would have created a real risk  of  danger  to  the
    uncle.

10.  Further, and most importantly, it is  not  a  question  of  the  father
    having a 'reach into Kabul'; it is a question of in  the  circumstances
    whether, having regard to the view that he is effectively an  enemy  of
    the Taliban put forward by his father, the Taliban would,  if  it  were
    known he was  back  in  Afghanistan,  attempt  to  find  him  and  take
    persecutory action against him of one sort or another.

11.  In our judgment in all the circumstances and  on  the  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that risk clearly exists, and that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  therefore  erred  in  law  in  finding  otherwise.  The
    Immigration Judge did not deal with the matter  on  that  wider  basis,
    namely a threat from the Taliban as opposed  to  an  individual  threat
    from the appellant's father, and that does affect in our  judgment  the
    possibility of relocation and the consideration as to  whether  in  all
    the circumstances it would be reasonable for relocation to be expected.

12.  There are of course the added elements that the appellant has now  been
    in this country since he was 14 years old and established a significant
    private life in  this  country.  As  the  Immigration  Judge  noted  in
    considering  the  Article  8  ECHR  element,  he  has   established   a
    considerable private life here; he had grown up and  been  educated  in
    this country; he has not been here without leave  or  in  a  precarious
    state; he speaks excellent English and works hard at his studies; he is
    not yet financially independent and at 19 is unlikely to  be  for  some
    time; and if he went back would be returned to a  country  he  has  not
    known for six years and to a city in which he has never  lived  because
    he cannot return to his home area.  Those observations, as we say, were
    in connection with the Article 8 aspect but they are of course material
    when  one  considers  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  in  all   the
    circumstances to expect him to go  back  to  Afghanistan  and  relocate
    there. There is also  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  ill-health  (he
    suffers from hepatitis B) which the First-tier Tribunal failed to place
    in the balance in relation  to  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  or
    Article 8 ECHR.  The reality is, however, that we take  the  view  that
    there is a real risk of serious harm  to  this  appellant  anywhere  in
    Afghanistan in all the circumstances of this case.  That being  so,  we
    would allow the appeal on that ground.

12.  In the circumstances it is in our view not necessary  to  consider  the
    details of the Article 8 ground.  That of course would only arise as an
    independent basis for allowing the appellant to remain if it  was  safe
    for him to return to Afghanistan.  But as we have decided clearly  that
    it would not be safe and that relocation is not in the circumstances of
    this  case  a  reasonable  possibility  for  this  appellant  we   will
    accordingly allow this appeal and direct that the appellant be  granted
    leave to remain on the basis that he is a refugee from Afghanistan.

Notice of Decision

      1. The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors on a
         point of law.

      2. The appeal is remade allowing the asylum appeal on the  basis  that
         the appellant is entitled to refugee status, and  on  human  rights
         grounds for the same reasons.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]
Signed   Date 21st July 2015

pp Mr Justice Collins

