

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11131/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th October 2013                          |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 HAIDI AMINI
                        (No anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Soltani of Iris Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On 1st August 2013 it was conceded by the Secretary of  State  that
        the First-tier Tribunal determination contained  legal  errors  and
        was set aside. The Appellant's immigration history is  a  preserved
        finding.


     2. The Appellant is said to have converted to Christianity.  In  light
        of the decision in NM (Christian Converts)  Afghanistan  CG  [2009]
        UKAIT 00045 it was agreed this element  of  the  claim  was  to  be
        considered first for if he was found to be a genuine  convert,  the
        appeal must be allowed.



Discussion



     3. The Appellant is an Afghan national of Hazara ethnicity born on the
        1st January 1989. In his witness statement dated 2nd  May  2013  he
        sets out details of his conversion from Islam to  Christianity  and
        continued attendance at Elim  Pentecostal  Church.   The  Appellant
        stated he first discovered Christianity in  2010  when  a  man  and
        woman knocked on his door and spoke to him. He  then  attended  the
        Elim Pentecostal Church from  August  2010,  following  a  move  to
        Huddersfield, and has continued to do so since. He attends services
        on Sunday, was baptised on the 9th January 2011,  and  explains  to
        his friends how he feels his life has changed through  his  finding
        Jesus and God and through his faith. The Appellant also started the
        World of Life Bible correspondence distance learning course in 2013
        to help him understand more about the bible and the Christian faith
        in his own language.


     4. The Appellant is supported by two representatives of the Church who
        attended to give oral evidence.  The Reverend Peter Hannam filed  a
        statement [A's bundle pages 13-17] dated 12th March 2011  in  which
        he explains that although he retired from the  position  of  Senior
        Pastor of the church, in April 2011, he has known the appellant for
        about three years as he baptised him.   Prior  to  the  baptism  he
        interviewed him to satisfy himself of the reality of the conversion
        to Christianity and also wrote a letter  in  support,  dated  March
        2011, in  which  he  confirmed  he  had  no  reason  to  doubt  the
        genuineness of his  Christian  faith;  which  he  confirms  in  his
        statement is still his position.  He has seen the appellant  attend
        church  on  several  occasions  and  has  had  brief   and   simple
        conversations to satisfy himself  that  he  is  continuing  in  the
        Christian life. In paragraph 17 and 18 Reverend Hannam concludes:


              17. In conclusion I wish to state that  I  believe  that  Hadi
   Amini is a                       genuine convert to the Christian  faith.
   He meets together with other                  Christians whenever he gets
   the opportunity and he evangelises                 when he  meets  people
   with whom he can easily communicate. I                  believe  that  he
   would    be    in    danger    were    he    to    be     deported     to
   Afghanistan or to  Iran  where  he  spent  some  time  before  coming  to
     England. Hadi has a desire to pursue his faith in this country  without
              fear or persecution and I  would  strongly  urge  that  he  be
   permitted to                 stay here and worship freely as he desires.


              18. I am unable to give an up-to-date account of Hadi's church
                       attendance or  the  way  in  which  he  is  currently
   practising his faith.  I                  have not seen him since January
   of this year when I  gave  evidence  on                his  behalf  at  a
   tribunal.    That   is   because   I   have   not   attended   the   Elim
   Church  in  Huddersfield  since  that  time.   In   retirement   I   have
     preached in many different places (in this country and  abroad)  but  I
          also felt that it was  necessary  for  me  to  withdraw  from  the
          Huddersfield church in order to make it easier for my successor as
                  senior pastor to establish himself in the position.  I  am
   sure  that                     others   can   verify   Hadi's   continued
   practising of his faith.




     5. The second witness from the church is a Mr Peter Bell who describes
        himself as a Social Action Deacon.  He  states  he  has  known  the
        Appellant personally  since  2010  when  he  attended  a  Christian
        service.  Mr Bell notes that the Appellant initially told him  that
        two English people spoke to him about Christianity in English  when
        they knocked on his door,  who  Mr  Bell  believes  may  have  been
        Jehovah's Witnesses. He confirms the Appellant was baptised on  9th
        January 2011, which he attended, and of additional work  undertaken
        by the Appellant to  expand  his  understanding  of  the  Christian
        faith.  On 15th September 2013  the  Appellant  introduced  him  to
        another Afghan Muslim friend who he said he  had  spoken  to  about
        Jesus to enable Mr Bell to explore the Gospel with this  individual
        and to pray for him. In paragraphs 10 and 11 of his statement  [A's
        supplementary bundle, p. 3] Mr Bell states:


              10. I have come across people who have had an ulterior  motive
   to be               seen as a Christian before, but I do not believe that
   Hadi to be one of                these people. He believes that he has  a
   new life by  knowing  and                    trusting  in  Jesus  as  his
   saviour and the Son of God.


              11. I believe that Hadi would not be accepted  in  Afghanistan
   where he                was born because of his new faith in Jesus, but I
   am also sure that                Hadi loves Jesus and that  he  would  be
   prepared to suffer because of                 his new faith.   I  believe
   that Hadi should be given the opportunity to                live in  this
   country   and   be   given   the   freedom   to   express    his    faith
   without fear of death, torture or persecution.


     6. Additional documentary  evidence  includes  a  letter  from  a  Mrs
        Jessica  Davies  [A's  bundle,  20-21]  confirming   his   baptism,
        attendance at OpenWORD Bible and English classes, and attendance at
        weekly services, a Baptism Certificate dated 9th January 2011 [22],
         and country material.


     7. There was no challenge to the credibility of Mr Hannam or  Mr  Bell
        and I am satisfied that I  can  put  appropriate  weight  on  their
        statements reflecting not only the Appellant's  regular  attendance
        at church since 2010, but also their genuinely held belief that  he
        is a genuine convert.  Whilst I cannot look into the  soul  of  the
        appellant, having considered the available evidence, I find to  the
        lower standard applicable to appeals of this  nature  that  he  has
        substantiated his claim to have converted to Christianity and to be
        a genuine convert.


     8.  In  NM,  the  Tribunal  held  that  an  Afghan  claimant  who  can
        demonstrate that he has genuinely converted  to  Christianity  from
        Islam is likely to be able to show that  he  is  at  real  risk  of
        serious ill-treatment amounting to persecution or a breach  of  his
        Article 3 ECHR right on return  to  Afghanistan.  It  was  accepted
        before me that in light of NM the Appellant faces a  real  risk  of
        persecution by reason of his new  religion  and  perception  as  an
        apostate  in  Islam,  such  as  to  entitle  him  to  a  grant   of
        international protection as a refugee.


Decision

     9. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 14th October 2013












