
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11012/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th October 2015                 |On 3rd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     EBE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 9th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M  Lewis  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Hague in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds  but  allowed  it  on  human
    rights grounds under the Immigration Rules against the decision of  the
    respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human  rights  protection
    to the appellant, an adult female citizen of Cameroon whose  minor  son
    is a dependant in the appeal.

 3. At the initial hearing of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal on 19th May
    2015, I reached  the  conclusion  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Hague
    contained an error on a point of law in relation to  the  human  rights
    issues for the reasons which I quote, below:
         "Error on a Point of Law
         3.   The grounds of application are  brief  and  contend  that  the
             judge made a material misdirection of law  when  applying  the
             requirements of Appendix FM paragraph EX.1.  That  is  because
             the judge appeared to have overlooked the requirements set out
             in EX.1.(a)(ii) which required consideration of whether or not
             it would be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  child  to
             leave the United Kingdom.
          4. Permission was granted on the basis that, whilst the judge had
             comprehensively rejected the evidence  of  the  appellant  and
             dismissed the asylum appeal, he was arguably  wrong  to  allow
             the  appeal  under  paragraph  EX.1  without  considering  the
             reasonableness test which the paragraph contains.
          5. At the hearing the appellant was unrepresented.   I  therefore
             spent  some  time  explaining  to  her  the  nature   of   the
             application particularly the need for me to  consider,  first,
             whether or not the decision of the First-tier  Judge  actually
             showed an error on a point of law.  I also made  it  clear  to
             the appellant that the grounds of  application  did  not  take
             issue with the judge's adverse credibility  findings  and  his
             conclusion that the appellant was not a refugee or entitled to
             humanitarian protection.  The  appellant  indicated  that  she
             understood my explanation.  The appellant also indicated to me
             that, if the issue relating to her human rights claim were  to
             give rise to a further hearing, she would  wish  to  call  the
             British father of her child, SE, as a witness, although he was
             not with her at the hearing before me.
          6. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the  respondent  relied  upon  the
             grounds.  She also indicated that, if an error on a  point  of
             law was found, then it would be appropriate for the matter  to
             continue to be heard in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  limited
             human rights issue involved.
          7. After I had  considered  the  matter  for  a  few  moments,  I
             announced that I was satisfied that  the  decision  showed  an
             error on a point of law in relation to the human rights  claim
             although I also indicated that the judge's decision to dismiss
             the asylum and humanitarian protection claims should stand.  I
             now give my reasons for that conclusion.
          8. The judge's consideration of paragraph EX.1. in Appendix FM of
             the Immigration Rules  is  brief.   In  paragraph  17  of  the
             decision he simply finds that, as the appellant is the primary
             carer for her son who is a British citizen,  the  requirements
             set out in paragraph EX.1.(a) had been met and that aspect  of
             the appeal could be allowed.   That  conclusion  is  in  error
             because the judge fails to  give  any  consideration  to  sub-
             paragraph (a)(ii) which requires  that  not  only  should  the
             applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child who is a British citizen in the UK  but  that  it
             would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
             United  Kingdom.   The  judge's  failure  to   consider   that
             requirement amounts to an error on a point of  law  such  that
             the decision should be re-made in  relation  to  human  rights
             issues only.  The decision  in  relation  to  the  asylum  and
             humanitarian protection claim can stand."





Resumed Hearing

 4. At the resumed hearing the  appellant  was  again  unrepresented  so  I
    explained to her the nature of the proceedings and  the  limitation  to
    human rights issues.  I also assisted her to give  evidence  by  asking
    her questions about the relevant issue including,  in  particular,  her
    relationship with her son, EE, born on 27th August 2011 and his father,
    SE.

 5. The appellant indicated to me that the father  of  her  child  was  not
    present to give evidence at the hearing.  I therefore asked her if  she
    wished to apply for an adjournment but she indicated that she wished to
    proceed with the hearing in any event.   Mr  McVeety  helpfully  agreed
    that he would not object to me taking into consideration  the  evidence
    given by SE  which  is  summarised  in  the  decision  of  Judge  Hague
    particularly at paragraph 16.

 6. The appellant then gave evidence with my assistance.  She adopted those
    parts of her statement dated  21st  March  2014  which  relate  to  her
    relationship with the father of her child and also her conviction  when
    sentenced to ten months' imprisonment whilst pregnant with SE's  child.
    She was released from prison on  5th  July  2011  following  which  she
    claimed asylum.

 7. In oral evidence before me the appellant stated  that  she  met  SE  in
    about 2009 when she had been in the United Kingdom  since  March  2005.
    At the time of meeting  SE  she  had  no  status.   They  ceased  their
    relationship when she was two and a half months' pregnant with her  son
    although SE then came back to see her  after  the  birth.  SE  had  not
    wanted her to have the child. She claimed that SE paid �100  per  month
    into her son's Lloyds bank account or paid it in cash when  he  is  the
    country.  However,  she  had  no  evidence  with  her  to  confirm  the
    payments.

 8. The appellant states that her son is now 4 years of age and attends  St
    James' Infant School reception class in Derby.  She showed me a copy of
    her son's passport to confirm that he is a British citizen.

 9. As to her own background, the appellant said that she had left Cameroon
    in 2001 to go to Holland and then came to the United Kingdom  in  2005.
    Both her parents are dead but she has cousins in Cameroon to  whom  she
    speaks on the phone.  They live in Buea which is close to the  city  of
    Douala.  When in Cameroon she worked on a farm with her  parents  after
    she had finished school at the age of 18.  Her brother lives in Holland
    and he is married.

10. She claimed that she could not return to Cameroon with her son  because
    the latter is close to his father who gives him "benefits".  However SE
    says  he  cannot  look  after  his  son  because  of  his  own   family
    commitments.  The appellant said that SE now lives with another son who
    is attending Coventry University.  He is not married to the  mother  of
    that child.  The appellant emphasised that she did not  know  what  she
    would do if she returned.

11. In cross-examination it was put to the appellant that SE was  receiving
    tax credits for the appellant's son and questioned how he could receive
    these when he was not living with his son. The appellant conceded  that
    she did not tell the tax authorities about this and had no idea what SE
    had told them.  She said that he obtains the  child  benefit  and  then
    gives it to her son.  She then pointed out that payments had only  been
    made for a year after her son became 3 years of age.

12. The appellant agreed that her son was still in good health.   She  said
    that she was from the English speaking part of  Cameroon  as  were  her
    cousins and that she had no other family in the  United  Kingdom.   She
    confirmed that SE had a son in Cameroon and that  he  travels  to  that
    country often.  He was not involved in taking the  appellant's  son  to
    school or to meet appointments.  However he did sometimes stay  at  his
    father's house at weekends.

Submissions

13. Mr McVeety indicated that the main issue was that arising under section
    EX at paragraph EX.1.(a)(ii) namely, that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom with her.  The
    same test arises under Section 117B(6)(b) of the  2002  Act.   He  also
    argued that the respondent's obligations to have  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the child in accordance with the provisions of Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 could  be  covered
    by the consideration of Article 8 issues  in  general.   These  matters
    were not covered in detail  in  the  respondent's  refusal  dated  28th
    November 2013 because, at that stage, the  child's  parentage  had  not
    been established because the  appellant  previously  claimed  that  the
    father of her child was a French national.

14. Mr McVeety drew attention to the appellant's poor  immigration  history
    reminding me that she had received a ten month prison sentence for  the
    use of false EEA documents.  He strongly argued that the best interests
    of the appellant's child were to be with its  mother.   There  were  no
    medical issues to consider and the appellant's asylum and  humanitarian
    protection appeals had been dismissed.  He also questioned whether  the
    appellant had only the limited family members living in  Cameroon  when
    her credibility, generally,  had  been  shown  to  be  in  issue.   The
    appellant had worked in the United Kingdom illegally without any status
    and only claimed asylum when she was about to be released from  prison.
    He argued that the father of the  appellant's  child  had,  apparently,
    only recently claimed child benefit when the child was not living  with
    him and had not attended the hearing to give evidence  as  anticipated.
    He also pointed out that, if the appellant were to return  voluntarily,
    she could obtain assistance to do so.

15. The appellant emphasised that she would not have anywhere  to  live  if
    she returned to Cameroon and thought it would be  better  if  she  were
    sent to Holland where her brother lives.  She  believed  that  her  son
    would be at risk if returned to Cameroon  as  she  would  be  a  single
    mother.  He would also have lost his relationship with his father.  She
    explained that she had been told by SE that he would try to attend  the
    hearing but she thought he might be working.

Decision and Reasons

16. Only human rights issues arise for  my  consideration  because  I  have
    already decided that the findings of the First-tier Judge  in  relation
    to the appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claims can stand.

17. In reaching conclusions about the human rights claim which involves, as
    a primary consideration, the best interests of the appellant's child as
    well  as  the  interests  of  the  appellant,  I  have  regard  to  the
    conclusions of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA
    Civ 387. That decision requires me to consider Article 8 matters  under
    the Rules first and only  to  move  to  consideration  of  such  issues
    outside  the  Rules  where  there   are   compelling   or   exceptional
    circumstances which lead me to conclude that there is a  "gap"  between
    the Rules and Article 8 and that this is a case outside  the  class  of
    cases which the Rules properly provide for.

18. The respondent has helpfully conceded  that  the  main  issue  in  this
    appeal is that raised in section EX.1 on the basis that it is  accepted
    that the appellant's child is a British citizen.  That issue is whether
    or not it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's child to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  I am satisfied, for the reasons which now  follow,
    that it would be reasonable.

19. Case law makes it clear that, normally, it is in the best interests  of
    children to be with their parents  (Azimi-Moayed  (Decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC). Also, in LD (Article 8
    - best interests of child) [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal
    stated that weighty reasons would be required to justify  separating  a
    parent from a lawfully settled minor child  and  from  a  community  in
    which he or she had grown up and lived for most of  his  or  her  life.
    However,  in  this  case,  the  respondent's  suggestion  is  that  the
    appellant should go with her British son to  Cameroon  thus  separating
    the child from its father. For the reasons which follow, I have reached
    the conclusion that it is in the child's best interests to go with  his
    mother to Cameroon and it is reasonable to expect this to  happen  even
    if it means separation from the child's father.

20. The First-tier Judge  heard  evidence  from  SE,  who  originates  from
    Cameroon, to confirm that he has a 20 year old son in Cameroon  who  is
    visited by SE in that country on a frequent basis. There is, therefore,
    the possibility that he can also visit his son,  EE,  in  the  country.
    However, whilst I accept that  SE  maintains  an  interest  in  EE  the
    evidence does not suggest that there is a strong  relationship  between
    them or that he would follow up any opportunity to see EE in  Cameroon.
    SE leaves the UK for lengthy periods of time because of  his  work  for
    Oxfam and has other family commitments.  He is said to be  living  with
    another son who currently attends  Coventry  University.   SE  was  not
    enthusiastic about the appellant having a child in the first place and,
    at  the  time  of  the  First-tier  hearing,  he  was  not  paying  any
    maintenance and now only makes payments for the  child's  benefit  from
    child allowance which he arguably should not  receive.   This  evidence
    does not enable me to conclude that SE has a  significant  interest  in
    the appellant's son such that the child should  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom so that he can maintain what  I  have  concluded  is  a  casual
    relationship. SE has not attended to give evidence which might displace
    my conclusions.

21. It is also evident that the appellant's son has only  recently  started
    school in the United Kingdom in a reception class so is not at a  stage
    in his upbringing where he has formed strong relationships and would be
    unable to settle into Cameroon with his mother.  Although the appellant
    claims that she cannot return to  Cameroon  she  stated  that  she  has
    relatives living there even if her parents have died.  She lives in the
    English speaking part of the country so there  will  be  little  or  no
    difficulty with communication for either her or her child.  No evidence
    has been put before me  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  cannot  take
    advantage of an assistance package to return to  her  home  country  or
    that her relatives there cannot assist her.  She has suggested that  it
    would be better if she were able to go to  Holland  where  her  brother
    lives but I cannot assume that she has any entitlement to  go  to  that
    country.

22. In all the circumstances I  reach  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's child to go with her to  Cameroon.
    Thus, the provisions of the Immigration Rules,  particularly  those  in
    section EX cannot avail the appellant.

23. I have considered whether there might be any compelling or  exceptional
    circumstances which mean that I should  consider  human  rights  issues
    outside the Rules.  I am not satisfied that the circumstances  which  I
    have already highlighted and, in particular, the  relationship  between
    the appellant's son and his father, can give rise to  consideration  of
    human rights issues outside the Rules.  All the relevant factors  have,
    I conclude, been considered in my examination  of  whether  or  not  it
    would be reasonable to expect the appellant's child to go with  her  to
    Cameroon.  The fact that the appellant's child  is  a  British  citizen
    does not, of itself, mean that the child should remain with its  mother
    in the United Kingdom.  Section 117B of the 2002  Act  makes  it  clear
    that  the  public  interest  in  removal  remains  where,  despite  the
    existence of a genuine and a subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, it would be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  I have already examined that test and  found  that
    it cannot benefit either the appellant or her child.  In reaching  that
    conclusion I also have to bear in mind that the appellant  has  a  very
    poor immigration history which has involved imprisonment for the use of
    false identity and that any private life, in addition to  family  life,
    established in the United Kingdom has been when her immigration  status
    is clearly precarious.  Thus, even if I were  to  consider  the  issues
    outside the rules, taking the best interests of the  appellant's  child
    as a primary consideration, I would be  unable  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent's decision is disproportionate.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian and human rights grounds.

Anonymity

As this appeal involves the interests of a young child I make the  following
anonymity direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
