
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11611/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th August 2015                  |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                     rKH
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Davison of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 19th September 1994 is a citizen  of  Iran.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Davison of Counsel.  The Respondent was
    represented by Mr Tarlow a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on  7th  December  2010
    and claimed asylum.  His asylum claim was refused by the Respondent  on
    1st April 2011 but the Appellant was granted discretionary leave  until
    19th March 2012 based upon his age.  The Appellant had then submitted a
    further application for leave on 5th March 2012  which  had  also  been
    refused by the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman sitting at Hatton Cross on 7th  April
    2015.  The judge had allowed the Appellant's  asylum  appeal  and  also
    allowed his appeal under the protected rights of the ECHR.

 4. The Respondent had filed application for permission to appeal  on  22nd
    April 2015.  Permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heynes on 8th May 2015 on the basis  as  claimed  within
    the Respondent's application that it was arguable the judge  had  erred
    to address country guidance or to support findings about risk on return
    with adequate reasoning.

 5. Directions had been set  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  firstly  to  decide
    whether an error of law had been made or  not  in  this  case  and  the
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6. Mr Tarlow referred  to  the  Respondent's  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  in
    particular noted that the judge had made no reference  to  the  country
    guidance case of SB [2009] which was significant in this case.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 7. Mr Davison submitted that the question of  military  service  had  been
    raised in the skeleton argument although conceded it was not  a  matter
    raised by the Appellant.  It was said that the judge in  particular  at
    paragraph 82 had looked at the risks on return and  that  the  findings
    made were findings that were open to the judge.  It  was  further  said
    that the  judge  had  considered  more  up-to-date  information  within
    country material than would have been available in the case of SB.

 8. In response Mr Tarlow submitted that if the judge was intending to move
    away from established country guidance case then he needed  to  provide
    reasons for such and none have been given.

 9. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and the submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

10. The Appellant had been accepted as an Iranian Kurd who was a minor when
    he claimed asylum in the UK.  His claim had been refused  by  the  Home
    Office but because of his  age  he  had  been  granted  twelve  months'
    discretionary leave.  His  further  application  for  leave  on  asylum
    grounds had been refused.

11. The judge had noted that the Appellant's claim to have left Iran out of
    a fear of persecution was  limited  to  a  single  incident  where  the
    Appellant claimed he was approached in his home village by  members  of
    Etelaat who wished him to essentially become a spy but his  mother  had
    forbad him so to do and he had fled because he feared the consequences.
     The Respondent had  for  a  number  of  reasons  provided  within  the
    original refusal letter  of  1st  April  2011,  taken  issue  with  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account.  It was further noted that  the
    solicitors' letter sent with the further application merely  reiterated
    the fear based upon  that  sole  feature  already  considered  and  the
    generalised suggestion that the Appellant would face discrimination for
    being a Kurd.  There had been no further evidence submitted.

12. The judge did not deal with the issue of credibility  or  otherwise  of
    the Appellant's account even though that had plainly been challenged by
    the Respondent.  The judge noted that given there was no evidence other
    than the evidence from  the  Appellant  and  the  challenges  from  the
    Respondent it  was  extremely  difficult  to  decide  between  the  two
    positions (paragraph 80).  That may have been the  case.   However  the
    lack of corroborative evidence is far from unusual in asylum cases  and
    it was incumbent upon the judge to deal with issues of  credibility  in
    the circumstances of this case.  He did not  do  so  and  that  failure
    amounts to an error of law.

13. That error may not necessarily have been material given that the  judge
    noted the following at paragraph 86:

         "Even if the Appellant was approached by the security  services  as
         he claimed there is in my view not the slightest chance  that  that
         will be a relevant  factor  on  his  return.   A  brief  couple  of
         conversations with a 16 year old  boy  in  a  remote  and  secluded
         village of no more than 100 households, that took place  well  over
         four years ago stands not  the  slightest  chance  of  having  been
         recorded or noted in any way.  The individuals concerned would have
         no doubt just moved on to try to influence someone else."

14. At paragraph 81 the judge concluded that whether the incident  occurred
    or not: "I do not believe it creates any  risk  for  the  Appellant  on
    return".

15. The judge however then looked at risk on return and concluded there was
    such a risk to the Appellant based  on  presumably  cumulative  factors
    outlined by him at paragraph 82 namely:

    (a)  Leaving Iran illegally.

    (b)  Leaving at an age where military service was pending.

    (c)  Kurdish ethnicity.

    (d)  Would be regarded because of his Kurdish ethnicity as someone with
         anti-Government sympathies.

16. The judge did not provide reasons why "There seems little doubt he left
    Iran illegally".  He had made no findings on credibility in respect  of
    claimed circumstances in Iran which may have led to  a  presumption  or
    conclusion one way  or  the  other  in  terms  of  exit.   Further  the
    circumstances of his claimed journey to the UK  had  additionally  been
    challenged by the Respondent.

17. Finally the Appellant's skeleton argument at paragraph 27  acknowledged
    that Iranian male citizens who had not turned 17 did have permission to
    leave the country.  The Appellant claimed (and it was  not  challenged)
    that he was only 16 when he had left.  It was  incumbent  therefore  in
    all of those circumstances for the judge to provide some  reasoning  as
    to why he concluded that there was little doubt the Appellant had  left
    illegally.

18. The question of evasion of military service was  never  raised  by  the
    Appellant nor by his representatives in their covering letter with  the
    second application.  Indeed the only  submission  to  that  effect  was
    within the Appellant's skeleton argument and  seemingly  at  odds  with
    their own reference from country material referred to above.  Again the
    judge needed to explain how the Appellant would be at risk  because  he
    would be perceived as having evaded military service.

19. In terms of the Appellant's ethnicity (and Sunni religion) whilst  that
    was not in issue the judge again failed  to  provide  reasons  why  the
    Appellant would face persecutory treatment  or  be  regarded  as  anti-
    Government  simply  for  being  Kurdish  particularly  given  that  the
    representatives themselves had put this aspect of the claim  no  higher
    than "discriminatory".

20. In terms of the risk on return  for  those  identifiable  features  the
    judge had referred himself to background material.  He  had  stated  at
    paragraph 84 that  the  material  provided  instances  of  cases  where
    individuals were detained whilst their background was checked  and  "It
    is impossible to discount the possibility of ill-treatment during  such
    enquiries".  He further concluded that because of the factors  referred
    to above the reasonable likelihood of ill-treatment or  prosecution  in
    one form or another could not be excluded.

21. Firstly as identified above the judge had not provided any  credibility
    findings or adequately explained why he found  all  the  above  factors
    were present.

22. Secondly the background material he referred to was  largely  concerned
    with those who had a profile or visibility.

23. Thirdly he appears to place the test  of  reasonable  likelihood  in  a
    negative way rather than applying the correct burden  and  standard  of
    proof.

24. Finally the judge made no reference to the country guidance case of  SB
    Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.

25. Whilst he was looking at material postdating that decision he does  not
    identify whether circumstances had worsened since 2009  to  the  extent
    that he should depart from the country guidance case nor  provides  any
    other reason for departing from the case.  SB was promulgated following
    recent elections in Iran and a crackdown on dissidents.  It was further
    noted at headnote (ii) that Iranians facing enforced return do  not  in
    general face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment, even if  they
    left illegally.  Having exited Iran illegally is not a significant risk
    factor although if it is the case that a person would face difficulties
    with the authorities for other reasons such a history could be a factor
    adding to the level of  difficulty.   As  noted  above  the  judge  had
    discounted in its entirety the Appellant would face any  risk  for  his
    alleged reason for having fled the country  in  the  first  place.   In
    respect of the other features he raised the judge provided little or no
    reasoning for relying upon those factors to  the  point  of  suggesting
    that they provided "significant difficulties".

26. For all the above reasons the judge's reasoning on the question of risk
    on return was inadequate and flawed and amounted to a material error of
    law.

Decision

27. There was a material error of law made by the judge in this  case  such
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be set aside  and
    that decision remade.

28. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
