
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/11551/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 3 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR ANTOINE KABEMBE MUKALA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tom Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Alasdair Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Sols. LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Buckwell)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on  10  December  2014  to
    deport the respondent from the UK and to refuse his  asylum  and  human
    rights applications.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of the DRC born in 1974. He  was  convicted
    on 18 November 2011  at  Canterbury  Crown  Court  for  possession  and
    control of identity documents with  intent  and  was  sentenced  to  15
    months imprisonment. He previously entered the UK in November 2007 with
    a Belgian passport that was not his.  He  was  sentenced  to  9  months
    imprisonment at Horseferry Road Magistrates' Court on 18  January  2008
    for bring in possession of a false instrument.  The  first  deportation
    order was made on 10 July 2013 but that  was  withdrawn  on  8  January
    2014. A second deportation order was made  on  2  March  2014  but  was
    withdrawn on 10 September 2014. The third deportation order was made on
    10 December 2014.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality  but  concluded  that  in  light  of  his  offending   that
    deportation was appropriate. The  respondent's  partner  suffered  from
    major depressive disorder and  dissociative  disorder  and  was  almost
    totally dependent upon the respondent but she might recover  and  would
    have access to public services to support her. The removal decision was
    not disproportionate.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 15 June 2015. He was  represented  by  Mr  P
    Haywood, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent was
    a credible witness and the medical evidence in relation to his  partner
    was unchallenged. The partner was not capable of acting as a carer  for
    her children because of her illness. There could  be  an  even  greater
    deterioration  in  her  health  if  the  respondent  was  removed.  The
    respondent also had  a  productive,  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with I, the partner's  young  teenager  son.   There  were
    likely to be potential savings to the public  purse  if  the  continued
    presence of the respondent was allowed. There was a risk that  I  would
    be taken into care at vast public expense if the home support and  care
    for him was judged to be inadequate.  The  continued  presence  of  the
    respondent was very positive for I. It would  be  detrimental  for  his
    interests to have to take care of his mother.

 6. The respondent's  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds but allowed on human rights grounds under  paragraph
    399 of the Immigration Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    because the analysis of undue hardship  did  not  balance  the  adverse
    impact of the respondent's offending with the  adverse  impact  on  his
    family or consider the potential mitigation of the adverse  effects  by
    state services and a more detailed assessment  of  the  effect  on  the
    partner's children was required.  The  entire  family  appeared  to  be
    dependent upon public funds and  the  assessment  of  the  respondent's
    ability to support himself in the UK was inadequately reasoned.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    12 August 2015. The first two grounds  were  not  particularly  strong,
    however the economic well- being of the  UK  was  relevant  and  so  an
    analysis of the respondent's ability to support  himself  was  required
    and any decision would need justification.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on all grounds.

 9. A detailed rule 24 response supporting the decision was submitted by Mr
    Haywood on 25 August 2015.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11. Mr Wilding submitted that the first  two  points  in  the  grounds  are
    building blocks for the third point. Paragraph 70 of the decision makes
    reference to removal damaging the public purse but  there  is  then  no
    reference in paragraph  77.  The  risk  of  I  going  into  care  is  a
    speculative assessment.

12. Mr Mackenzie made detailed submissions which I do not need to  set  out
    in full. Mr Wilding did not make any further submissions  in  response.
    There is no challenge to  the  medical  evidence  or  to  the  positive
    credibility findings made by the judge. There is also no  challenge  to
    the  very  competent  analysis  of  the  relevant  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules and the 2002 Act which appears at paragraphs 71-78 of
    the decision. The challenge is narrow  and  primarily  based  upon  the
    failure to analyse the ability of the respondent to support himself  in
    the UK.

13. I find that  the  decision  is  comprehensive  and  well-reasoned.  The
    assessment and conclusions on  the  facts  are  detailed  and  make  it
    readily apparent why the decision was  made.  The  adverse  effects  of
    deportation on the family were properly considered and it is clear that
    the judge had in mind the impact of  the  respondent's  offending.  The
    conclusions in relation  to  the  risks  to  the  family  emerged  from
    unchallenged evidence. The issue as to whether telephone contact  could
    be maintained with I is not material to the outcome of the  appeal.  It
    was properly open to the judge to find  that  the  respondent  was  the
    carer for his British citizen partner and the only effective parent for
    I, so as to remove the risk that he might have to go into care. I  find
    that to be a realistic rather than speculative assessment.

14. I reject the submission that the failure to  analyse  the  respondent's
    ability to support himself financially in detail if allowed  to  remain
    demonstrates a material error of law.  The  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons for finding that removal of the respondent would not positively
    further the economic well-being of the UK and those reasons are soundly
    based upon the evidence. No material error of law arises.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and its decision stands.

Decision

16. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.


Signed   [pic]    Date  31 October 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
