
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: AA/11602/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2015                           |On 4 January 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     Tmn
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity

We maintain the anonymity order made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant
to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless
the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  orders  otherwise,  no  report  of   any
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the Appellant.  This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,  all
parties and their representatives.




                            DECISION AND REASONS
            (Delivered orally at the hearing of 30 November 2015)

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo, born in
    December 1950.  She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 4 December 2014  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom by way of directions under Section 10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  On the  same  date  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application for asylum.

Error of law

 2. That appeal was heard on 27 March 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 21 May 2015.  Prior to
    the hearing the appellant made an application for  adjournment  on  the
    papers in  order  to  seek  the  opinion  of  The  Medical  Foundation,
    primarily to determine whether they would  be  prepared  to  provide  a
    medical report which she could then use in support of her appeal before
    the Tribunal.  That application was refused in strident  terms  on  the
    papers but was renewed at the hearing before the FtT by Miss Clarke  on
    the appellant's behalf.

 3. The FtT refused to adjourn the hearing, ostensibly for the reasons duly
    set out in paragraph 13 of its decision:

         "I determined that the application to adjourn  should  be  refused.
         The appellant had only described rape and  specific  abuse  in  her
         supplementary witness statement dated 26 March, and the question of
         credibility was  a  matter  for  the  Tribunal.  The  existence  of
         scarring  from  injuries  and  cigarette  burns  could  have   been
         confirmed by the medical examination,  but  as  the  injuries  were
         claimed to have been sustained sometime between around  22/23  July
         2014 and the following three days, they would almost certainly been
         obvious as recent injuries when the appellant arrived in the United
         Kingdom on 3 August 2014, and the  appellant  could  have  obtained
         medical evidence at that time.  Although the  respondent  had  made
         the decision without taking account of the claim that the appellant
         had been assaulted as now described, it was within the  ability  of
         the Tribunal to consider all the information and reach a decision."

 4. Further relevant findings are also found in paragraphs 31, 36 and 39 of
    the decision, which I do not read out.

 5. The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford, granted on 16 June 2015.  Although  the
    grounds are lengthy the appellant in effect relies on a solitary point;
    that the refusal to grant an adjournment has caused unfairness.

 6. The starting point for our consideration and, indeed, what should  have
    been the starting point for the First-tier Tribunal's consideration  is
    paragraph  2  of   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  (Statutory  Instrument
    2604/2014):



         "(1)     The overriding objective of these Rules is to  enable  the
             Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

         (2)  ...

          (3)     The Upper  Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the
             overriding objective when it-

             (a)  exercises any power under these Rules; or

             (b)  interprets any rule or practice direction."


 7. Rule 4 of the Procedure Rules gives power to  the  FtT  to  adjourn  or
    postpone a hearing. It is  axiomatic  that  when  deciding  whether  to
    adjourn or postpone a  hearing  the  FtT  should  always  have  at  the
    forefront of its mind the overriding objective set out above.

 8. The issue of fairness  has  been  considered  in  a  number  of  recent
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal, including by the President in  Nwaigwe
    (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418.  This  case  considered  the
    previous version of the First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  but  is
    nevertheless still instructive on the approach that should be taken  in
    cases such as the instant one, where considerations are being given  as
    to whether to adjourn the hearing of an appeal. Paragraphs 7 and  8  of
    Nwaigwe are of some importance and remind both this Tribunal,  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal, that when considering the question of  whether  to
    adjourn a hearing, the issue  of  fairness  (to  both  parties)  is  of
    prominence.

 9. Turning back to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the  instant
    case.  Miss Sreeraman submits  that  although  the  decision  does  not
    explicitly refer to rule 2 of the  2014  Procedure  Rules,  or  to  the
    matters identified therein, the fact that such consideration was  given
    by the FtT can be implied from reading the decision as a whole, and  in
    particular paragraph 13 thereof.

10. We do not accept this to be so. As was conceded by Miss Sreeraman,  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal discloses no explicit reference to  the
    terms of rule 2 of the 2014 Procedure Rules, nor does  it  include  any
    appropriate self-direction. Neither in our view  can  such  be  implied
    from reading the decision as a whole, or any particular  part  thereof.
    The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to engage in the proper  process
    and consideration of a matter which should have been at the very  heart
    of its  deliberations  i.e.  the  issue  of  fairness  is  of  critical
    importance and amounts to an error of law.

11. The only question that remains therefore is whether the  aforementioned
    error is one capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. We have no
    hesitation in answering this question in the affirmative. Although  the
    First-tier Tribunal gave careful and detailed reasons for rejecting the
    truth of the appellant's account, its decision admits in  paragraph  13
    thereof  of  the  possibility  that  the  medical  evidence  which  the
    appellant sought to obtain could provide confirmatory and corroborative
    evidence of her account. Assuming this to be  so,  the  Tribunal  would
    have been required to feed  this  into  the  underlying  assessment  of
    whether the appellant had given a credible account of the  reasons  why
    she fled from her homeland.  We cannot discount  the  possibility  that
    had the medical evidence been before the First-tier Tribunal, it  would
    have come to a different conclusion as to the truth of all or parts  of
    the evidence given by the appellant.

12. Consequently, for these reasons we find that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contains an error of law capable of affecting the  outcome  of
    the appeal and we set aside such decision.

Re-Making of Decision

13. Having announced  the  aforementioned  decision  at  the  hearing  both
    parties agreed that the proper course is for this matter to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh. Given the extent of
    the fact finding necessary to determine the appeal, we concur.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law  capable
affecting the outcome of the appeal and we set it aside

We direct that the appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined afresh by a Judge other than Judge Wylie.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor













