
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11071/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 17 August 2015                   |On: 15 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Albania born in 1989.   Her  claim  to
       international  protection  rests  on  a  claim  that  she  has   been
       trafficked from Albania for the purpose of sexual exploitation.

    2. Her claim had initially been rejected by  the  Respondent  and  in  a
       determination dated 22nd April 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
       Devlin) dismissed her appeal.  That decision was  set  aside  in  its
       entirety and directions given  that  the  matter  be  remade.   There
       followed a lengthy, and regrettable, delay.   That  was  because  the
       Upper Tribunal had embarked on a review of the evidence  relating  to
       female victims of trafficking (VOTs), and in  particular  whether  it
       was safe, or reasonable, to expect them to relocate within Albania if
       returned.  This case was therefore adjourned with the consent of  the
       parties until that 'country guidance' case was heard and promulgated.
        By the date of hearing  that  case  had  still  not  been  reported.
       Having identified the issues the parties agreed  that  there  was  no
       longer any point in delaying  matters.   That  was  because  the  new
       country guidance was specifically concerned with a package of support
       offered to returning VOTs that was no longer, by the time this appeal
       was heard, available.  The Respondent was not therefore relying on it
       in respect of the present Appellant.

    3. In re-making the  appeal  I  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  live
       evidence from the Appellant.  I was also  referred  to  a  voluminous
       bundle of documents.  I reserved my decision.

       The Evidence

       The Appellant's Evidence

    4. The Appellant adopted her  witness  statements  dated  20th  December
       2013, 3rd March 2014 and the 7th October 2014.  Her account,  as  set
       out in those statements and amplified in her oral  evidence,  was  as
       follows.

    5. The Appellant was born in a village near Shkoder,  Northern  Albania,
       into a conservative and  traditional  Muslim  family.   She  attended
       school until the age of 14 and was thereafter expected to work in the
       home and sometimes on the land.  In her family it was known that  men
       worked and women  got  married.    She  describes  her  father  as  a
       "fanatic" who was very concerned that his family, and  his  daughters
       in particular, follow ancient Albanian tradition.  He was  a  violent
       and controlling man.  He drank heavily and subjected  her  mother  to
       domestic violence.

    6. In March 2013 when she was 24 years old she attended a wedding at the
       home of a neighbour.  At this wedding she noticed that  a  boy  there
       kept looking at her and smiling.   Whilst  everyone  was  dancing  he
       managed to gesture to the Appellant to catch her attention.  He wrote
       his name and number on a piece of paper and left it in the toilet for
       her to pick up.  He said his name was Ermir Ymeri.  A few days  later
       the Appellant went to visit her friend Ela who lived  a  few  minutes
       away.  She told Ela about the boy at the wedding and Ela allowed  the
       Appellant to use her telephone to contact him.  She texted a  message
       saying that she was the  girl  from  the  wedding.   He  called  back
       straight away.  He told her that he really liked her as  soon  as  he
       saw her and that he wanted to meet her.  The Appellant said that  her
       family were very strict and that if he wanted to meet her,  he  would
       have to marry her.

    7. After this incident the Appellant would go  to  Ela's  home  to  call
       Ermir.  They would talk for a long time on the  phone  and  gradually
       got closer.  He was extremely romantic and promised her that he would
       marry her and make a good life for her.  The Appellant fell in  love.
       Ermir insisted that they meet in person  and  finally  the  Appellant
       picked up the courage and agreed.   She told him that if her  brother
       and father found out they would kill her  but  he  told  her  not  to
       worry.  They arranged to meet in a quiet street.   She  saw  him  for
       approximately 30 minutes on that  first  occasion.   He  gave  her  a
       mobile telephone so that she no longer  had  to  go  to  Ela's.   The
       Appellant describes herself as "mad in love" after this meeting.  She
       could not wait to leave home and marry Ermir.

    8. Shortly after this the Appellant's father informed her  that  he  had
       received a marriage proposal for her which  he  intended  to  accept.
       The Appellant panicked.  She could not imagine  life  without  anyone
       else except Ermir.  When she told him about it he said that he  would
       take her away.  She agreed.   He  told  her  that  they  would  leave
       Albania together.  He said  that  he  would  help  her  apply  for  a
       passport.

    9. One day in October 2013 the Appellant was on the phone to Ermir  when
       her father and brothers came into the  room.   They  must  have  been
       listening to her conversation.  They snatched the phone from her  and
       her father heard Ermir's voice on the other end.   They  switched  it
       off and beat her.  Her father kept asking who the man was  and  where
       she got the phone from.  The Appellant cried and  promised  that  she
       would  no  longer  speak  to  him.   She  was  hit  until  she   fell
       unconscious.

   10.  After  this  the  atmosphere  at  home  was  very  depressing.   The
       Appellant's family were insulting her and telling her  that  she  had
       brought shame upon them.  Her father said that he was going to  bring
       her wedding forward.  For three days the Appellant  was  not  allowed
       out.  She was promising her father that she would marry  whomever  he
       wanted and that she  was  not  going  to  talk  to  that  boy  again.
       Eventually her father believed her and she was allowed to go to Ela's
       house.  At Ela's house she called Ermir and told him everything.   He
       told her that they would run away together and that he would help her
       get a passport.  The initial application was made at a  local  office
       and the Appellant subsequently went to Shkoder to get it  -  she  had
       gone with Ela and Ela's mother on the pretext of a shopping trip  and
       had made an excuse to get away for a short while, whereupon she  went
       to the relevant government building and collected her passport.

   11. On the day that the Appellant ran away from home she told her  mother
       she was going to visit Ela.  She could only take a few things  -  she
       had managed to take some clothes there earlier on.   She  left  Ela's
       and met Ermir.  From there they travelled to  Lac  and  Ermir  bought
       tickets for them to go to Belgium.

   12. When they got to Belgium they stayed  for  three  days  in  a  hotel.
       Ermir told the Appellant that he was going to take her to the  United
       Kingdom in a lorry.  She would not be needing her passport again;  he
       took it from her.  On the third day an agent came and  met  with  the
       Appellant and stowed her in a  lorry.   Ermir  travelled  separately.
       Once she had reached the UK the Appellant was reunited with Ermir  in
       a car park.  She was happy to see him again.  They went together to a
       shared house - another Albanian man was living there but  Ermir  told
       her not to leave their room.  She was very happy.  They were in  love
       and spent ten days together.  Ermir told her that he  loved  her  and
       that they were going to be married.

   13. Then Ermir told the Appellant that she was going  to  have  to  start
       work.  He said that she had a beautiful body and that she could  earn
       a lot of money.  He said that he was going to buy her new clothes and
       make up and that she could start work as a prostitute.  The Appellant
       was shocked - she argued with Ermir, and  told  him  that  she  would
       never do that.  He hit her and became very abusive.  He said that  if
       she refused he would kill her.  He reminded her that  he  knew  where
       her family in Albania lived.  He told her that  he  had  never  loved
       her, everything he had said had been lies  and  that  he  had  always
       intended that she work for him.  Ermir beat and raped the  Appellant.
       The Appellant was  heartbroken.   She  could  not  believe  what  was
       happening.  All she could do was cry.

   14. After two days in the room and further abuse the Appellant was  still
       refusing to consent to working as a prostitute.  Ermir  tried  a  new
       tack: he called her father  in  Albania.   He  told  the  Appellant's
       father where she was and said that she was working as  a  prostitute.
       The Appellant believes that he did this so that she had no option  of
       returning home to Albania.  Still the Appellant did not give in.  Two
       days later she had a chance to call her father herself.   She  begged
       him to forgive her.  She said that Ermir was lying and that  she  had
       not agreed to any such work.  Her father  was  not  sympathetic.   He
       told her that if she returned home he would  behead  her.   When  the
       Appellant was asked at the hearing about the rift with her family she
       began to cry and shake, so that her  distress  necessitated  a  short
       break.

   15. On the evening of 21st November 2013 Ermir got drunk and fell asleep.
        The Appellant saw her chance.  She took his keys and let herself out
       of the room.  Once outside of the house she ran.   She  walked  until
       her legs hurt and she came to a park.  She was approached by a middle-
       aged English woman who saw that she was crying and hugged  her.   The
       lady took her to her house where she  and  her  husband  allowed  the
       Appellant  to  stay.   They  tried  to  communicate   using   'google
       translate'.  The lady and her husband told the  Appellant  she  would
       have to go to the Home Office.  She begged them to let her stay a few
       days.  She was terrified of being found  by  Ermir.   Eventually  the
       couple took her to Croydon and showed her which building  to  go  in.
       The Appellant went in and claimed asylum.  At this point in her  oral
       evidence the Appellant again  became  extremely  upset,  particularly
       when asked about the point at which Ermir  'turned'  from  being  her
       lover into being her abuser.

   16. Since her ordeal the Appellant has  lost  weight  and  suffered  from
       sleep disturbance.  When  she  first  claimed  asylum  she  described
       herself as contemplating suicide.  She was very depressed  and  could
       see no future for herself.  However she feels that her mental  health
       has improved a little bit.  She has made some friends  in  Liverpool,
       some  of  whom  are  other  Albanian  women  who  have  had   similar
       experiences to her.  She has attended English classes  and  this  has
       helped her.  She has also started to  attend  church.   In  her  oral
       evidence she told me that she has converted to Catholicism  and  that
       she now attends church every week.  She has been baptised  but  could
       not remember the name of the  church  where  this  took  place.   The
       church has been supporting her and referred  her  to  a  psychologist
       whom she now sees every week.  She was also referred to a rape crisis
       centre called  'RASA'  and  she  is  still  attending  there.   These
       sessions are on a Tuesday and she always feels better after this.

   17. The Appellant states that she had initially refused to speak  to  the
       police because she was afraid of the consequences.  However  in  2014
       she did approach the police with the help of her solicitor.  She  was
       interviewed twice and told them everything she  knew.   Unfortunately
       the investigation has been discontinued due to lack of evidence.

   18. This account, given  in  her  detailed  witness  statement  and  oral
       evidence, largely accords with that  given  to  the  Respondent  when
       initially interviewed.  There are however some differences, which the
       Respondent relies  upon  to  submit  that  the  Appellant  cannot  be
       regarded as a reliable witness.

   19. First is the apparent claim in the screening interview [at  A8]  that
       the Appellant did work as a prostitute after arrival in the UK:



  |What happened?        |I separated from him because he lied to  |
|                      |me, he promised me to be his wife but he |
|                      |lied                                     |
|Did anything else     |No, he threatened to make me work as a   |
|happen?               |prostitute in the UK                     |
|Have you worked as a  |Yes, in England for 3 weeks as along as I|
|prostitute in the UK  |stayed with him                          |
|or any other country? |                                         |
|When did you start    |From the date I arrived on 4/11/13       |
|living with him?      |                                         |
|How did he travel to  |By plane, he said that he had proper     |
|the UK?               |documents, proper papers this is what he |
|                      |said                                     |
|Where did you work as |I did not work, his intention was to     |
|a prostitute in the   |force me to work as a prostitute because |
|UK?                   |he wanted to send me to a house where    |
|                      |they kept females                        |
|Have you worked as a  |No                                       |
|prostitute in the UK? |                                         |




   20. The second difference between the initial and later account  is  that
       the Appellant made no mention in her interviews of Ermir having raped
       her.  At Q6 of the main interview the Appellant was asked if  he  had
       harmed her.  She recounted how he had contacted her family  and  told
       them she was working as a prostitute, but then  became  tearful;  the
       interviewing officer has recorded that s/he went to get a tissue  for
       her.  She then described how he abused and threatened  her  but  does
       not mention being raped.  Of this the Appellant now explains:

           "I haven't disclosed that I had been raped by Ermir  previously,
           because I find it very hard to keep reliving the ordeal; it  not
           only hurts me physically but mentally also. I am not sure who  I
           can trust anymore[1]"

       Medico-counselling Evidence

   21. The Appellant relies  on  a  letter  dated  23rd  January  2014  from
       'MRANG', the Merseyside Refugee and Asylum Seekers Pre and Post Natal
       Support Group.  The letter is from Jean Comerford who is a  qualified
       counsellor with 22 years experience.  She states that  she  has  been
       offering the Appellant counselling since August 2014 and has observed
       in her various symptoms that would accord  with  diagnostic  criteria
       for  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (as  defined  in  DSM-V).  The
       Appellant attends weekly and is receiving support and  friendship  at
       MRANG.

   22. I was further provided with a letter dated  27th  October  2014  from
       Vicky  Briggs  of  'RASA',  the  Rape  and  Sexual  Abuse  Centre  in
       Merseyside.  Ms Briggs is an Independent Sexual Violence Advocate who
       writes  to  confirm  that  she  has  been  offering   the   Appellant
       counselling with the assistance  of  an  interpreter  since  she  was
       referred by Merseyside  police  in  July  2014.   The  Appellant  has
       disclosed suicidal feelings, problems sleeping and low mood.

   23. The Respondent has produced the Appellant's medical  records  created
       by 'SERCO' staff when  she  was  held  in  immigration  detention  at
       Yarlswood.  These  record  that  the  Appellant  was  then  reporting
       feeling stressed, suicidal and tearful.  On the 7th December 2013  it
       is recorded that the Appellant denied being a VOT but  was  upset  by
       family  pressure  and  the  breakdown  of  her  relationship  with  a
       boyfriend.

       Police Investigation

   24. I have been provided with a letter dated 13th January  2015  from  DC
       Chantal Capes of  the  Serious  and  Organised  Crime  squad  of  the
       Metropolitan Police.  The purpose of the letter was to  confirm  that
       the investigation was  at  that  time  on-going  but  DC  Capes  also
       mentions that she had personally interviewed the Appellant about  the
       claimed abuse. She writes "I have no reason to disbelieve  her.  [The
       Appellant's] account was very genuine and I have since  referred  her
       to Rape Crisis counselling which she has been attending ever  since".
       An earlier letter from DC Capes, dated 16th September  2014  confirms
       that the Appellant was assisting the Trafficking and Kidnap  unit  in
       their investigations and that they had referred her to the  Salvation
       Army in order that she be assessed as a victim of trafficking.

       Expert Report

   25. The Appellant's bundle contains a report dated 16th September 2013 by
       Abigail Stepnitz  who  describes  herself  as  a  'Human  Trafficking
       Expert'.  Ms Stepnitz appends her lengthy CV to the report.  It would
       appear that her expertise in trafficking was gained  primarily  in  a
       four year stint as the National Co-Ordinator for the  Poppy  Project,
       where she was involved in setting up the National Referral Mechanism,
       advised a number of government bodies including the CPS  and  founded
       the Strategic Monitoring Group.  She has acted as  a  consultant  for
       the United Nations, the International Organisation on  Migration  and
       the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe.

   26. Ms Stepnitz begins her report by setting out the objective background
       to her assessment of the Appellant's case.  She refers, for instance,
       to the  internationally  recognised  definitions  and  indicators  of
       trafficking  and  to  recent  UK  based  research  on  the   reported
       experiences of women  trafficked  here  for  the  purpose  of  sexual
       exploitation.  She also sets out some background material on  Albania
       and its efforts to combat trafficking.  She looks in some  detail  at
       the statistical evidence about the socio-economic  position  of  VOTs
       and notes the direct correlation between vulnerability to trafficking
       and poverty.

   27. Ms Stepnitz met with the  Appellant  and  interviewed  her  with  the
       assistance of an interpreter.  I do not repeat the account  that  she
       has recorded in her report, save to note that it is  consistent  with
       the account summarised above.  Ms Stepnitz explored  the  Appellant's
       evidence that her father was a "fanatic".  The  Appellant  said  that
       although nominally Muslim her father drank  excessively,  frequenting
       local bars.  He  was  extremely  violent  towards  her  mother.   His
       fanaticism came  from  his  obsession  with  local  kanun  law.   The
       Appellant said that all the people in the village observed kanun, but
       even other villagers regarded her father as extreme.  This led to her
       family being to some extent ostracised.  She remembers telling  Ermir
       about this.  She told him that if her brothers and father got hold of
       her they would kill her.  He had promised to protect and  look  after
       her.  That was how he justified them travelling onwards  to  the  UK.
       He said that her family might be able to get to her  in  Belgium  but
       they would not be able to get into  the  UK  because  of  the  border
       controls; they would not find her there.  Ms Stepnitz interjects that
       in the past two years she has interviewed eight other  Albanian  VOTs
       who have had similar experiences.  Ms Stepnitz notes that at  several
       points during their consultation the Appellant "cried  heavily".   In
       particular she became distressed when discussing the phone call where
       her father told her she was disowned, and the night that she escaped:
       "she explained having been very frightened during her escape  and  it
       was obvious that discussing it was causing her great distress"[2].

   28. As to the late disclosure of rape,  Ms  Stepnitz  finds  this  to  be
       entirely consistent with the Appellant's claim  to  be  a  VOT.   She
       notes that narratives presented by VOTs  are  frequently  disjointed,
       fragmented and disclosed in a non-chronological order[3].  In  common
       with many VOTs the Appellant has  disclosed  suffering  from  various
       mental  health  problems  including  anxiety,  nightmares,   frequent
       crying, guilt, shame, feelings of hopelessness, stress and amnesia.

   29.  Ms  Stepnitz  devotes  a  considerable  amount  of  her  report   to
       criticising the Respondent and Competent Authority approach  in  this
       case, and in particular the failure to refer the Appellant  into  the
       NRM sooner.   The  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  "failed  to
       identify herself as a VOT"  is  said  to  be  inconsistent  with  the
       Respondent's own policy and the NRM.  Asking a woman in her  position
       whether she would like to be referred to  a  "specialist  trafficking
       unit" was unhelpful, in Ms Stepnitz's view.  It is apparent from  the
       interview record that the Appellant does  not  understand  what  that
       means.

       My Findings

   30. I remind myself that the burden of proof lies on  the  Appellant  who
       must establish that there is a reasonable likelihood that if returned
       to Albania she would  face  serious  harm.   The  phrase  'reasonable
       likelihood' reflects  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  in
       protection claims, and can also be expressed as a "real risk".  If  I
       determine that the Appellant cannot go to  live  in  her  home  area,
       either because of a risk from Ermir or her family,  I  must  consider
       whether she can reasonably be expected to go and live somewhere  else
       in Albania.

   31. The  Competent  Authority  did  not  find  in  the  Appellant's  case
       'reasonable grounds' to believe that she was a VOT.  Four reasons are
       given:  i) it is not accepted as  credible  that  an  English  couple
       would have helped the Appellant as claimed, ii)  the  health  records
       created in detention nowhere record a claim to have been abused  iii)
       "at no time were you forced to engage in  any  sexual  activity  with
       anyone against your will" and iv)  the  account  does  not  meet  the
       definition of trafficking.  This is, with  respect,  utter  nonsense.
       It is very hard to understand how the Competent Authority could reach
       the conclusion that no trafficking indicators were  present  in  this
       case.  The Appellant's evidence at interview was that she was tricked
       into coming to the UK then subjected to threats to make her undertake
       sex work.  The fact that she managed to escape before actually  being
       set to work does not stop her being a VOT.  The 'reasonable  grounds'
       decision requires a low threshold to engage the NRM and the  negative
       decision was in my view perverse.  Even  if  the  Appellant  did  not
       manage to conclusively establish her case,  at  the  very  least  the
       narrative disclosed "reasonable grounds".  The two  reasons  advanced
       for rejecting her credibility - the good  Samaritans  and  the  SERCO
       records - were not at any  point  in  the  CA's  assessment  balanced
       against the consistent evidence  of  the  Appellant.   Nor  were  the
       disclosures of suicidal ideation and depression made to medical staff
       at Yarlswood.  I agree with Ms Stepnitz that greater care should have
       been taken in explaining to the Appellant what  a  "specialist  unit"
       and the "national  referral  mechanism"  were.   I  also  agree  that
       greater care should have been taken in evaluating the  claim  against
       the objective criteria for the determination of trafficking claims.

   32. Having looked at the Appellant's evidence as a composite  whole,  and
       having had the opportunity to hear live evidence from her  myself,  I
       am left in little doubt that she is a VOT.

   33. I find that the account given has been detailed  and  consistent.   I
       attach no weight whatsoever to the  "discrepancy'  arising  from  the
       screening interview record, reproduced above at paragraph 19.  It  is
       clear to all  but  the  most  obtuse  of  reader  that  there  was  a
       misunderstanding which  was  immediately  clarified.   I  have  given
       careful consideration to the late disclosure of rape.  It is  correct
       to say that the Appellant did not initially claim  that  Ermir  raped
       her during the week or so that he was trying  to  "persuade"  her  to
       undertake  sex  work.   She  subsequently   makes   this   claim   to
       counsellors, to her solicitor and  then  the  police.   I  accept  Ms
       Khan's submission that survivors of sexual violence very  often  have
       difficulty  in  disclosing   their   experiences,   particularly   to
       strangers.  I heard  the  Appellant  speak  with  passion  and  great
       bitterness about how Ermir broke her heart by tricking  her  in  this
       cruel way.  It needs  only  the  most  basic  degree  of  empathy  to
       understand that she might find it difficult to admit  that  he  raped
       and abused her, and that she had been extremely foolish  in  trusting
       his  promises.   The  consistency  of  the  account,  told   in   two
       interviews,  three  witness  statements,  live  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal  and  in  consultation  with  various  counsellors  and   Ms
       Stepnitz, lends weight to the Appellant's claim.

   34. I find the account to be internally  coherent.   The  author  of  the
       refusal  letter  considers  there  to  be  some  discrepancy  in  the
       Appellant's description of her father and brothers as "fanatics" with
       her evidence that she was able, for instance, to leave the  house  on
       her own even after being discovered taking the  illicit  phone  call.
       This is an overly simplistic analysis.  The point about  abusive  and
       domineering bullies - of whatever gender or cultural background -  is
       that they very often exercise complete control  over  their  victims.
       As such they do not imagine that the victim will step  out  of  line.
       The Appellant's father was prepared to treat her  contact  with  this
       boy as an anomaly that would not be repeated.  At that stage she  had
       not left his house and  he  could  be  confident  that  she  had  not
       'stained his honour' in a public and irretrievable way.  I do not see
       any contradiction in the claim that he merely  carried  on  with  her
       wedding plans.  Nor do I see any contradiction in the claim that  her
       "fanatic" father was a heavy drinker who abused his wife.  There  are
       plenty of men who consider themselves Muslim who  drink  alcohol  and
       beat their wives.  More significantly, as the Appellant  explains  to
       Ms Stepnitz, it was not Islam that her father  was  fanatical  about,
       but the Albanian kanun,  the  medieval  code  of  law  and  customary
       practice.  The internal coherence of the account adds weight  to  the
       claim.

   35. I find the Appellant's account to be consistent with  the  background
       material on how traffickers operate, and  how  VOTs  react  to  their
       ordeal.  There is nothing in her account that is  remarkable  in  the
       context of trafficking narratives.   This  too  adds  weight  to  the
       Appellant's case.

   36. Finally there  is  support  for  the  Appellant  not  just  from  the
       counsellors and other mental health services who have worked with her
       since her arrival, but from DC Capes.  This is significant because DC
       Capes was assessing the Appellant as a witness in the  context  of  a
       criminal inquiry.  She conducted two  thorough  interviews  with  the
       Appellant and found  "no  reason  to  disbelieve  her".   Indeed  the
       Appellant's "very genuine" evidence prompted  further  investigation.
       I have given weight to the fact that DC Capes, who had an opportunity
       to probe the evidence  in  the  intimate  setting  of  an  interview,
       believed the Appellant entirely.

   37. Against all of that I  weigh  the  knowledge  that  some  women  from
       Albania might claim asylum because they want  to  leave  Albania  and
       seek a better life in the UK.  Some women might advance a bogus claim
       of trafficking in order to support such a  claim.   On  the  evidence
       before me, and applying the lower standard of proof,  this  woman  is
       not one of them.  I find as fact  that  the  Appellant  has  given  a
       truthful account of her experiences.

   38. I accept her evidence that she has been disowned  and  threatened  by
       her family, in particular by her father who has  credibly  threatened
       to "behead" her if she comes back to her  home  area.   There  having
       been no material change in circumstance since that threat was made in
       2013, I am satisfied that the Appellant faces a well-founded fear  of
       persecution for reasons of her  membership  of  a  particular  social
       group, namely women in Albania.  The actors of persecution  would  be
       her family who would perpetrate 'honour' based violence against  her.
       In AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80  (IAC)  the
       Upper Tribunal held that the ability of a woman to access  sufficient
       state protection in Albania would depend  on  a  number  of  factors.
       Particularly relevant in this case is the fact that her  family  come
       from a northern village which observes the kanun, and  that  code  is
       strictly applied by her  family.   For  them  this  is  a  matter  of
       'honour'.  As such they are unlikely to be deterred by the threat  of
       prosecution.  She has no connections  to  whom  she  could  turn  for
       support or protection in the north.  I am satisfied that she would be
       at risk.

   39. Before me the Respondent squarely  placed  her  case  on  credibility
       grounds. Mr Harrison having conceded that he could not sensibly  rely
       on  a  resettlement  package  which  no  longer  existed,   made   no
       submissions on whether  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  internally
       relocate in Albania.  It is however a matter raised  in  the  refusal
       letter so for the sake of completeness I address it.  I can be brief.
        This is a young woman living in abject terror  of  her  family,  and
       indeed of Ermir.  There is no evidence that she knows anyone  or  has
       any connection to Tirana or any other southern city. She left  school
       at 14 and has no skills to speak  of.   She  was  being  groomed  for
       nothing but early marriage and the life of a housewife.  She  has  no
       obvious way of supporting herself in a city where family  connections
       are so important.  Even if she were to receive some training  from  a
       NGO or charity (of which I was shown no evidence) she would likely be
       facing straightened economic  circumstances  in  the  low-paid  'grey
       economy' as described in AM  &  BM.   That  would  be  a  significant
       challenge, and in the worse case scenario, render her  vulnerable  to
       further trafficking.

   40. Since her arrival in the UK she has, I accept, suffered from anxiety,
       depression and feelings of hopelessness.   Although  both  MRANG  and
       RASA make reference to the diagnostic criteria for  PTSD  one  hardly
       needs to pathologise the obvious sequalae of being raised in a  house
       ruled by violence,  then  having  your  heart  broken  by  a  'prince
       charming' who betrayed, raped and beat you.  The  Appellant  credibly
       speaks of suffering from overwhelming feelings of  shame,  guilt  and
       self-loathing,  leading  to  thoughts  of  suicide.   I  accept   the
       submission of Ms Khan that these are very likely to worsen should she
       be removed from the support network in the UK -  the  church,  MRANG,
       RASA, her psychologist, her lawyers, the police - who have helped her
       to see a more positive way out.  Even if  such  support  were  to  be
       available in Tirana (and I have been shown no evidence  at  all  that
       this is the case) I do not find that it would be  of  any  meaningful
       assistance to the Appellant, since  she  would  be  living  with  the
       constant, and not  unreasonable,  fear  of  discovery.   It  is  very
       difficult to reassure someone that they are safe  where  there  is  a
       chance, no matter how small, that they are not.

   41. I also bear in mind that the Appellant would be living  as  a  single
       woman without any family support and  as  such  would  likely  to  be
       subject to significant stigmatisation by certain elements of Albanian
       society.  In AM & BM the Tribunal heard and  accepted  evidence  that
       women on their own are  presumed  by  wider  society  to  have  acted
       inappropriately in some way.  A woman who does not have  the  support
       of her natal family or husband is considered a kurva, a whore who  is
       best avoided, at worse abused.

   42. Taking all of these factors in the round I am satisfied that it would
       be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate on her own within
       Tirana or  other  southern  city.  She  does  not  have  the  skills,
       education, mental resilience or support to cope, and I find she would
       not be able to re-establish any kind of normal life.

   43. It follows that her appeal is allowed.

       Decisions

   44. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contain an error of  law
       and it has been set aside.  The Error of Law decision is appended  to
       this.

   45. Having had regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:
       Anonymity Orders I find that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  make  a
       direction for anonymity and do so in the following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
           family.  This direction applies both parties.  Failure to comply
           with  this  direction  could   lead   to   contempt   of   court
           proceedings".

   46. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

       "The appeal is allowed on refugee convention grounds.

       The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because  she
       is a refugee.

       The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          6th September 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Paragraph 42, statement dated 20th December 2013
[2] Paragraph 85
[3] Paragraph 15

