

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/11360/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 August 2017                          |  On 29 August 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                          abrahim kibrom aferworki
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Katani, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blair promulgated on 24 March 2017, dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 4 August 2015  to
    refuse him asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is  a  citizen  of  Eritrea  and  is  a
    Pentecostal Christian.  He was born in Assab (now in  Eritrea)  but  at
    the age of 2 moved to live in Addis  Ababa  where  he  lived  with  his
    parents until they were deported to Eritrea in 1999.  He  left  Eritrea
    in 2000, travelling to Sudan where he lived  and  worked  for  thirteen
    years before travelling to  Libya  and  thence  to  Italy,  France  and
    finally the United Kingdom, entering on 23 March 2015.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is a Pentecostal Christian and a  draft
    evader and fears persecution on return to Eritrea on that reason.

 4. The respondent's case is set out in the  refusal  letter  of  4  August
    2015.  In summary, the respondent did not accept that the appellant  is
    Eritrean but that, given that his primary language is Amharic  and  his
    knowledge of Ethiopian athletes [38] yet he was a national of  Ethiopia
    and, that  following  ST  (ethnic  Eritrean  -  nationality  -  return)
    Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 00252 the burden was on him to show he had done
    all that he could be reasonably be expected to do to facilitate  return
    as a national of Ethiopia.  The respondent did not accept that  he  was
    at risk if returned to Ethiopia.

 5. The appeal first came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fowell  sitting
    in Glasgow on 20 June 2016.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  8  August
    2016, the appellant's claims were dismissed.  An  appeal  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal was successful and the  matter  was
    then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  when  it  came  before  Judge
    Blair sitting on 28 February 2017.

 6. In his decision promulgated on 24 March 2017, the judge found that  the
    appellant:-

      i) had not established that he  is  Eritrean  [23],  it  being  wholly
         implausible that he would not have been spoken to by his parents in
         Tigrinya given his claim that they were deported to Eritrea because
         of their assertion of Eritrean nationality [25];

     ii) had given answers to questions about Eritrea which were correct  in
         substance, but had referred to a graveyard  in  Saris  where  there
         were statues of athletes erected in 2002; and, his  explanation  of
         being able to identify a statue not erected until that date when he
         had left Eritrea in 2000 (that he had read about it in a  magazine)
         was implausible [28], rejecting the explanation given [29];

    iii) had not done all he could reasonably have done  to  facilitate  his
         return as  a  national  of  Ethiopia,  the  evidence  being  wholly
         unsatisfactory [30] both as in relation to travelling to  Ethiopian
         Embassy and what he said had occurred there [31] to [33]; going  to
         an embassy, telling an official that one  is  a  national  of  that
         country  without  evidence  was  not  taking  reasonable  steps  to
         establish Eritrean (sic) nationality  [36],  the  letter  from  the
         appellant's solicitors to the Ethiopian Embassy had been of  little
         value [37];

     iv) have given evidence of his visit to the Ethiopian Embassy which was
         evasive and vague [44] from which he concluded that  the  appellant
         knows he is an Ethiopian.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    grounds that the judge had erred:-

      i) in failing to say that how he had taken into account the fact  that
         Amharic is spoken  to  a  degree  in  Eritrea  into  assessing  the
         appellant's nationality, in particular failing to take into account
         evidence that it is spoken as a first or second language in Eritrea
         particularly by those who had previously lived in Ethiopia  and  in
         the area of Assab both which applied to the appellant;

     ii) in finding that Tigrinya would be more likely to be spoken by those
         in that part of Ethiopia which later became Eritrea for which there
         was no evidential basis, and that the approach to the appellant not
         speaking  Tigrinya  was  inconsistent  when  assessed  against  the
         witness who gave evidence in Amharic and had been recognised  as  a
         refugee from Eritrea;

    iii) in making errors of fact, in referring  to  the  statues  being  in
         Eritrea when they were in Ethiopia;  that  it  was  speculative  to
         conclude that it was not plausible the appellant had just  happened
         to read in a magazine about the athletes in question;

     iv) in expecting the appellant to amend his interview in respect  of  a
         question he was never asked; and

      v) in failing to identify what reasonable steps  the  appellant  could
         have taken when going to the embassy at a time when the appellant's
         evidence was he had no evidence to provide and in failing to  apply
         the country guidance in ST.

The Hearing

 8. I heard submissions from Mr Katani for the appellant  and  Mr  Matthews
    for the respondent.  Mr Katani submitted that the background  evidence,
    an extract from an EASO report,  showed  that  Amharic  was  spoken  in
    Eritrea as a first or second language, particularly amongst  those  who
    have been removed from Ethiopia and from those who lived in the area of
    Assab owing to its prior importance as  an  Eritrean  naval  base.   He
    submitted further that given the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  his
    parents had spoken  to  him  in  Amharic  the  judge  had  indulged  in
    impermissible speculation.

 9. Mr Katani submitted also that the judge had erred in stating  that  the
    statues offered to athletes had been in Eritrea when they had  in  fact
    been in Ethiopia.

10. With respect to the issue of  attendance  at  the  embassy,  Mr  Katani
    submitted that the judge had made no reference to the relevant  country
    guidance and had expressly gone against  country  guidance  in  stating
    that the latter written by the appellant's  solicitors  was  of  little
    value.  That, he submitted, was impermissible and  that  nothing  could
    fairly be drawn from the fact  there  had  been  no  response  to  that
    letter.

11. Mr Matthews submitted that if the  appellant  could  show  he  was  not
    Ethiopian, the other grounds were not material.  He submitted  that  it
    had been open to the judge to say that the letter written by  Katani  &
    Co was of little value given that the letter does not even mention  the
    name of the parents, give any details of where and when they were  born
    or of a sister who is said to  have  been  born  in  Addis  Ababa.   He
    submitted that the judge had properly followed  ST  (Ethiopia),  adding
    that any linguistic analysis was not determinative of the  issues.   He
    submitted in any event the judge had not erred  in  making  facts  with
    respect to the issue of the statues and this appeared to  be  simply  a
    slip of the pen; this was clear when reading  the  determination  as  a
    whole.  He submitted further that on reading the interview it was clear
    from what the appellant had said that he was giving the  impression  of
    having recalled having seen the statues not that he had read  about  it
    in a magazine that this subsequent explanation was in  the  context  of
    the evidence one which the judge was entitled to project.

12. In response Mr Katani submitted  that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
    letter to the  Ethiopian  Embassy  was  wrong  either  because  he  had
    rejected it improperly on the basis that there had been no response  or
    if that had not been the reason, then  no  adequate  reasons  had  been
    provided.  He submitted further that the judge had not referred to  the
    wrong country at paragraph 27.

The Law

13. It was in the circumstances for the an appellant to show that he is not
    an Ethiopian national  - see the guidance given in  ST  (Ethiopia).  Of
    particular relevance in this appeal is the following: -
    (4) Although, pursuant to MA (Ethiopia), each claimant must demonstrate
    that he or she has done  all  that  could  be  reasonably  expected  to
    facilitate return as a national of Ethiopia, the present procedures and
    practices of the Ethiopian Embassy in London will provide the  backdrop
    against which judicial fact-finders will decide  whether  an  appellant
    has complied with this requirement. A person who  is  regarded  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities as an  ethnic  Eritrean  and  who  left  Ethiopia
    during or in the immediate aftermath of the border war between Ethiopia
    and Eritrea, is likely to face very significant practical  difficulties
    in establishing nationality and the attendant right to return, stemming
    from the reluctance of the Ethiopian  authorities  to  countenance  the
    return of someone it regards  as  a  "foreigner",  whether  or  not  in
    international law the person concerned holds the nationality of another
    country (paragraphs 93 to 104).
    (5) Judicial fact-finders will  expect  a  person  asserting  arbitrary
    deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach the embassy in  London
    with all documentation emanating from  Ethiopia  that  the  person  may
    have, relevant to establishing nationality, including ID card, address,
    place of birth, identity and place of birth of  parents,  identity  and
    whereabouts of any relatives in Ethiopia and details  of  the  person's
    schooling in Ethiopia. Failing production of Ethiopian documentation in
    respect of such matters, the person should put in writing all  relevant
    details, to be handed to the embassy. Whilst persons are not  for  this
    purpose entitled to portray themselves  to  the  embassy  as  Eritrean,
    there is no  need  to  suppress  details  which  disclose  an  Eritrean
    connection (paragraph 105).

14. Whilst the judge does not expressly direct himself in  accordance  with
    ST, although that is a country guidance decision, it is not an error of
    law not to refer to it so long  as  the  principles  are  applied.   It
    should be borne in mind in this context that the appellant was  advised
    specifically in the  refusal  letter  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
    guidance given in ST in any future appeal.  Further, it is of note that
    the judge at [30] expressly uses the language of ST in stating  "I  did
    not consider that the appellant had done all that he  reasonably  could
    to facilitate return as a national of Ethiopia."  His rejection of that
    claim is set out in the subsequent paragraphs [31] to [36].  It  is,  I
    consider, artificial to focus narrowly on the judge's finding  at  [37]
    that he found the letter from Katani & Co addressed  to  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy to be of "little value.  There was no response  to  it."   That
    letter must be considered in the context of the risks of the evidence.

15. I turn to the grounds in order.

16. I find no merit in the submission that the judge  erred  materially  in
    not taking into account the fact that Amharic is as the evidence shows,
    spoken in Eritrea as  a  first  language  by  some  particularly  those
    removed from Ethiopia and also in the area of Assab which was  formerly
    under close Ethiopian control.  The point that the judge made  was  not
    that it was implausible  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  spoken
    Tigrinya per se but because he found it implausible that  his  parents,
    of Eritrean origin, and who had asserted their  nationality  would  not
    have spoken Tigrinya.  That is a different point.  It  cannot  be  said
    that that was not a point open to the judge on the evidence nor is that
    finding on plausibility grounds attacked in the grounds of  appeal;  it
    is not the fact of the appellant not  speaking  Tigrinya  which  is  an
    issue but the reason why he does not speak Tigrinya in  the  particular
    context of what he has said about his parents.  I note,  however,  that
    he said that they spoke some words in Tigrinya (see Q.21  and  22)  the
    answer - that they did not want to be identified so  speaking  Tigrinya
    and would speak Amharic, does  not  explain  why  they  did  not  speak
    Tigrinya in the home and the evidence is  also  that  if  it  was  "any
    specific thing, they would speak in Tigrinya".

17. I do not consider any inferences can be drawn from the judge's comments
    at [26] as this does not appear to form part of the reasoning process.

18. I do not accept that the judge has made any material factual errors  in
    his analysis of the evidence about the statues.  The root of this issue
    is the appellant's statement in interview at Q.48.  I set out Q.48  and
    49 in full:

    Q.48 Do you remember the name of the stadium?    No I do not  know.  In
                                                 Saris  there  is   by   the
                                                 graveyard,   there   is   a
                                                 statue of two athletes.

    Q.49 What type of athletes?     Mamo Woldie and Abebe Bekila.

19. It is not in dispute that these statues were erected in 2002 long after
    the appellant had left Ethiopia or for that matter Eritrea.

20. I do not consider that it can fairly be said  that  the  judge  wrongly
    referred to Eritrea at [27].  The appellant did in his  interview  give
    evidence about what he saw in Ethiopia in the area where  he  lived  at
    Q.26 to Q.53 particularly and asked about landmarks.  These answers are
    I consider somewhat limited but it is equally clear that  he  did  give
    more details about living in Assab which he described at  Q.64  and  at
    Q.80 to  Q.97  where  he  gave  details  about  the  currency  and  the
    revolution which,  it  is  accepted  are  correct.   That  is  entirely
    consistent with the statement at [27] that  the  answers  to  questions
    were correct in substance.  Although it could have  been  more  clearly
    identified, it is sufficiently clear from the decision that  the  judge
    is now, after making that point and having properly referred to Eritrea
    ( a credibility issue)  turning  to  issues  which  damage  credibility
    particularly the issue regarding the statues. It cannot  be  said  that
    the judge was wrongly concluding that the statues were in Eritrea.

21. Whilst there was a degree of ambiguity at [28] in the  judge  referring
    to the appellant having left Eritrea in 2000, I do  not  consider  that
    this, even if it is an error, makes any material difference.  The issue
    is not where the statues are located but why the appellant was able  to
    describe them and more importantly to volunteer information about  them
    when they were not erected until he had  on  any  account  left  either
    Eritrea or Ethiopia.  It matters  not  where  they  were  located;  the
    difficulty is in the appellant being able to describe  their  existence
    in a place he was asked to describe after he had left the  country  and
    had not returned.

22.  Further,  it  is  clear  from  the  context  that  the  appellant  was
    volunteering information.  It is also clear from  the  context  of  the
    questions that he was  being  asked  to  describe  an  area.   He  gave
    information that there were statues of two individuals.  It is  not  in
    doubt that they were not erected until 2002.   It  is  unclear  why  he
    would have mentioned these two statues if they had not existed  at  the
    time  he  had  lived  in  the  area.   I  consider  that  in  all   the
    circumstances and in the context, that the judge was entitled to reject
    the explanation; the challenge comes  nowhere  near  showing  that  the
    finding was irrational or otherwise unsustainable.

23. The further challenges to  the  judge's  findings  on  this  issue  are
    lacking in merit.  The judge had given adequate reasons for saying  why
    he did not accept that the appellant had read about the  statues  in  a
    magazine given the context in which the information was  given  in  the
    interview.

24. Further, the submission that the  judge  erred  in  drawing  inferences
    adverse to the appellant from not amending his interview in respect  of
    a question he was not asked is misplaced.  At [29] the judge found that
    the explanation about the  interpreter  not  having  explained  matters
    properly to the appellant was implausible.  This is not a drawing of an
    inference from an appellant to fail to give further information  or  to
    clarify matters; it  is  in  the  context  of  the  allegation  of  the
    interpreter not explaining matters that there is  a  reference  to  him
    amending the interview and the judge is correct in pointing out that it
    was not for the interpreter to  explain  matters  but  rather  for  the
    appellant to give answers consistent with his actual lived  experience.
    I consider that these comments are not irrational and  were  manifestly
    open to the judge.

25. The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account of his travel to the Ethiopian Embassy.   No  issue
    is taken in the grounds with a lack of evidence  of  travelling  there,
    the  Megabus  ticket  having  no  details  on  it  or  identifying  the
    appellant; the implausibility that the  consular  official  would  have
    allowed himself to be photographed with someone attending  in  relation
    to questions about  their  nationality;  the  failure  to  provide  the
    business  card  from  the  consular  official  [32]  and  take  on  the
    contradiction in his evidence why the business card had  been  obtained
    [33]; and, that it was not a  reasonable  step  to  establish  Eritrean
    nationality (by which  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  meant  Ethiopia
    nationality) [36] without taking evidence.

26.  I  accept  that  the  appellant  may  not  have  evidence  as  to  his
    nationality, but as Mr Matthews submitted, the letter  written  to  the
    embassy is lacking in any  proper  detail.   The  appellant's  parents'
    names are not given nor are their dates of  birth  nor  are  any  other
    details  about  them  whatsoever.   I  consider   that   in   all   the
    circumstances given the previous justifiable concerns about the account
    of travelling to the embassy, that the  judge  was  entitled  and  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for finding that the appellant had not
    taken reasonable steps to establish Eritrean nationality.

27. In this context, it was open to the judge to conclude that the fact  of
    the letter had been sent by Katani & Co to the Ethiopian Embassy was of
    little evidential value.  It is not correct to say  that  there  is  no
    adequate explanation for this; on the contrary it  is  clear  from  the
    context of the previous sustainable doubts as to whether the  appellant
    had in fact attended the Embassy why that is so.  Further, and  in  any
    event, the fact that the letter is not answered is not  probative.   It
    is at best neutral and is part of a factual matrix in assessing whether
    reasonable steps have been taken, and the judge was manifestly entitled
    to conclude that they had not.

28. Given the evidence and given the deficiencies  identified  albeit  that
    these were not expressly referred to in the same terms in the decision,
    the judge's reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to  have  taken
    reasonable steps is entirely justified.  It  is  evident  that  he  was
    properly applying the principles set out   in ST.

29. For these reasons, I consider that the decision does  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law and I uphold the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date:  16 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

