
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11198/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2016                          |On 15th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Bethlehem [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dixon of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Chapman of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 23rd June 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 25th  February  2015  and
    claimed asylum.  She claimed to be Eritrean with a  date  of  birth  of
    23rd June 1993.  The Claimant feared return to Eritrea because she is a
    Pentecostal  Christian  and  would  face  persecution  because  of  her
    religion, and also because she would  be  persecuted  by  the  Eritrean
    authorities as a person who left the country illegally, thereby evading
    national service.

 4. The application was refused on 31st July 2015 and the appeal was  heard
    by the FTT on 23rd June 2016.

 5. The FTT heard evidence from the Claimant and a  witness  Daniel  Haile.
    Mr Haile confirmed that he had  been  granted  refugee  status  in  the
    United Kingdom, and he  is  an  Eritrean  citizen,  and  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.  He met the Appellant in a church in Sudan in January  2007,
    and they subsequently met again in a church in the  United  Kingdom  in
    December 2015.  He confirmed to  the  FTT  that  the  Appellant  is  an
    Eritrean citizen and Pentecostal Christian.

 6. The FTT found both the Appellant  and  Mr  Haile  to  be  credible  and
    consistent.  It was agreed by the parties  that  if  the  Appellant  is
    Eritrean she would be at risk and would be entitled to asylum.

 7. The FTT found that the Appellant is Eritrean, and therefore her  appeal
    was allowed.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds are succinct contending that the FTT  had  erred
    by failing to apply the country guidance case of ST (Ethnic Eritrean  -
    nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 252 (IAC).  In failing to
    apply the country guidance decision, it was submitted that the FTT  had
    materially  erred  in  assessing  the   Appellant's   nationality   and
    credibility.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted.  Following the  grant  of  permission
    the Claimant lodged a response pursuant to  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending in  summary  that  the
    Secretary of State's application amounted to a  disagreement  with  the
    findings made by the FTT, but did not disclose a material error of law.
     It was contended that the FTT decision  was  adequately  reasoned  and
    should stand.

10. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    should be set aside.



The Secretary of State's Submissions

11. Mrs Aboni relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.



The Claimant's Submissions

12. Mr Dixon accepted that ST had been referred to in the refusal  decision
    and had not been addressed by the FTT.  However, that without more  did
    not amount to a material error of law.

13. Mr Dixon pointed out that  the  FTT  had  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    credible, and there had been no challenge to the  credibility  findings
    made by the FTT.  The Claimant had explained in  paragraph  29  of  her
    witness statement that she had in fact visited  the  Ethiopian  Embassy
    and was told that she was not entitled to Ethiopian nationality.

14. Mr Dixon  submitted  that  as  the  FTT  had  accepted  the  Claimant's
    credibility, it must therefore have accepted the contents of  paragraph
    29, and therefore the Claimant had satisfied the procedure and guidance
    referred to in ST.

15. Mr Dixon's case was that although it was an error not to make reference
    to ST, and the  fact  that  the  Claimant  had  visited  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy, given the circumstances, this was not a material error.



The Secretary of State's Response

16. Mrs Aboni submitted that there appeared to be no consideration  of  the
    Claimant's claim to have visited the Ethiopian Embassy,  and  therefore
    the FTT had materially erred in law, and the  decision  should  be  set
    aside and remitted to the FTT to be re-made.



My Conclusions and Reasons

17. It is common ground that ST is a country  guidance  decision,  and  was
    referred to at paragraph 26 of the refusal decision.  I set  out  below
    paragraph 5 of the headnote to ST;

         "(5) Judicial fact-finders will expect a person asserting arbitrary
             deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach  the  embassy
             in London with all documentation emanating from Ethiopia  that
             the person may have,  relevant  to  establishing  nationality,
             including ID card, address, place of birth, identity and place
             of birth of parents, identity and whereabouts of any relatives
             in Ethiopia and details of the person's schooling in Ethiopia.
              Failing production of Ethiopian documentation in  respect  of
             such matters, the person should put in  writing  all  relevant
             details, to be handed to the embassy.  Whilst persons are  not
             for this purpose entitled to portray themselves to the embassy
             as Eritrean, there  is  no  need  to  suppress  details  which
             disclose an Eritrean connection (paragraph 105)."

18. The Secretary of State's case was that the Claimant was  Ethiopian  not
    Eritrean, and therefore the Claimant needed to attend at the  Ethiopian
    Embassy to see whether she would be accepted as an  Ethiopian  citizen.
    The Claimant had not taken this course of action prior  to  refusal  of
    her claim on 31st July 2015.

19. The FTT summarised the Respondent's reasons for refusal at paragraph 10
    noting that the ST point had been relied upon, in that the Claimant;

         "Has not provided any evidence from the Ethiopian Embassy to verify
         her claim to be Eritrean in accordance with ST".

20. Thereafter there is no mention in the FTT decision of  ST.   It  is  an
    error of law not to follow a country guidance case, if the  issue  upon
    which guidance is given, is relevant to the case being considered.   It
    would appear that in this case, the issue in ST was relevant.

21. The Claimant had in fact addressed this issue,  as  although  when  her
    application was refused, she had not visited the Ethiopian Embassy, she
    had subsequently done so and I  set  out  below  paragraph  29  of  her
    witness statement which was before the FTT;

         29.  "I attended Ethiopian Embassy in (sic) 17th March 2016.  I was
             given a form to complete and they  asked  me  if  I  have  any
             documents, for example  birth  certificate  or  passport  that
             confirm that I am an Ethiopian national.  They also  asked  me
             details about my life and my  background.   I  was  told  that
             because I do not have any documents confirming that I  am  not
             an  Ethiopian  national  I  am  not  entitled  for   Ethiopian
             nationality.  They did  not  provide  me  with  any  documents
             confirming the same."

22. There would appear to be a typing error in  the  above  paragraph,  and
    that presumably the Appellant meant to say that  because  she  did  not
    have any documents confirming that she is an Ethiopian national, she is
    not entitled to Ethiopian nationality.

23. It is therefore evident that following refusal of her asylum claim, the
    Appellant contends that she did go to the Ethiopian  Embassy,  and  was
    told  that  she  was  not  entitled  to  Ethiopian  citizenship.    The
    application for permission to appeal may not have been  made,  had  the
    FTT recorded this.

24. I find that the FTT erred in not recording  and  considering  the  fact
    that the Claimant had visited the Ethiopian Embassy in  an  attempt  to
    follow the guidance given in ST, but I do not find that in  this  case,
    the error is material.

25. The FTT recorded in  paragraph  37  that  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant was "consistent, plausible and credible."

26. The FTT found at paragraph 38 that Mr Haile was a credible witness.

27. I therefore  conclude  that  the  FTT  accepted  the  contents  of  the
    Claimant's witness statement,  and  therefore  accepted  that  she  had
    visited the Ethiopian Embassy, and was told that she was  not  entitled
    to Ethiopian citizenship.  I cannot see, in the circumstances, that the
    FTT's failure to record this amounts to a material error of  law.   The
    Claimant's evidence was that she had visited the Ethiopian Embassy, and
    the FTT found her to be credible and accepted her evidence.

28. The grounds submitted by the Secretary  of  State  do  not  disclose  a
    material error of law in the FTT decision.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  request  to
the Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and I see no need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             6th December 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             6th December 2016
