

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11150/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on: |
|On 25 May 2016                                |On 25 November 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                     K A
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the appellant:     Mr J Howard, Counsel instructed by Fountain
solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Holmes, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to return her to Albania after refusing  her  international
   protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  humanitarian  protection
   grounds, or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. At a hearing on 12 June 2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  found
   that there was a material error of law, and set aside the decision of the
   First-tier Tribunal, posing two questions for the  Tribunal  which  would
   remake the decision:

       1) Is the appellant as a single woman with an illegitimate child  at
          risk in Albania?

       2) If so (given that if  the  first  question  is  answered  in  the
          negative, the question of internal relocation does not arise), on
          the basis of such findings  as  have  already  been  made,  would
          internal relocation be unduly harsh?

3. When considering this appeal, the First-tier Tribunal did  not  have  the
   benefit of the Upper Tribunal's country guidance in TD and AD (trafficked
   women) Albania CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).

Preserved findings of fact

4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  account
   generally lacked credibility and the Judge was not satisfied that she had
   been trafficked.  He accepted that certain facts  and  matters  had  been
   established.  The following findings of fact are  preserved  and/or  were
   agreed between the parties at the hearing today:

    i) The appellant is an Albanian woman.

   ii) She came to the United Kingdom at a time  which  cannot  be  clearly
       established.

  iii) She claimed asylum on 20 January 2014.

   iv) On 21 August 2014,  in  Cardiff,  the  appellant  gave  birth  to  a
       daughter.

    v) She is now pregnant with her second child.

   vi) If returned to Albania today, she would  be  returning  as  a  young
       unaccompanied woman with one, or in due course  two,  children  born
       outside marriage.

5. On 26 May 2016, I gave directions for the future conduct of  the  appeal,
   requiring the parties to serve and file written submissions  setting  out
   concisely all issues and arguments in relation to  the  remaking  of  the
   decision in this appeal on which  the  appellant  relies,  in  particular
   those identified by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker and/or arising out
   of the country guidance given in TD and AD, including whether  any  facts
   remained in dispute and whether a further oral hearing is required.  Both
   sets of submissions are now before me.  I also directed that  no  further
   documents were to be filed without the leave of the Upper Tribunal.

6.  For the appellant, the written submissions  record  that  the  appellant
   has now had the second child with whom  she  was  pregnant  at  the  last
   hearing, a boy born on 3 June 2016.  The appellant relies on the  country
   guidance decision in AM and BM and in particular on the finding at  [171]
   that a daughter with an illegitimate child could not return  to  live  in
   the family home; and at [187] that there were difficulties for  a  single
   woman in reintegrating into Albanian society, where  the  family  is  the
   principal unit for welfare and mutual  support,  as  well  as  being  the
   channel through which employment is most often obtained.

7. The appellant submits that in her  particular  circumstances,  she  would
   have  no  support  network  available;  that  she  has  two  illegitimate
   children; that she is a young woman from a rural family, which will  have
   conservative views; and that her education  is  limited  to  primary  and
   secondary school.  The appellant would return as a vulnerable individual.



8. The appellant relies on the expert  report  of  Sonya  Landesmann  of  19
   October 2015, as to the appellant's having broken  the  social  norms  of
   acceptable conduct in Albania and her  opinion  that  it  would  be  both
   difficult and dangerous for this appellant to  be  returned  to  Albania,
   where she would be considered  to  have  acted  in  a  dishonourable  and
   shameful way, for which her family would consider death the only outcome.

9. The First-tier Tribunal had accepted that the risk to the  appellant  was
   well-founded and that she was at risk of ill-treatment by reason  of  the
   shame the appellant had brought to her family.  The appellant argued that
   the population at large, and not just the appellant's family, would  have
   an interest in harming her.

10. The appellant's submission cited a long passage from the 2015  US  State
   Department report concerning  the  position  of  women  and  children  in
   Albania, and also section 7.2  of  the  Home  Office  Country  of  Origin
   Information and Guidance on women fearing domestic violence  in  Albania,
   published on 6 April 2016.

11. In relation to internal relocation, the appellant argued  that  Albanian
   women were treated poorly in domestic violence shelters,  which  provided
   only short term protection.  She contended that the  Tribunal,  making  a
   fair assessment of the relevant facts, as set out in Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) and others [2007]  UKHL  49,  should
   find that it would be unduly harsh to expect her  to  return  to  Albania
   with her children and relocate away from any risk her  family  presented.
   There was a lack of sufficiency of protection  throughout  the  whole  of
   Albania for her.

12. The appellant also argued that it was  in  the  best  interests  of  her
   children for her to remain the United Kingdom, rather than be returned to
   Albania.  There is no further detail on that point.

13.  For  the  respondent,  Ms  Holmes  reminded  the  Tribunal   that   the
   appellant's trafficking account had been found to lack credibility.   The
   First-tier Tribunal Judge had accepted that the appellant's  first  child
   was illegitimate, but her account in her statement of 16 May 2016  as  to
   the parentage of the second child was totally lacking in credibility:  "I
   can confirm that I met a man in Dunhill Park approximately 9 months  ago.
   We started flirting.  I went back to his place, we had  sex  and  I  fell
   pregnant".  Ms Holmes reminded me that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
   found the appellant to be a credible witness overall.

14. The appellant had been resourceful, travelling to  the  United  Kingdom,
   then absconding from Cardiff to London with her child.  She was  in  good
   mental and physical health, save that she had dermatitis, and the  First-
   tier Tribunal had found that there were no concerns about her ability  to
   care for her child.  The appellant had primary and  secondary  education,
   and would not necessarily be disadvantaged by a lack of higher education.
    She did not fall to be treated as a vulnerable individual.

15. The report of  Sonya  Landesmann  failed  to  approach  the  appellant's
   circumstances as they had been found to exist, that is,  that  she  is  a
   woman with the attributes set out above, but  not  a  trafficked  person.
   Its  value  in  assessing  the  risk  on  return  was  reduced  by   that
   misunderstanding.   Ms  Landesmann  had  not  met  or   interviewed   the
   appellant, and appeared not to have visited Albania since  2001,  working
   mainly with Albanian and Kosovan survivors  in  exile.   Ms  Landesmann's
   report should be regarded as emotive and partial, and  Ms  Holmes  argued
   that no weight should be placed upon it.

16. In TD and AD, the Upper Tribunal had found that in general, there was  a
   Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection  in  Albania  (see  [119(d)]),
   that it was not impossible for women to live alone  in  Tirana,  with  or
   without children (paragraph [107]) and that the discrimination and stigma
   which attached to women living alone was not at the Article 3 ECHR level,
   although it was 'a factor to be considered  cumulatively  when  assessing
   whether internal flight is reasonable  for  any  given  appellant'.   The
   appellant had the option of applying for  reintegration  assistance  from
   Refugee Action, to ease her return to Albania.

17. As regards the best interests of  the  children,  Ms  Holmes  relied  on
   Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74  at
   [24].  The children were not British citizens and had no right to  future
   health care or education in the United Kingdom.

18. Ms Holmes submitted that the appellant had  not  discharged  the  burden
   upon her of establishing that she would be at risk on return to  Albania,
   or that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to  exercise  an  internal
   relocation option within Albania.  She asked me to dismiss the appeal.

19. Neither party's submissions seek a  further  oral  hearing.   I  proceed
   therefore to remake the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  and
   arguments before me.



Discussion

20. This appeal was adjourned to await the outcome of the  Upper  Tribunal's
   decision in TD and AD (Trafficked women)(CG) [2016] UKUT  92  (IAC),  but
   that decision is of limited assistance, as it is not accepted  that  this
   appellant is a trafficked person.  Nevertheless, some help can be derived
   from TD and AD on internal relocation, assuming in the appellant's favour
   that she will not be well-received if she returns to her family  and  her
   home area.  The Upper Tribunal looked at reintegration outside  shelters,
   at [105] - [111]:
         "105.      ...At some point, the  VOT  must  either  return  to her
         family, or set out on her own if that option is not available,  and
         it is in this latter endeavour, the parties agree, that  she  would
         face her greatest challenge.
         106.      All of the evidence  before  us  indicates  that  in this
         period women face numerous obstacles, that  include,  but  are  not
         limited  to:  financial  hardship,  difficulty  in  finding  secure
         employment  and  housing,  poverty,   discrimination   and   stigma
         (pertaining to the VOT as well as any  children  she  might  have),
         isolation and no, or severely restricted, access to  mental  health
         services. As will be seen below it  is  argued  on  behalf  of  the
         appellants that the  cumulative  effect  of  such  factors  renders
         internal flight as unreasonable for many VOTs; it is further argued
         that the vulnerability of a VOT at this  point  places  her  at  an
         unacceptably high risk of re-trafficking or other harm.
         107.      We do not accept that it is, in general, "impossible" for
         a woman to live on her own in  Tirana,  as  asserted  by  Professor
         Haxhiymeri. She refers in her  evidence  to  her  own  organisation
         resettling survivors of domestic violence in the city, living alone
         or with their children. The case studies in the UNP  report  reveal
         that five of the eight women entered into employment after  leaving
         the shelter, and of these  three  were  living  apart  from  family
         members, for instance 'T' who is paying her own rent, working for a
         private employer as a chef and who describes herself as  "confident
         and highly skilful".
         108.      Such women have been able to live alone in  Tirana; women
         who have been able to put the skills  they  have  acquired  in  the
         shelters to good use, and even to flourish in their new  vocations.
         For these women, there will be a meaningful net gain from  packages
         such as that offered by the IOM: the skills  they  have  developed,
         sometimes with the support of a  loan  or  grant,  has  given  them
         economic security and  the  ability  to  survive  away  from  their
         families.
         109.      For less resilient or adaptable women  however,  the path
         to financial independence  is  not  so  straightforward.  Professor
         Haxhiymeri describes the assistance offered by  the  shelters,  the
         Albanian government or the IOM as "superficial" and  stressed  that
         such training packages rarely help  women  in  the  long  run.  The
         problem she identifies is that women in Albania tend to  find  work
         in the low-skilled, informal sector where employment is not  secure
         or protected, and where wages rarely keep  up  with  the  costs  of
         living: this is the "grey economy" discussed in AM & BM [8]. All of
         the evidence supports a finding that the financial constraints make
         survival in the cities difficult: we accept Professor  Haxhiymeri's
         evidence of her personal experience of trying to find accommodation
         for survivors of domestic violence. Workers at  her  NGO  typically
         find that the cost of basic accommodation in Tirana,  even  in  the
         outskirts, is E200 per month  whereas  a  woman  working  in  those
         conditions will typically earn no more than E150.  The  respondents
         to the research consistently reported that it is  "very  difficult"
         to live alone because of the financial constraints women  face,  in
         particular in staying in employment and in  paying  rent.  The  UNP
         report confirms that there is no provision for VOTs to have  access
         to social housing, and that they are therefore forced  to  rent  in
         the private sector. The high unemployment rate  means  that  people
         are forced  to  take  "any  kind  of  job".  The  Needs  Assessment
         succinctly summarises this situation: "most victims  are  returning
         to the same place, facing the same problems that  they  had  before
         they were trafficked". The difference now being that they must face
         such daily grind whilst living with the physical, psychological and
         social consequences of that experience.
         110.      ...We adopt and underline the view expressed in that case
         that in all claims it is important to consider the circumstances of
         the individual, including her strength, age, and psychological make-
         up. For VOTs who have been through extreme traumatic experiences it
         is not difficult to see how they are likely to suffer psychological
         consequences such as complex  PTSD.  The  VOT  may  suffer  lasting
         physical damage as a result of her experiences. These are important
         factors which must be considered when  assessing  whether  internal
         flight is reasonable for any individual VOT.  Whilst  the  evidence
         relating to psychological support services for VOTs once they  have
         left  the  shelters  suggests  some  availability,   that   it   is
         undoubtedly patchy and in many cases wholly inadequate as  we  have
         observed above. An individual, because of her condition,  may  have
         difficulty in accessing or engaging  with  such  services  that  do
         exist.  She  may  be  required  to  pay  for  mental  health  care,
         increasing her financial burden. These are all matters relevant  to
         the  consideration  of  whether  internal  flight   is   reasonably
         available.
         111.      As to  the  social  consequences  of  a  past trafficking
         experience we note the findings in AM & BM about  social  exclusion
         of women labelled as kurva, in  the  context  of  the  tenacity  of
         Northern  Albanian  traditions.  It  might  be  thought  that   the
         increased migration from the countryside to the cities  might  lead
         to a weakening in such belief systems, as extended  families  leave
         the land and break  down  into  smaller,  more  independent  units.
         Surprisingly we were shown no evidence to that effect, and in  fact
         it was suggested by Professor  Haxhiymeri  that  such  migration  -
         primarily from North to South - has had  the  opposite  effect,  of
         transporting conservative Geg social mores into  the  more  liberal
         south. The importance of the family unit as a social  and  economic
         construct was emphasised in all the evidence before us.  We  accept
         her evidence  that  women  living  on  their  own  are  immediately
         identifiable as being on the 'outside';  even  if  the  details  of
         their history are not known, work  colleagues  and  neighbours  may
         view them with some suspicion. In some cases  that  suspicion  will
         escalate to open prejudice and  hostility.  We  therefore  find  no
         reason to depart from the general conclusions on this matter  drawn
         by the Tribunal in AM & BM. Women living on their own are likely to
         be socially distinct. Whilst discrimination  and  stigma  certainly
         exist they will not generally constitute persecutory "serious harm"
         or breach Article 3, but  this  it  nevertheless  a  factor  to  be
         considered cumulatively when assessing whether internal  flight  is
         reasonable for any given appellant."
21. As regards the position of women in Albania, the  evidence  relied  upon
   is the US State Department Report on Albania for 2015,  published  on  13
   April 2016, which was not before the Tribunal in TD and AD.  The relevant
   passages in the more recent report are as follows:

         "Rape and Domestic Violence: Rape, including  spousal  rape,  is  a
         crime. Penalties for rape and assault depend  on  the  age  of  the
         victim. ...The law includes provisions on sexual assault and sexual
         harassment and makes the criminalization of spousal rape  explicit.
         The government did not enforce the law effectively. Victims  rarely
         reported spousal abuse, and officials  did  not  prosecute  spousal
         rape. The concept of spousal rape was  not  well  established,  and
         authorities and the public often did not consider it a crime.

         Domestic violence against women, including spousal abuse,  remained
         a serious problem. Police  often  did  not  have  the  training  or
         capacity to  deal  effectively  with  domestic  violence  cases.  A
         government shelter for domestic violence victims in Tirana assisted
         28 women and 47 children through 2015 but could not accept  victims
         without a court order. NGOs  operated  three  shelters  to  protect
         victim of domestic violence as well as trafficking, one  in  Tirana
         and two outside the capital. ...

         Discrimination: The law provides for  the  same  legal  status  and
         rights for  women  as  for  men,  including  under  family,  labor,
         property,  nationality,  and  inheritance  laws.  Women  were   not
         excluded from any occupation in either law or  practice,  but  they
         were underrepresented  at  the  highest  levels  of  their  fields.
         Although the law mandates equal pay for equal work, the  government
         and private employers did not fully implement  this  provision.  In
         many communities, women experienced societal  discrimination  based
         on traditional social norms depicting women as subordinate to  men.
         There were reports of discrimination  in  employment  (see  section
         7.d.)."

22.  I accept Ms Holmes' argument that I can  derive  little  assistance  in
   assessing this appeal from the reports of Ms Landesmann, prepared without
   meeting or speaking to the appellant, because they  erroneously  approach
   this appellant's circumstances on the basis  that  she  is  a  trafficked
   person, which the NRM found not to be the case.  In her report of 23  May
   2016, Ms Landesmann identified the gap in evidence as to the paternity of
   the appellant's second child.

Discussion

23. The appellant is a resourceful young woman who left Albania on  her  own
   passport in 2013, on her account, travelling alone  when  she  was  newly
   pregnant (the appellant claimed asylum in January 2014 and  her  son  was
   born in August 2014). Her account is that she flew openly from Albania to
   Belgium, stayed 2 nights in Belgium in a hotel, then  came  clandestinely
   by lorry to the United Kingdom.   She may have had an uncle's  assistance
   in setting up the journey. The appellant was educated in Albania, both in
   primary and secondary school, but  has  no  tertiary  education.  She  is
   generally healthy: she experienced post-natal depression after the  birth
   of  her  daughter,  but  has  not  been  seen  by  her  general   medical
   practitioner for that since December  2014.   She  has  hand  dermatitis.
   While in the United Kingdom,  the  appellant  relocated  unassisted  from
   Cardiff to London (Ms Holmes says she 'absconded').

24. The respondent accepts that this appellant would be returned to  Albania
   now as a single mother, with two children,  a  daughter  born  in  August
   2014, now 2 years old, and a son born in 2016.   Both  her  children  are
   very young and neither is of school, or even nursery, age.  No individual
   factors regarding either child are relied upon.

25. The best interests of the appellant's children, for  whom  there  is  no
   claim to British citizenship, and who are, therefore,  Albanian  citizens
   like  their  mother,  lies  in  growing  up  in  the  country  of   their
   nationality, and remaining with their mother.  They have not  spent  very
   long in the United Kingdom and are still of an age where their mother  is
   their primary focus and carer.

26. I observe  that  since  appellant  is  still  married  to  her  husband,
   although he has disappeared, it appears inaccurate to say  that  her  two
   children have  been  'born  outside  marriage'.   However,  there  is  no
   father's name on the  daughter's  birth  certificate  in  2014,  and  the
   parentage of the appellant's son born in 2016 remains  unexplained.   The
   appellant's account of how she became pregnant with her second  child  is
   not believed (a one-night stand after meeting a man in a London park).

27. No other facts are established, in particular, the  appellant's  account
   of her marriage is not believed, nor  that  she  was  trafficked  to  the
   United Kingdom.

28. The appellant has shown herself to be resourceful in  her  travel  alone
   to the United Kingdom, and her relocation from  Cardiff  to  London.  The
   paucity of information as to what the appellant has really been doing  in
   the United Kingdom does not assist her in  showing  that  she  could  not
   cope, financially and socially, in a city such as  Tirana,  if  she  were
   returned to  Albania.   I  note  that  there  is  voluntary  repatriation
   assistance available from the respondent to tide the appellant  over  the
   initial post-return period,  and  that  if  the  Institute  of  Migration
   accepts that she is a trafficked person (despite the  rejection  of  that
   account by the NRM, the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal),  she
   may also benefit from its resettlement programme.

29. The risk of domestic violence outside the appellant's home area  is  not
   made out.  The appellant's case is that her husband is missing.  If  that
   is the case, she is not at risk of domestic violence from him.  She  says
   that her family will not accept her, but it is not clear how  they  would
   be aware that she had returned, if she  remained  in  Tirana  and  sought
   employment and accommodation there.  The  appellant  is  not  uneducated.
   She has primary and secondary education and the country evidence suggests
   that there are jobs available,  albeit  not  at  the  higher  levels,  in
   Tirana.

30. I therefore answer the questions posed by Judge Zucker as follows:   the
   appellant has not discharged the burden of showing that she is, in  fact,
   a single woman  with  illegitimate  children.   On  the  appellant's  own
   account, she is a married woman, whose husband is missing, a circumstance
   which might attract sympathy rather than exclusion and  stigma.   If  the
   appellant's account of her marriage is  a  falsehood,  and  she  has  two
   children outside marriage, then the country evidence  suggests  that  she
   may have difficulty with her parents and in her home area, and that there
   may be a risk there at the level of persecution.

31. If that is the case, it is for the appellant to  show  that  she  cannot
   relocate to any other place in Albania. Even having regard to  the  lower
   standard applicable in international protection cases, I am not satisfied
   that she has done so.  There are too many difficulties and  discrepancies
   with her account of the parentage of her two  children;  the  possibility
   that she has a partner, or indeed a husband in the United Kingdom, cannot
   be excluded.

32. If the appellant is  to  be  returned  alone  with  her  children,  then
   applying AM and BM and  TD  and  AD,  there  is  Horvath  sufficiency  of
   protection and assistance available  for  resettlement,  for  example  in
   Tirana, where the evidence is that there are jobs, and lone  women,  even
   with children, do live and work.  I do not find on these  facts  that  it
   would be unduly harsh to expect this appellant to live and work in Tirana
   with her children. Nor do I find that the best interests  of  these  very
   young children requires them to remain in the United Kingdom, where  they
   are not citizens and have no right to education or health care (Zoumbas).

33. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.




   Date:    24 November 2016      Signed:     Judith A J C Gleeson

                                              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



