
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11447/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th July 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HALL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown of Counsel, instructed by Knights Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Immigration History and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a decision of Judge  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Mitchell promulgated on 2nd March 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and we will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Afghanistan born 5th  June  1982  who
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 27th March 2002 and claimed
    asylum.

 4. His asylum claim was refused and his subsequent appeal  dismissed.   He
    was removed from the United Kingdom on 12th September 2006.  On a  date
    unknown the Claimant re-entered the United Kingdom.

 5. On 20th  July  2012  the  Claimant  made  further  submissions  to  the
    Respondent, claiming that he was entitled to asylum by  reason  of  his
    ethnicity as a Hazara and his political opinion.  On 13th June 2013 the
    Claimant submitted further representations claiming that he would be at
    risk  if  returned  to  Afghanistan  because  of  his   conversion   to
    Christianity.

 6.  The  Claimant  was  interviewed  in  connection  with  these   further
    submissions on 15th June 2014.  On 7th October 2014  the  Secretary  of
    State issued a reasons for refusal letter explaining why the Claimant's
    application had been refused, and on 14th October 2014 issued a  Notice
    of Immigration Decision which indicated that a decision had been  taken
    to remove the Claimant from the United Kingdom.  In brief  summary  the
    Secretary of State refused the  application,  not  accepting  that  the
    Claimant would be at risk if returned to Afghanistan.  It  was  however
    accepted that he had been baptised on 2nd June 2013 and  in  accordance
    with NM (Christian Converts) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00045  it  was
    accepted that if the Claimant had genuinely converted to  Christianity,
    then a grant of asylum would be appropriate.

 7. The Secretary of State noted that the Claimant  had  not  provided  any
    letters of support from members of the church he claimed to attend.  It
    was also noted that while he answered some questions about Christianity
    correctly  when  interviewed,  there  were  other  questions  where  he
    displayed a lack of knowledge.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  of  the
    opinion that the knowledge he had displayed about  Christianity  was  a
    repetition of learned facts rather than a genuine display of faith  and
    his claim was considered to be a fabrication and it  was  not  accepted
    that he had genuinely converted to Christianity.  In  addition  it  was
    not accepted that the Claimant was entitled to humanitarian protection,
    nor that there would be a breach of his human rights if he was  removed
    from the United Kingdom.

 8. The Claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Mitchell (the judge)  on  20th
    February 2015.  The judge found that the Claimant is a genuine  convert
    to Christianity and therefore allowed his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.
    Because of the findings that the Appellant would be at risk if returned
    to Afghanistan the appeal was also allowed with reference to Articles 2
    and 3 of the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention).  The judge did not accept that the Claimant  was  entitled
    to succeed with his appeal  in  relation  to  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention neither did the judge accept the Appellant's claim  that  he
    had not in fact been removed from the United Kingdom on 12th  September
    2006.  The Claimant had also contended  that  he  had  been  unlawfully
    deprived of the  benefits  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  ELR  policy
    relating to Afghanistan for failed asylum seekers, and the judge  found
    that he was not entitled to have his case considered with reference  to
    that policy.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal contending that the judge had made a material misdirection  of
    law by misapplying the principles set out in Ali Dorodian 01TH01537  in
    that the judge had accepted the Claimant's disputed conversion  without
    hearing any evidence from a minister of the church  or  parish  priest.
    The judge had relied only upon the Claimant's evidence.

10. Permission to appeal was granted and at a  hearing  on  15th  May  2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall found that the judge had erred in  not
    correctly applying  the  principles  in  Dorodian  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  indicated  that  the  decision
    would be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  The findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellant  had  been  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom on 12th September 2006 and  that  he  re-entered  this  country
    illegally in 2010  were  preserved,  as  were  the  findings  that  the
    Claimant was not entitled to the benefit of the  Secretary  of  State's
    ELR policy on Afghanistan.  In addition the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Claimant's appeal could not succeed with reference to
    Article 8 were preserved.

11. The hearing was adjourned to enable the Claimant, who was  not  legally
    represented, to give evidence, and arrange for  his  parish  priest  to
    attend the hearing.  The purpose of the Upper Tribunal hearing would be
    to assess the evidence, and decide whether the Claimant's conversion to
    Christianity is genuine.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - 10th July 2015

Preliminary Issues

12. The Claimant attended, and was represented by Mr Brown of Counsel.   We
    were told that no interpreter would be required.

13. We ascertained that we had received all documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

14. We had received the Respondent's bundle that had been before the First-
    tier, and the Claimant's bundle  comprising  151  pages.   In  addition
    there was a further letter from Father Duncan McVicar  dated  5th  July
    2015.

15. Both representatives had  seen  the  error  of  law  decision  produced
    following the hearing on 15th May 2015, and understood that  the  issue
    before the Upper Tribunal  was  whether  the  Claimant  was  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity.

16. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

17. We firstly heard from the Claimant who adopted  his  witness  statement
    dated  13th  February  2015.   The  Claimant  was  questioned  by  both
    representatives and we have recorded all questions and answers  in  our
    Record of Proceedings and it is not necessary to reiterate them in full
    here.  The Claimant's evidence may be summarised as follows.

18. In relation to his conversion to Christianity the Claimant had  started
    to attend church regularly in the United Kingdom in 2003.  He  referred
    to Sister Barbara who  would  discuss  the  Catholic  faith  with  him.
    However the Claimant only started  to  seriously  study  the  Christian
    faith about a year before he was baptised on 2nd June 2013.

19. The Claimant reads the Bible on a regular basis and  regularly  attends
    church.  He was interviewed  in  connection  with  his  claim  to  have
    converted to Christianity on 15th  June  2014,  and  his  view  of  the
    interview was that he was able to demonstrate a good  understanding  of
    his faith, but he accepted that he still learning about his new  faith.
    He felt that the Secretary of State was wrong and unreasonable to  find
    that because he could not answer every question, this meant that he was
    not a genuine Christian.

20. We then heard evidence from Father McVicar who adopted the contents  of
    his letter dated 5th July 2015 in which he confirmed that  he  met  the
    Claimant at the end of 2012 and described him as an  active  member  of
    his parish community.  It  was  confirmed  that  the  Claimant  attends
    church regularly and Father McVicar carried  out  his  baptism  and  he
    became a Roman Catholic Christian on 2nd June 2013.   Father  McVicar's
    letter confirms that he  has  no  hesitation  in  confirming  that  the
    conversion from Islam to Christianity is genuine.

21. We have recorded all of Father McVicar's  evidence  in  our  Record  of
    Proceedings and it is not necessary to set it out in  full  here.   The
    evidence may be summarised as follows.

22. Father McVicar explained that his church has six safeguards  to  ensure
    that a baptism is genuine.

23. Firstly there must be a formal  interview  between  the  candidate  for
    baptism and the priest so  that  the  priest  can  assess  whether  the
    candidate is genuine.

24. Secondly every candidate must attend a course  of  instruction  in  the
    Christian faith which may be carried out at group level or on a one-to-
    one basis depending on the circumstances.   This  would  normally  last
    between four  and  six  months.   Father  McVicar  confirmed  that  the
    Claimant attended all the meetings.

25. Thirdly every candidate must take part in the life of the local parish.
     At a minimum he or she  must  attend  church  every  Sunday.   It  was
    confirmed that the Claimant had attended church every Sunday since  the
    process started.

26. Fourthly when the course of instruction has been completed, there  must
    be another meeting between the priest and the  candidate,  and  if  the
    candidate wishes to continue, there must be an application made to  the
    diocese in a formal way.  The candidate must  sign  a  declaration  and
    this is sent to a Tribunal, and if approved, permission is given to the
    priest to baptise.  This means that a priest cannot carry out a baptism
    without permission.

27. Fifthly there must be a sponsor from the local Christian community, and
    in this case it must be a practising Roman Catholic Christian  over  16
    years of age.  The Claimant had such a sponsor.

28. Sixthly at the end of the process, a baptism ceremony is  performed  in
    public so that the parish community can  have  full  knowledge  of  the
    event, and if anybody knows of  any  reason  why  a  candidate  is  not
    suitable they can speak up.

29. Father McVicar  stated  that  he  has  no  doubt  that  the  Claimant's
    conversion to Christianity is genuine.  He has witnessed his attendance
    at church and his willingness to  take  on  responsibility  within  the
    church.  Numerous members of the church have signed letters  confirming
    their support for the Claimant, and confirming their belief that he  is
    a genuine Christian.

30. Father McVicar stated that his church receives between four  and  eight
    converts to Christianity per year, and he  estimated  that  20%-25%  of
    these are individuals from foreign countries.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

31. Mr Harrison commented that it was clear from Father McVicar's  evidence
    that the Claimant  had  been  accepted  wholeheartedly  by  the  parish
    community as a genuine Christian convert.

The Claimant's Submissions

32. Mr Brown submitted that  the  burden  of  proof  had  been  discharged.
    Father McVicar had explained the rigorous process that preceded baptism
    and had expressed wholeheartedly and unequivocally, his belief that the
    Claimant's conversion to Christianity is genuine.   We  were  therefore
    asked to allow the appeal.

33. At the conclusion of oral submissions we reserved our decision.

Our Conclusions and Reasons


34. We have taken into account all the evidence placed before us,  together
    with the submissions of both representatives.  The burden of  proof  is
    on the Claimant, and  can  be  described  as  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood.

35. It has been accepted by the Secretary of State that if  the  Claimant's
    conversion to Christianity is genuine, then he is entitled to  a  grant
    of asylum.  That is the issue that we have to consider.

36. We have taken into account the Claimant's immigration history  and  the
    fact that he was initially refused asylum and his subsequent appeal was
    dismissed on 28th December 2004.

37. We have also taken into account that the Appellant's claim not to  have
    been removed from the United Kingdom on 12th  September  2006  has  not
    been believed.

38. The Secretary of State accepts that the Claimant has been baptised as a
    Roman Catholic Christian and that this baptism took place on  2nd  June
    2013.  We are satisfied that the Claimant's conversion to  Christianity
    is genuine.

39. We place weight upon the Claimant's evidence on this  issue,  and  very
    significant weight upon Father McVicar's  evidence.   We  found  Father
    McVicar to be an impressive and  credible  witness  who  took  time  to
    explain the safeguards and procedures which are carried  out  prior  to
    baptism.  Baptism is a serious commitment, but it may be the case  that
    some individuals profess to have converted to Christianity,  simply  in
    order to remain in the United Kingdom,  and  their  conversion  is  not
    genuine.  We formed the opinion after  listening  to  Father  McVicar's
    evidence that the church is aware of  this  possibility  which  is  why
    rigorous safeguards are in place.

40. Father McVicar's evidence  was  unequivocal  and  was  accepted  by  Mr
    Harrison on behalf of the Secretary of State.

41. The picture painted of the Appellant is of a relatively new convert  to
    Christianity who regularly attends church, reads the Bible, and engages
    fully with parish life.

42. He did  not  have  an  encyclopaedic  knowledge  of  Christianity  when
    interviewed,  but  we  find  that  this  does  not  detract  from   the
    genuineness  of  his  conversion,  having  taken  into  account  Father
    McVicar's evidence.

43. In addition, we note that contained within  the  Claimant's  bundle  of
    documents at pages 68 to 88, are numerous letters from members  of  the
    parish community confirming their support for the Claimant,  and  their
    belief that he is a genuine Christian.

44. Having accepted the  evidence  placed  before  us,  we  find  that  the
    Claimant's conversion to Christianity is genuine, and he  is  therefore
    entitled to a grant of asylum.

45. Because he is entitled to asylum, he is not  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.   Because  of  our  findings  in  relation  to
    asylum, we also find that the Appellant would be at risk  of  treatment
    that would breach Article 3 of the 1950 Convention if he was removed to
    Afghanistan.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and was  set  aside.   We  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.  We allow the Claimant's appeal on asylum grounds.

The Claimant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

We allow the Claimant's appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  in  relation  to
Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  in  relation  to  the
Claimant's identity.  We continue that direction pursuant to Rule 14 of  The
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date 13th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence  that  was
available to the Tribunal that was not placed before the Secretary of  State
when the initial decision was made.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 13th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

