
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        AA/11065/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                            Sent
On 17 June 2014        On 20 June 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                     TM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. H.  Short  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Turpin  &
                       Miller Solicitors.
For  the  Respondent:             Mr.  P.  Duffy,  Home  Office   Presenting
                            Officer.


                          MEMORANDUM AND DIRECTIONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Napthine promulgated on 25  March  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated  23  November  2012  to
      remove the Appellant from the UK following the refusal of  her  second
      application for asylum.


   2. Before me today the parties indicated that there was common ground  as
      to there being an error of law on the part  of  Judge  Napthine.  They
      were also in agreement regarding the future  conduct  of  the  appeal:
      that it should be heard again before the First-tier Tribunal.


   3. By way of clarification I invited Mr Duffy to  identify  the  specific
      paragraphs in the Appellant's grounds in support  of  the  application
      for permission to appeal which he acknowledged amounted to an error of
      law. He  struggled  immediately  to  put  his  finger  on  a  specific
      paragraph in what are lengthy grounds, but stated that he accepted the
      substance of paragraph 3 of the grant of permission to  appeal,  which
      he paraphrased as being an inconsistency between the  Judge's  finding
      that a witness who confirmed that the Appellant had been a teacher was
      a credible witness, and the Judge's rejection of the Appellant's claim
      to have been a teacher.


   4. In the circumstances  I  did  not  invite  Ms  Short  to  amplify  the
      challenge to the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  but
      invited the parties' observations  on  future  conduct.  As  indicated
      above, they both agreed that the effect of the Judge's error  went  to
      the overall credibility assessment of the Appellant  and  warranted  a
      fresh hearing. Indeed, it was possible to fix a date  for  hearing  at
      Hatton Cross on 2 December 2014.


   5. Thereafter, I had a brief discussion with Ms Short about the  pleading
      in the grounds that the  Appellant  should  have  been  treated  as  a
      vulnerable witness - noting, which Ms Short confirmed, that  this  did
      not appear to have been the subject of a submission before the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge - and indicating in  such  circumstances  I  would
      have been unlikely to find much merit in  that  ground  of  challenge.
      However, I also indicated that I  was  troubled  by  Judge  Napthine's
      approach to the supporting medical  evidence  -  but  did  not  invite
      either party to address me in this regard or state any  conclusion  in
      the absence of submissions.


   6. Upon coming to write up the 'error of law' determination it has become
      apparent that Mr Duffy may have been  mistaken  in  his  reference  to
      paragraph 3 of the grant of permission to appeal.


   7. This appeal has some history. It relates  to  the  Appellant's  second
      application for asylum - an earlier application having been refused on
      22 July 2009 and a subsequent appeal dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
      Emerton in a determination  promulgated  on  23  September  2009  (ref
      AA/07818/2009).  Following  the  refusal   of   an   application   for
      reconsideration, the Appellant made repeated  further  representations
      to the Respondent: her representations were rejected,  but  they  were
      accepted to constitute a 'fresh claim' giving rise to a further  right
      of appeal against a removal decision made on 23 November 2012. This is
      the relevant immigration decision herein.


   8. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 7 May 2013 by First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Widdup and dismissed. An application for permission to appeal to
      the Upper Tribunal was granted on 13 June 2013 by First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Osborne, and subsequently Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  found
      that there had been an error of law and  that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to be heard afresh in  the  First-tier  with  all  issues  at
      large. It was in such circumstances that the appeal came before  Judge
      Napathine.


   9. It would appear that Mr Duffy's reference to paragraph 3 of the  grant
      of permission to appeal relates to Judge Osborne's grant in respect of
      the previous appeal hearing before Judge Widdup.


  10. In such circumstances it seems clear to me that Mr Duffy's  concession
      was premised on a misconception. In  my  judgement  -  save  with  one
      caveat - the interests of justice require that I reconvene the  appeal
      before me in order that I hear further submissions  on  the  issue  of
      error of law, with a view to immediately proceeding to a rehearing  of
      the appeal if I find there is an error of law. (This  will  also  have
      the advantage of likely leading to a quicker resolution than  awaiting
      the December listing at Hatton Cross.)


  11. The single caveat is this: if the Respondent confirms  the  concession
      on error of law justifying a fresh hearing - whether that  be  on  the
      basis seemingly erroneously indicated by Mr Duffy  or  on  some  other
      basis - then it will be unnecessary to reconvene  the  hearing  before
      the Upper Tribunal and the case can proceed  in  accordance  with  the
      listing at Hatton Cross.


  12. Accordingly, I make the following Directions:


(i) The Respondent is to file and serve within ten days of  the  sending  of
      these Directions written confirmation of whether or not it is accepted
      that there was a material error of  law  on  the  part  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Napthine, such that a fresh hearing of the  Appellant's
      appeal is warranted. In the event that it is conceded that  there  was
      such an error of law, the Respondent is to particularise the  accepted
      error.

(ii) In the event that the Respondent concedes the issue of error of law,  a
      brief Determination  will  be  prepared  to  this  effect  by  me  and
      promulgated to the parties and the appeal will proceed to a  rehearing
      as already listed at Hatton Cross on 2 December 2014.

(iii) In the event that the Respondent does not concede the issue  of  error
      of law, the hearing date at Hatton  Cross  will  be  vacated  and  the
      appeal will be listed before me at Field House on the first  available
      date for consideration of the issue of error of law with a substantive
      rehearing to remake the decision on the appeal to  follow  immediately
      in the event that such error is found. The appeal will be  listed  for
      one day to permit sufficient time.

(iv) In this latter circumstance it will be necessary for the  Appellant  to
      attend  Field  House  with  her  witnesses.  Any  further  documentary
      evidence or statements upon which she may wish to rely should be filed
      and served at least seven days prior to the hearing.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     17 June 2014

