
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11801/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2015                         |On 6 October 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              Mr Ehsan Chapavi
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge S J Clarke whereby she dismissed his  appeal  against  the
   Respondent's decision to remove him from the United Kingdom following the
   refusal of asylum.  Permission to appeal was granted as it  was  arguable
   that the judge had failed to give the Appellant's evidence the  necessary
   anxious scrutiny, particularly given that he was only 14 when he  arrived
   in the United Kingdom.

2. I heard submissions from  both  representatives  and  at  the  hearing  I
   announced that I found that the decision involved the making of an  error
   of law and that my reasons for this would follow.  I set my  reasons  out
   below.

Submissions

3. Ms Head relied on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted  that  the  judge
   had failed to consider the evidence of the witnesses.  I was referred  to
   paragraph [13].  It was submitted that the judge did  not  challenge  the
   reliability of what the witnesses had said, but that she had  disregarded
   this evidence in  her  findings  (paragraphs  [18]  and  [21]).   It  was
   submitted  that  the  witnesses  had  given  independent  evidence,   and
   consisted of the Appellant's social worker, his  foster  mother  and  his
   girlfriend.

4. Secondly  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
   Appellant's responses to the Respondent's case made against him.   I  was
   referred to paragraph [19] relating to the difficulty with dates and  the
   conversion from the Iranian calendar.  It was submitted  that  the  judge
   had failed to consider what  the  Appellant  had  said  to  explain  this
   difference.  Concern had been raised by the Appellant's representative at
   interview regarding the conversions of the Iranian calendar (C13  of  the
   Respondent's bundle).  It was submitted that this had not been taken into
   account.

5. In relation to paragraph [20], the fingerprinting of  the  Appellant,  it
   was submitted that again the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  what  the
   Appellant had said in response.  He had given evidence at the hearing and
   the evidence was not in conflict.

6. It was also submitted with reference to paragraph  [20]  that  the  judge
   had not drawn an adverse inference against the Appellant for not claiming
   asylum in Greece.  The Appellant claimed to have left Iran on  27  or  28
   January and he was  fingerprinted  in  Greece  on  29  January.   It  was
   submitted that there was no reason why these  dates  were  contradictory.
   No reason had been given by the judge as to why it was  implausible  that
   two days after he claimed to have  left  Iran  he  was  fingerprinted  in
   Greece.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  had  merely  reiterated  the
   Respondent's concerns and had not engaged with the Appellant's answers.

7. Further, in paragraph [21] there was no reference to the delay  of  three
   years which the Respondent had taken in coming to her decision.   It  was
   submitted that the consideration of Article  8  was  woefully  inadequate
   [25].  No regard had been had to the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  had
   lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom for over six  years  and  no
   regard had been had to the undue delay on the part of the Respondent.  It
   was submitted that these issues were raised in the skeleton argument.

8. Further, the judge had not dealt with all of the  factors  under  Section
   117B nor had she given  adequate  reasons  for  her  findings.   She  had
   ignored the evidence of the witnesses and her credibility  findings  were
   unsustainable given the fact that she had  not  taken  into  account  the
   Appellant's responses to the Respondent's reasons for refusal.

9. Mr. Duffy submitted that paragraph [13] merely stated that  the  evidence
   of the witnesses did not add to the Appellant's claim for asylum, or  his
   claim under Articles 2 and 3, which was understandable as  the  witnesses
   were based in the United Kingdom.  It was clear that what the judge meant
   was that the Appellant had been in contact with his family secretly;  the
   fact that the witnesses did not know that he was in contact with them was
   because this is what they had been told by the Appellant.

10. He submitted that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom when  he  was
   14 and, although a minor, a 14 year old could  be  expected  to  give  an
   accurate and reasonable account.  The judge was  entitled  to  take  into
   account what he had said at his screening interview.

11. In relation to the dates (paragraph [19]) the Appellant had said he  had
   left Iran on 27 January and then went on a long  lorry  journey  of  more
   than two days.  The judge's findings were open to  her  on  the  evidence
   before her and there was no material error of law.

12. In response Ms Head submitted that even if Mr. Duffy was  correct  about
   paragraph [13], and the fact that the witnesses could not comment on  the
   Appellant's asylum claim, it remained the case that the judge had  failed
   to consider their evidence on other  issues,  for  example  contact  with
   Iran.  There was no reason given for rejecting this evidence and,  as  it
   was in direct contradiction to the judge's findings, she needed  to  give
   reasons for her findings.  The Appellant was a minor living in  a  family
   home under the care of Social Services.  It was  reasonable  to  consider
   that the evidence of such witnesses would be reliable.  If  it  were  not
   found to be reliable, then reasons needed to  be  given.   She  submitted
   that it was not likely that he had pretended that there  was  no  contact
   between him and Iran for six years.

13. In relation to travel, at Q5.1 of his screening  interview  (A4  of  the
   Respondent's bundle) when  the  Appellant  talked  about  the  number  of
   lorries that he had travelled in, he was answering the question of how he
   travelled to the United Kingdom, not how he had travelled to Greece.   It
   was reasonable for him to have taken two or three  days  to  travel  from
   Iran overland to Greece.  The judge had not addressed this.

14.  She  submitted  again  that  the  judge  had  ignored  the  Appellant's
   representative's concern regarding the dates.  It was reasonable that the
   Appellant had continued to use the dates which had been given to him;  he
   was a minor and they had been given to him in a calendar which he did not
   understand.  The judge had ignored this explanation.  She had  failed  to
   consider evidence which was before her on a  number  of  issues  and  the
   decision was unsustainable.

Error of law

15. I find that the judge did not give reasons for why she did not take  the
   evidence of the Appellant or the three witnesses into account.   In  find
   that paragraph [13] only addresses the fact that the witnesses cannot add
   to the Appellant's claim for asylum or under Articles 2 and 3, given that
   they are based in the United Kingdom.  However, it does not  address  the
   value of their evidence on other issues, such as contact with  Iran.   No
   reason is given for why the evidence of these  witnesses  should  not  be
   relied on, and  no  analysis  of  their  evidence  is  contained  in  the
   decision.

16. At paragraph [18] the judge finds that the  most  likely  conclusion  is
   that the Appellant has been in contact with  his  family  since  he  left
   Iran.  At paragraph [21] the judge finds again  that  the  Appellant  has
   always been in contact with his family.  The evidence  of  the  witnesses
   was in complete contradiction to this, yet there is no reference to  this
   evidence.

17. I find that the judge has failed to give reasons for  her  finding  that
   the Appellant is in contact with his family in Iran.  In  doing  so,  she
   has  failed  to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of   three
   independent witnesses including the Appellant's  social  worker  and  his
   foster mother.

18. In relation to the Appellant's evidence, in particular the  explanations
   given  in  response  to  the  Respondent's  reasons  for   refusing   his
   application, there is no analysis of these by the  judge.   There  is  no
   reference to the Appellant's evidence given at the  hearing  relating  to
   being fingerprinted.  There is no reference to the  concerns  which  were
   raised by the Appellant's representative at the  screening  interview  in
   relation to the conversion of dates from the Iranian calendar.

19. Explanations have been  given  by  the  Appellant  for  the  conflicting
   accounts of being fingerprinted, and for the  difference  in  dates,  but
   there is no analysis of these explanations and no reasons given as to why
   these explanations have been rejected.   This  is  particularly  relevant
   given that the Appellant was a  minor  when  he  arrived  in  the  United
   Kingdom and, although the judge states in paragraph  [13]  that  she  has
   taken into account the fact that the Appellant was a minor, this  is  not
   borne out by her decision, particularly  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
   dates.  She states that the Appellant gave the  same  answer  four  times
   but, as submitted by Ms Head, given that he had been told this date in an
   unfamiliar calendar, when he was a minor in a country  to  which  he  had
   only just arrived, it is not  unreasonable  that  he  would  continue  to
   repeat this date.  However, there is no analysis of this.

20. Further there is no explanation given for why it is  inconsistent  that,
   if he left Iran on 27 January,  he  should  have  been  fingerprinted  in
   Greece on 29 January.  There is no reason given for why he would not have
   been able to make the overland journey from Greece to Iran in  two  days.
   The judge merely finds that this is implausible and  must  indicate  that
   the Appellant is lying.

21. The consideration of Article 8  is  in  paragraph  [25].   There  is  no
   reference to the amount of time the Appellant  has  been  living  in  the
   United  Kingdom.   Whilst  saying   that   there   are   no   exceptional
   circumstances, and no reasons to consider the  Appellant's  circumstances
   outside of the immigration rules, the judge has considered some, but  not
   all, of the factors set out in section 117B,  although  this  section  is
   only relevant if a proportionality assessment is carried out.  It is  not
   clear from paragraphs [25] and [26] that the  judge  has  considered  the
   Appellant's circumstances outside of the immigration rules.

22. The  skeleton  argument  contains  detailed  arguments  in  relation  to
   Article 8 (paragraphs 18 to 43), yet the judge has dealt with it  in  two
   paragraphs.  The skeleton argument refers to the case of EU (Afghanistan)
   [2013] EWCA Civ 32.  The judge refers to  this  in  paragraph  [21],  but
   finds that this is a case where the primary facts are not  credible,  and
   fails to engage with the reasoning of EU.


23. I find that the judge  failed  to  give  reasons  for  her  findings  on
   material matters in relation to the evidence before her.  I find that the
   decision involved the making of a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5 October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



