
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |
|Prepared on 8 February 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya, who entered  the  UK  using  a
         Libyan passport and entry clearance as a  student  which  had  been
         granted to him on 13 February 2013. He claimed asylum upon arrival,
         but the Respondent refused to vary his leave, curtailed  his  leave
         so that he had none, and in addition made a decision to remove  him
         from the UK on 14 March 2013.

      2. The Appellant duly appealed against those immigration decisions and
         his appeal was heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Cope,  and  then
         dismissed in a decision promulgated on 13 June 2013  which  roundly
         rejected as untrue the Appellant's account of his experiences.  His
         appeal rights against that decision were duly exhausted.

      3. The Appellant subsequently made a fresh claim  to  asylum,  relying
         upon a deterioration in the situation within  Libya,  although  his
         account of his personal circumstances and experiences remained  the
         same. That fresh claim was refused by the Respondent on 8  December
         2014, and a further decision to remove was made in consequence. The
         Appellant duly appealed against those  immigration  decisions,  and
         his appeal  was  heard  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox,  and
         dismissed in a decision promulgated on 8 May 2015.

      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was  granted  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Andrew on 1 June 2015.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 15 June 2015 in which
         she pointed to the findings made by Judge Fix which she argued were
         entirely adequate to dispose of the appeal. Neither  party  applied
         to introduce further evidence. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The grounds of appeal

      6. The grant of permission was limited to the complaint that the Judge
         had not give  adequate  consideration  to  the  objective  evidence
         relied upon by the Appellant concerning the  deterioration  in  the
         situation within Libya. The other complaints raised in the  grounds
         were rejected as being based upon misrepresentations of the content
         of the decision.

      7. Neither the decision itself, nor the grounds which  Ms  Brakaj  had
         drafted herself, nor the grant of permission, make any reference to
         the relevant recent country guidance  decision  of  AT  and  Others
         (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318. That is of
         concern, given that this country guidance decision was  promulgated
         on 14 July 2014, some nine months before the hearing  before  Judge
         Fox.

      8. In those circumstances I invited Ms Brakaj to address the  question
         of whether Judge Fox's decision was consistent  with  that  country
         guidance, in the light of the findings of primary fact that he  and
         Judge Cope had made. She accepted that it  was,  and  that  in  the
         light of the guidance contained in AT a claimant could not  succeed
         if the Tribunal were merely considering the  risks  he  would  face
         upon return as a fit single  man,  even  if  he  had  exited  Libya
         illegally. She also accepted that the guidance to be  found  in  AT
         also disposed of the substance of the complaint that Judge Fox  had
         not considered Article 15(c), which was in any event without  merit
         because the decision records  that  he  did  [37].    She  accepted
         therefore that the sole  ground  upon  which  permission  had  been
         granted could not succeed, unless she  could  renew  the  complaint
         that Judge Fox made an error of law  in  failing  to  take  as  his
         starting point the Appellant's claim to be a member of  the  Zintan
         clan/tribe, which she argued before me had been a positive  finding
         made in the Appellant's favour  by  Judge  Cope,  although  in  the
         grounds of appeal she had drafted she had argued  that  Judge  Cope
         had failed to resolve this issue.

      9. Although three other complaints  were  raised  in  the  grounds  as
         originally drafted, there was never any merit in them as set out in
         the decision granting limited permission to appeal, and  Ms  Brakaj
         did not seek to advance them further before me.

     10. First the claim that Judge Fox had overlooked the photographs which
         showed a ruined house, which the  Appellant  said  was  his  family
         home. Contrary to the claims made in the grounds these  photographs
         were specifically referred to by Judge Fox, and taken into  account
         [17].

     11. Second Judge Fox was well aware that Tripoli airport was closed  at
         the date of the hearing and made specific reference to it [18  21].
         He did not overlook the matter. As he  explained  in  his  decision
         nothing turned upon the closure of that airport  since  no  removal
         directions had yet been set,  and  no  route  of  return  had  been
         specified by the Respondent. Benghazi airport remained open and  it
         was a safe point of return; AT.

     12. Third, if the Appellant's brother had  entered  the  UK  since  the
         hearing before Judge Cope, then as Judge Fox noted,  that  did  beg
         the obvious question as to why the Appellant had not offered him as
         a witness of fact to corroborate his account, and as  a  source  of
         material new evidence that was not before Judge Cope.  Ms  Brakaj's
         explanation for this was that the Appellant had not told her of the
         presence of his  twin  brother  in  the  UK  prior  to  his  cross-
         examination, and she had no explanation to offer for his conduct in
         that respect. The existence of a twin  brother,  and  his  economic
         activities, was relied upon by the Appellant as an explanation  for
         why his claim to have been in hiding in Libya  was  not  consistent
         with the entries recorded in the bank statements for his  own  bank
         account that he had produced in  support  of  his  entry  clearance
         application [Cope 43].  That  was  a  matter  that  Judge  Fox  was
         perfectly entitled to consider as part of  his  assessment  of  the
         weight to be given to the Appellant's  evidence,  and  the  grounds
         offer no arguable complaint to the approach that Judge Fox took  to
         this evidence in paragraphs 19 and 20 of his decision.

     13. Ms Brakaj's argument before me in relation to the Appellant's claim
         to be a member of the Zintan clan/tribe,  was  twofold.  First  she
         argued quite simply that Judge Cope had accepted this claim  to  be
         true; although in the grounds she had argued the contrary position,
         arguing that  Judge  Cope  had  failed  to  resolve  the  issue  of
         clan/tribe membership.  Second  she  argued,  as  set  out  in  her
         grounds, that the Appellant had consistently advanced his claim  to
         Zintan clan/tribe membership, and that he had first advanced it  as
         part of his application  for  a  student  visa,  and  that  he  had
         therefore done so at a time when he could not have  recognised  the
         significance that clan/tribe membership would later assume  in  the
         context of safe return to Libya.

     14. Both limbs to this argument fail. First I am  satisfied  that  when
         Judge Cope's decision is read fairly, and as a whole,  it  must  be
         read as a rejection as untrue of the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a
         member of the Zintan clan/tribe. That rejection was merely  a  part
         of the overall rejection of the Appellant's evidence as untrue. The
         fact that Judge Cope then went on to deal with the  matter  in  the
         alternative, posing  the  question  of  whether  it  would  make  a
         difference if the Appellant were truly Zintan, does not  alter  the
         rejection.

     15. Second it is plain that the Appellant has not given the  consistent
         account upon which Ms Brakaj's argument  is  based,  and  that  the
         details he has given of his family have altered  significantly  for
         no obvious reason other than  at  least  one  version  was  untrue.
         Although Judge Cope and Judge Fox make no reference  to  the  fact,
         the Appellant had made two applications for entry  clearance  as  a
         student. The first was made  unsuccessfully  on  11  November  2012
         [D12]. The second was made successfully on 30  December  2012.  The
         family details he gave in each  of  those  applications  are  quite
         different. Thus he gave a different  date  of  birth,  a  different
         maiden name, and a different place of birth, for his mother between
         the two applications. In short he  appears  to  have  identified  a
         completely different woman as his mother in the second application.
         In addition he gave a different date  of  birth,  and  a  different
         place of birth, for his father in the  two  applications,  although
         the name remained the same. As Ms Brakaj accepted,  no  explanation
         for his decision to do so has ever been offered.

     16. Nowhere in the VAF is an applicant asked to identify their clan  or
         tribe. Ms Brakaj accepted that her argument that the Appellant  had
         consistently claimed to be Zintan was based upon the place of birth
         given for his parents. Since he had  not,  that  argument  entirely
         falls away. In any event, a place of birth is  not  of  itself  the
         conclusive evidence of clan or tribal  membership  that  Ms  Brakaj
         appeared to seek to elevate it to.

     17. In the circumstances there was no new evidence placed before  Judge
         Fox that would have allowed him properly to  revisit  Judge  Cope's
         adverse findings of  primary  fact,  and  to  remake  them  in  the
         Appellant's  favour.  It  is  clear  that  both   entry   clearance
         applications were before Judge Fox, even if they  were  not  before
         Judge Cope. If their existence, and  the  changes  in  the  details
         offered for his parents therein, had been brought to the  attention
         of Judge Fox (and I am not satisfied that they were) I am satisfied
         that it would not have been evidence that would have  indicated  to
         him that he should revisit any of Judge Cope's adverse findings  of
         fact, and remake any of them in  the  Appellant's  favour.  On  the
         contrary this material would simply have reinforced in his mind the
         reliability of Judge Cope's rejection of the  Appellant's  evidence
         as unreliable, both generally, and specifically in relation to  the
         claim to be a member of the Zintan clan/tribe. Thus Judge  Fox  was
         perfectly entitled to approach the evidence in the way that he did,
         and he gave entirely adequate reasons for his decision.

    Conclusion

     18. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that any of the  challenges
         advanced in the grounds of appeal have any arguable merit. I am not
         satisfied that the Appellant has  established  that  there  is  any
         material error of law in the Tribunal's decision promulgated on   8
         May 2015 that requires the decision to be set aside and remade.

    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 8
    May 2015 did not involve the making of an error of law in the  decision
    to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to be set  aside  and
    remade. The decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 8 February 2016
