
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11188/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 May 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR GEBERASELASIE MEBHRAHTOM
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss C Warren of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the respondent claims to be
    a citizen of Eritrea born on 10 May 1989.  However, for convenience,  I
    refer below to Mr Mebhrahtom as the appellant and to the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent, which are the designations they had before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NP  Dickson
    promulgated on  19  February  2015,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State made on 5 December 2014,
    in which the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

    The appellant's case

 3. The appellant's case is as follows. The appellant was  born  in  Assab,
    Eritrea. His family consisted of his mother, his father is two brothers
    and two sisters. The appellant was about one-year-old when he  and  his
    family left Eritrea and went to live in Ethiopia. The appellant and the
    family remained in Ethiopia until 2000 after which they  were  deported
    to Eritrea. The family lived temporarily in a hotel before moving to  a
    refugee camp in Assab in Eritrea where they stayed  for  two  years  as
    they had no means to support themselves. The appellant and  his  father
    returned to Ethiopia illegally in 2002. The appellant's father went  to
    find work and the appellant who was 13 years old at the  time  did  not
    want to be subjected to military service in Eritrea.

 4. The appellant returned to Eritrea to marry a woman from his local tribe
    and ethnic group. He went by car to the border of Eritrea and  Ethiopia
    and then went across the border on foot throughout the night. His uncle
    came to the border and took him into Eritrea. He  was  only  there  for
    five days during which he married. He heard rumours that the neighbours
    and other people have found out that he has returned. The appellant was
    concerned he would  be  reported  to  the  authorities  and  taken  for
    military service. He left Eritrea with his wife because if he had  left
    his wife in Eritrea, he believes that her life would have been at  risk
    if she faced questions from the authorities about his whereabouts.

 5. After he re-entered if you appear the appellant and his wife were taken
    to a nearby refugee camp by military officials. He resided in the  camp
    for a short period before he travelled to Sudan. His wife  remained  in
    the camp. The appellant's intention  was  to  obtain  legal  status  in
    another country and then his wife could join him. The appellant  cannot
    return to Eritrea as he left the country illegally and he  has  yet  to
    carry out military service. The appellant claims that he is a  national
    of Eritrea and not a national of Ethiopia.

    The respondent's reasons for refusal

 6. The respondent in her Reasons for Refusal letter dated 5 December  2014
    stated in summary the following. It is not accept  that  the  appellant
    and his family were deported to Eritrea  in  2000  due  to  the  border
    conflict with if you appear.  The  country  information  confirms  that
    during the border conflict between 1998 and 2000  many  Eritreans  were
    deported from Ethiopia during this time. It was not accepted  that  the
    appellant's  family  was  deported  because  his   father   voted   for
    independence in the referendum in  1993,  which  is  some  seven  years
    later. It is not accepted therefore  that  the  deportation  had  taken
    place.

 7. In the alternative, the appellant has been able to  live  and  work  in
    Ethiopia since 2002 and has  had  the  opportunity  to  regularise  his
    status. He could have obtained Ethiopian  citizenship  under  the  2004
    Directive issued by the Ethiopian immigration Department to  regularise
    the status  of  Eritreans  remaining  in  Ethiopia.  It  was  therefore
    reasonable to assume that  the  appellant  was  in  fact  an  Ethiopian
    national.

 8. The appellant has not been credible  in  his  evidence.  The  appellant
    claims that in 2000  into  the  appellant's  family  left  Eritrea  and
    returned to Ethiopia as he felt  uncomfortable  joining  the  Eritreans
    military. However at that time the appellant was only 13 years  old  so
    this reason lacks credibility. The appellant claims  that  in  2014  he
    went to Eritrea to marry his wife which is inconsistent with this claim
    that he fled Eritrea to evade military service and his  fear  of  being
    recruited on  return.  At  his  asylum  interview  at  question  6  the
    appellant claimed that he has never returned to Eritrea after 2002  and
    at question 16, he denied that he had said this. These  matters  go  to
    the appellant's credibility.

 9. The appellant has also given inconsistent accounts  of  when  he  first
    left Eritrea after his wedding travelling to Sudan and then saying that
    he left Eritrea and traveled to Ethiopia before leaving to  Sudan.  The
    respondent also relied on section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 because the  appellant  travelled
    to Italy and France  before  entering  the  United  Kingdom  which  are
    considered safe countries in which the appellant did not claim asylum.

10. The respondent believes that the appellant is an Ethiopian national. He
    has failed to demonstrate any problems in Ethiopia and  accordingly  he
    could return to Ethiopia and join other members  of  his  family  apart
    from one brother who is in Djibouti and his mother who is in Eritrea.

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge NP Dickson gave  the  following  reasons  for
    allowing the appellant's appeal.

      i. Paragraph 29 "the reasoning of the Home Office in the refusal
         letter had failed to take into account country guidance
         determination of the upper Tribunal in ST Ethiopia. This
         determination held that although the question of whether a person
         is a national of a particular state is a matter of law for that
         state, the question whether a national of a particular state has
         been lawfully or unlawfully deprived of the nationality of that
         state is a legitimate issue for the court or Tribunal to determine.
         It was held that an unknown but a considerable number of dual
         nationals were expelled from Ethiopia to Eritrea without having
         been subject to due process and not too much should be read into
         the finding of the Ethiopia-Eritreans Claims Commission.

     ii. Paragraph 30 "in ST the Tribunal referred to the arbitrary
         behaviour of the Ethiopian authorities and various other matters
         with disclose the general and pragmatic approach to the rule of law
         in Ethiopia. The evidence of the experts regarding the 2004
         Directive was referred to in the determination. The 2004 Directive
         provided a way for Eritreans in Ethiopia to obtain registered
         foreign status in Ethiopia and in some cases a route to the re-
         acquisition of Ethiopian citizenship. However this applied only to
         those who are resident in Ethiopia when Eritrea became independent
         and who had continued to reside in Ethiopia until the date of the
         Directive. The Tribunal accepted the expert evidence to the effect
         that the opportunities in Ethiopia making use of the 2004 Directive
         was extremely limited, with registration being possible only
         between March and June 2004. The evidence in another case had
         suggested that by 2007 the Ethiopian authorities would not take
         back anyone who was not regarded by them as a national".

    iii. Paragraph 31 "the Tribunal also considered the situation of persons
         perceived as Eritreans in Ethiopia in 2011. It was stated that such
         persons would lack even the limited security registration under the
         2004 Directive. Tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea remain high
         and there are unresolved issues regarding the border. It was stated
         that Eritrea has a repressive regime, haemorrhaging population,
         particularly young people seeking to avoid its draconian form of
         military service. All these matters were highly likely to aggravate
         the feeling of insecurity of someone in Ethiopia in this situation
         and in particular when the relationship between the countries is
         deteriorating".

     iv. Paragraph 32 "the appellant has given an explanation for the
         inconsistencies in his travel dates...I have taken into account the
         low standard of proof in asylum cases and have found him to be a
         credible witness. The appellant's evidence that Eritreans nationals
         would not be able to obtain Ethiopian nationality following their
         return to Ethiopia in 2002 is supported by the findings in ST. I
         accept that for many years the appellant and certain members of his
         family lived illegally in Ethiopia and were not granted any status.
         It follows that the appellant cannot now approach the Ethiopian
         authorities and seek to regularise his status in that country.

      v. Paragraph 33 "I therefore find the appellant is a citizen of
         Eritrea. Following his wedding he left Eritrea illegally. In
         accordance with MA Eritrea the appellant will be perceived of a
         person of draft age who has left Eritrea illegally and would suffer
         persecution from the authorities as he has not carried out any
         military service. It follows that he will face a real risk of
         persecution or serious harm on his return. The appellant has
         established a well-founded fear of persecution and in reaching my
         conclusion I take into account not only the history of the matter
         and the situation at the date of the decision but also the question
         of persecution if the appellant were now to be returned to
         Eritrea."

    The respondent's grounds of appeal

12. The respondent's grounds of appeal  states  the  following.  The  Judge
    erred   in   his   approach   to   the   appellant's   nationality   by
    misunderstanding the Home Office's stance in  the  refusal  letter.  At
    paragraph 14 of  the  refusal  letter,  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    Eritrean was rejected. The Immigration Judge's analysis of  nationality
    starts with the assumption that the appellant is an Eritrean  and  that
    might be legible for Ethiopian citizenship and has made findings in the
    appellant's favour in  this  regard.  The  Judge  has  approached  this
    assessment from the wrong  starting  point  which  is  evident  in  his
    analysis from paragraph 26 to 33 in the determination.  The  Judge  has
    based his finding on a misunderstanding of the respondent's argument as
    to the appellant's nationality.

13. At the hearing we heard submissions from both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

14. The Judge fell into material  error  as  he  failed  to  determine  the
    question  of  the  appellant's  nationality  taking  into  account  the
    respondent's view that the appellant was of Ethiopian  nationality  and
    not an Eritrean. The Judge did not consider the two opposing points  of
    view but accepted that the appellant is an  Eritrean  national  without
    giving adequate reasons for his  finding  that  the  appellant  was  an
    Eritrean. The Judge simply assumed that the appellant was  an  Eritrean
    national and his discussion was  about  the  appellant's  inability  to
    acquire Ethiopia citizenship by reference to the  background  evidence.
    This was a material error of law.

15. Nationality like any other fact in an appeal has  to  be  proved  on  a
    balance of probabilities. If  the  appellant  alleges  that  he  is  an
    Eritrean national, he must prove that on a balance of probability.

16. The Judge found the appellant to be a credible witness  but  failed  to
    take  into  account  the  various  discrepancies  in  the   appellant's
    evidence. The appellant's evidence was that his father worked  for  the
    Ethiopian army  and  was  viewed  as  an  Ethiopian  by  the  Ethiopian
    government. There is nothing  in  the  determination  where  the  Judge
    analysed this evidence and questioned why the appellant's father  would
    be accepted into the Ethiopian army if he was not Ethiopian.

17. The appellant claims that his father  was  deported  from  Ethiopia  to
    Eritrea in 2000. Asked why his father would be  deported  when  he  was
    viewed as having Ethiopian nationality, having belonged to the Ethiopia
    army, the appellant stated that after Eritrean independence his  father
    was viewed as having changed allegiances. That might have been  so  but
    that would still not have made his father  an  Eritrean  national.  The
    Judge's failure to question this evidence  brought  him  into  material
    error.

18.  The explanation given by the appellant for why his father was deported
    to Eritrea was that his father "was deemed to be  bad  for  the  public
    good as he had voted in the referendum  for  Eritrean  independence  in
    1993". The Judge did not question why the appellant's father  would  be
    deported seven years after voting in the referendum in  1993.  He  also
    did not address or question how the Ethiopian  authorities  would  have
    found  out  that  the  appellant's  father  had  voted   for   Eritrean
    independence in the referendum.  The  respondent  in  her  reasons  for
    refusal letter made the point that it is not credible in the least that
    the  appellant's  father  would  be  deported  seven  years  after  the
    referendum.  There  is  nothing  in  the  challenged  determination  to
    indicate that the Judge considered the implication of this evidence.

19. There is also nothing in the challenged determination to indicate  that
    the Judge considered Section 8 of  the  2004  Act  when  assessing  the
    appellant's  credibility.  He  did  not  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant did not claim asylum while in a safe country  as  he  was  in
    Italy and France before he came to the United Kingdom.

20. I am ultimately satisfied  that  there  is  a  material  error  in  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge, in that  he  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding the appellant's account to be credible and
    consistent, and there is nothing in the determination to show  that  he
    gave sufficient consideration to  points  adverse  to  the  appellant's
    credibility that were set out in the reasons for refusal decision.

21. Consequential to my finding that there is a material error  of  law,  I
    set aside the determination of the Judge.

  22. Both parties agreed that the appeal ought to be sent back to the First
      tier- Tribunal so that findings of fact can be  made.  I  agreed  that
      this was the proper course  of  action  to  take  in  this  appeal  in
      accordance with section 7. 2 (b) (i) the Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012 as we were of the view that the  appeal
      requires judicial fact-finding and should  to  be  considered  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.

23. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by a  First-
    tier Judge in the First-tier Tribunal other than by First-tier Judge NP
    Dickson Tribunal on a date to be notified

    Decision

24. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge NP Dickson is set aside,
    and the appeal  is  sent  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    determination.



Signed by

      Date 5th day of June 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge
Mrs S Chana
