
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/11806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2015                          |On 6 October 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     KSH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Harding, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
   2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
   or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
   of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
   Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
   failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of
   court proceedings.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 1 January 1942. In a
   decision promulgated on 10 April 2015, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed
   the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse her
   application for asylum or humanitarian protection. The Tribunal also
   found that removing the appellant from the UK would not contravene
   Article 8 of the ECHR.


3. The appellant entered the UK on 25 September 2013 and claimed asylum.
   The respondent did not accept most of the appellant's account of her
   background or the reasons she gave for claiming she was persecuted and
   would be at risk upon return to Somalia. In particular, the respondent
   did not accept that the appellant was a member of the Asharaaf clan, that
   she had been persecuted by Al Shabab, and that she would lack support
   from family and friends upon return to Somalia.

   First tier Tribunal decision

4. The appellant's appeal was heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge Black
   ("the judge"). The judge found the appellant to be largely credibility
   although to have exaggerated certain parts of her claim. She found, inter
   alia, that:

     a. the appellant is a member of the Asharaaf clan, which is known for
        religious activity;
     b. she lived principally in Kismayo, apart from periods when she left
        to avoid fighting;
     c. she and her family had been affected by local violence and
        disturbances caused by Al Shabab in the give years before her
        departure including shelling and destroying of her home and an
        attack on a mosque where she was praying; and
     d. the appellant had been harassed by Al Shabab for not covering her
        face.

5. However, the judge did not accept that the appellant had been the victim
   of torture or that she had been targeted as a particular individual by Al
   Shabab. She also did not accept her claim to not have support in Somalia.
   The judge found that the appellant has relatives in Somalia, in the form
   of her husband's family and her own brother, as well as supportive
   neighbours in Kismayo who had accommodated and supported her before she
   left for the UK. At paragraph [40] the judge stated that she was:

           "satisfied that the appellant would have the support of family
           and friends, members of her clan, on return to Somalia, just as
           she did prior to her departure from the city."

6. The judge also found, at paragraph [48], that:

           "there is a risk of sexual violence where women travel without
           male friends or relatives but in this case the appellant has
           friends and relatives in Somalia and, since they  have given her
           support in the past, I find that they would do so on her return"

7. Having made these findings, and having referred to and considered MOJ &
   Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] 00442 (IAC) and AMM and
   others (conflict, humanitarian crisis, returnees, FGM) Somalia CG [2011]
   UKUT 445 (IAC) the judge concluded that the appellant was not entitled to
   a grant of asylum or humanitarian protection.


8. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by failing to consider
   how the appellant would be able to travel from Mogadishu to Kismayo,
   which would be necessary for her to access the support described by the
   judge.  They also submit that the judge had improperly equated
   sufficiency of support with protection and failed to consider the risk to
   the appellant as a female as set out in AMM.

   Submissions

9. Mr Nath, on behalf of the respondent, stated that he was 'taking a view'
   and that he accepted there was potentially an error of law in respect of
   the judge failing to give full and proper consideration to the risk the
   appellant would face in travelling from Mogadishu to Kismayo. He
   suggested that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
   to be heard in its entirety afresh.


10. Mr Harding, for the appellant, argued that there was sufficient
   evidence available for the appeal to be remade in favour of the
   appellant. He referred to AMM,  which is good law for all matters not
   specifically addressed in MOJ, where it states that:

           Travel by land across southern and central Somalia to a home
           area or proposed place of relocation is an issue that falls to
           be addressed in the course of determining claims to
           international protection. Such travel may well, in general, pose
           real risks of serious harm, not only from Al-Shabab checkpoints
           but also as a result of the present famine conditions. Women
           travelling without male friends or relatives are in general
           likely to face a real risk of sexual violence.


11. Mr Harding argued that on the judge's findings, the appellant would be
   a lone woman returning and therefore the risks as described in AMM above
   would apply. He also submitted that internal relocation to Mogadishu was
   not viable as the appellant would be a person of minority clan without
   access to support or funds with a real risk of having to live in an IDP
   camp. He referred to paragraph [425] of MOJ, which states:

           relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no
           former links to the city, no access to funds and no other form
           of clan, family or social support is unlikely to be realistic
           as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some form of
           ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of having no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is a real possibility of having to live in
           conditions that will fall below acceptable humanitarian
           standards.

   Findings

12. I find that the First tier Tribunal's decision contains an error of law
   in that the judge failed to give sufficient consideration as to whether,
   and if so how, the appellant would be able to travel from Mogadishu to
   Kismayo. This is a material error and accordingly the First-tier
   Tribunal's decision is set aside.


13. The journey from Mogadishu to Kismayo is critical to the asylum appeal
   because the protection and support the appellant is likely to receive
   upon return to Somalia, as described by the judge, is in Kismayo, not
   Mogadishu. Accordingly, in order to benefit from this support, the
   appellant will need to travel between the two cities. AMM, as cited
   above, makes clear the difficulties someone may face in undertaking such
   a journey, particularly where they are a lone female.

14. The judge did not ignore this issue. At paragraph [48] she refers to
   the risk of a woman travelling without a male companion but finds that
   the appellant has friends and relatives in Somalia who would help her
   upon return. And at paragraph [43] she states that the appellant's
   husband's nephew helped her travel to the UK and could help her upon
   return. However, the judge has not specifically addressed the question of
   how the appellant, in her particular circumstances, will travel from
   Kismayo to Mogadishu. In any event, I did not hear any submissions from
   Mr Nath in relation to this and it was clear his view, on behalf of the
   respondent, was that the judge had erred and the claim should be re-
   heard.

15. I have considered whether I can remake the decision based on the
   evidence and factual findings before me but find that I am not able to do
   so. In order to assess whether the appellant is in a position to travel
   from Mogadishu to Kismayo, a tribunal will need to consider a range of
   matters including in particular the appellant's state of health and the
   nature and extent of support she is likely to receive in order to
   undertake the journey to Kismayo. This will require a full hearing with
   oral evidence. Accordingly, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
   Tribunal to be heard afresh.

   Decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
      law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal
      heard afresh.


17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge A M Black.

  18. Anonymity order made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated                                |




