



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2015                           |On 04 January 2016            |
|Prepared 20 November 2015                     |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Miss Faith Kudzanai Nyagande
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Emezie of Chipatiso Associates LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Zimbabwe, date of birth 18  November  1982,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision,  dated  4  December
    2014, to refuse a claim seeking asylum and on the same date a  decision
    to make removal directions, a form IS.151A having  been  served  on  29
    January 2014.

3.    The  Claimant's  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   J
    Macdonald (the Judge), who, in a decision promulgated on 1  June  2015,
    allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention on the basis  that  the
    Claimant faced a real risk  of  persecution  reliant  upon  an  imputed
    political opinion, namely support for the MDC, and as such the risk  of
    persecution came from the ZANU-PF party, there was no  effective  state
    protection to which she could have recourse nor was internal relocation
    a reasonable option available to the Claimant on a return to Zimbabwe.

4.   The decision [D] of the judge was challenged by the Secretary of  State
    on 8 June 2015.  On 18 June 2015 permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt.  I decided for reasons given  in  my
    decision,  dated  November  2015,      that  the  Original   Tribunal's
    decision could not stand and the matter would be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

5.   The basis of the Claimant feared persecution on  return  sufficient  to
    engage the Refugee Convention and proscribed ill-treatment contrary  to
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR on return to Zimbabwe as a  single  female
    being in a particular  social  group  as  well  as  a  female  to  whom
    political opinions are inferred namely as a supporter  of  the  MDC  in
    opposition to  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  and  ZANU-PF.I  have  also
    considered the risks on return as a failed asylum seeker.

6.   There was no dispute by the Secretary of State that women  in  Zimbabwe
    do have a common immutable characteristic namely their gender.  It  was
    accepted that on a return to Zimbabwe the  Appellant  will  become  the
    member of a  particular  social  group  namely'  a  lone  woman'.   The
    Claimant claimed a risk of  being  targeted  because  of  her  father's
    support for the MDC in Zimbabwe: It being  inferred  through  her  past
    activities helping him that she too supported the MDC. Further  it  was
    said that  the  Claimant  was  a  refugee  sur  place  because  of  her
    particular political  activities  supporting  the  MDC  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

7.   The basis of the fears on  return  are  reasonably  summarised  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter (RFRL):

         "1.  You are Faith Kudzanai Nyagande, born on 18 November  1982,  a
             Zimbabwean national (SCR 1.1 - 1.6).


         2.   You lived with your mother and father and had one brother  and
             two sisters (AIR Q25).


         3.   Your father was employed as a teacher and joined  the  MDC  in
             1999, he was a prominent member of the MDC and would  campaign
             on their behalf, in Murehwa.  You  would  attend  MDC  rallies
             with your father to support  and  encourage  him.   You  would
             attend these rallies at weekends and hand  out  leaflets  (AIR
             Q40 - Q49, Q60).


         4.   On 17 March 2001 you arrived in the  UK  as  a  visitor.   You
             subsequently submitted applications for leave to remain in the
             UK (Home Office Records).


         5.   On 21 December 2001 your  father  was  beaten  and  killed  by
             members of the Zanu - PF, in  front  of  your  mother.   These
             members  followed  your  mother  and  brother  to   Mutawatawa
             Hospital and told the doctor to give the reason for his  death
             as a disease to hide the fact that they were involved  in  his
             death (AIR Q62 - Q76).


         6.   In June  2003,  you  travelled  to  Zimbabwe  to  attend  your
             mother's funeral.  You stayed with your siblings in Harare and
             the funeral was held  in  Mutare  Kwase  Village.   5  Zanu-PF
             members were at attendance at the funeral, they threatened you
             and your siblings that they were watching you and if you  said
             anything you would  be  killed.   Following  the  funeral  you
             returned to Harare with your siblings (AIR Q77 - Q98).


         7.   During your time in Zimbabwe your brother told you that he was
             a prominent member of the MDC and you also found out that your
             sisters were involved too (WS, para 12, AIR Q105 -  Q106)  You
             spent two weeks in Zimbabwe then returned to the UK.


         8.   Your siblings received threatening phone calls from the  Zanu-
             PF, they were told that their movements were being watched and
             if they told anybody they would be killed.  You  assumed  they
             received these calls due to  your  father's  past  involvement
             with the MDC (AIR Q109 - Q111).


         9.   In July 2005, your sibling's home, in Harare, was destroyed as
             part of Operation Murambatsvina.  Subsequently, your  siblings
             fled to South Africa and you have had no further contact  with
             them (WS para 13, AIR Q 26, Q27, Q109  -  Q116).   The  family
             home in Murehwa was reclaimed by the Zanu-PF (AIR Q 14).


         10.  You are not involved with the MDC in the UK (AIR Q100)


         Statement of future fear


         11.  You fear you will be killed by the Zanu-PF if  you  return  to
             Zimbabwe (AIR Q112).  You also claim that you will have no one
             to help you in Zimbabwe with your epilepsy (SCR 4.2).


         Medical Issues


         12.  You were  diagnosed  with  epilepsy  in  2008  and  have  been
             prescribed Levetiracetam to control the condition.   You  also
             take paracetamol when required (AIR Q3, Q4)."

8.   The Claimant entered the United Kingdom in March 2001 as a visitor  and
    had six months' leave to enter the United Kingdom until September 2001.
     There followed a series of applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student which were granted between then and 2009.

9.   On 26 February 2014 the Claimant claimed asylum which  was  refused  by
    the RFRL dated 4 December 2014.  The Claimant had returned to  Zimbabwe
    in 2003 where she had remained for a period of time before returning to
    the United Kingdom in June or July 2003.The Claimant  in interview (AIR
    Q/A37) claimed Zanu-PF agents were responsible for  the  death  of  her
    father and mother.

10.  The Claimant and her siblings attended her  mother's  funeral  in  June
    2003 and the Claimant stayed with some of her siblings  in  Harare,  it
    was said at the funeral she and others in her family were threatened by
    ZANU-PF members in particular asserting that they would be killed.  The
    Claimant after the funeral returned to Harare with her siblings and  it
    was said that the Claimant's brother was a prominent member of the MDC.
    There was no supporting evidence about her  brother's  significance  in
    the MDC past or  present.    The  Claimant  spent  some  two  weeks  in
    Zimbabwe before returning to the United Kingdom in 2003.

11.   Thereafter between 2003 and February 2014 the Claimant made  no  claim
    for protection or asylum in the United Kingdom.  The  Claimant  in  her
    undated statement (paragraph 14) (AB15-19) and a dated  version  3/2/14
    (paragraph 12) claimed that she only found out in June 2003  that..."my
    family was heavily involved in politics...As such, my family is  always
    getting death threats... my mother, sisters and brother  had  moved  to
    Harare in Mbare following our father's death because their  lives  were
    in danger".

12.  In addition to the claim originally given to  the  Secretary  of  State
    set out above it  was  said  that  the  Claimant  has  been  active  in
    attending demonstrations and the like  and  possibly  distributing  MDC
    literature in the United Kingdom.  It is said  that  a  combination  of
    past and present activities gave rise to the real risk of ill-treatment
    from, in effect, agents of the state through  ZANU-PF  supporters,  and
    internal relocation was such that wherever she was to go she  would  be
    discovered and be at risk of those  very  same  threats  from  ZANU-PF.
    Internal relocation was not a  reasonable  option  and  nor  was  there
    sufficient protection to which she could have recourse.

13.  It was not disputed that the Claimant's siblings remained  in  Zimbabwe
    between 2003 and sometime in 2005, possibly after June when  clearances
    of unlawful development and other  clearances  were  conducted  by  the
    Zimbabwean authorities particularly in what  was  known  as  'Operation
    Murambatsvina'. After the claimed events at the funeral I did not  find
    any other  ill-treatment  of  her  family  in  Zimbabwe.  In  2005  the
    Claimant's siblings moved to South Africa and  the  Claimant  has  only
    been able to maintain limited contact with them.

14.  It is clear that, Zimbabwe is essentially  a  male  dominated  society,
    women are noted to be subject to discrimination both in  the  home,  in
    employment  and  generally  albeit  there  remained  a  great  deal  of
    employment of women in medical services, dental services and the  like.
    The Claimant has trained as  a dental  nurse  who  has  worked  in  the
    United Kingdom between 2005 and 2009. Whilst she may have to re-qualify
    in part her work skills are transferable to Zimbabwe. On  the  evidence
    provided I find no reason to assume that she will be left  homeless  or
    destitute or subject to abuse and exploitation as a single woman on her
    own.  In this context the Claimant is a mature lady  who  speaks  Shona
    and English, has the capacity to work, find accommodation  and  make  a
    life for herself on return.  I  find  her  fears  in  relation  to  the
    town/area of Murehwa  or  elsewhere  were  very  limited  and  even  if
    subjectively held did not demonstrate that she would be of interest  to
    the Zanu-PF or the government through her own activities  or  those  of
    her family: There was no evidence of recent activities by the latter.

15.  It was noticeable from the Claimant's statements, contained within  the
    Claimant's bundle, pages 15 to 20 and from 20 to 31, that in the United
    Kingdom the Claimant has qualified as a  dental  nurse  albeit  further
    studies have been frustrated by a lack of  sponsorship.   The  Claimant
    during  this  period  has  it  seemed,  albeit  there  was  a  lack  of
    particulars, had legal advice on her status in the United  Kingdom  and
    applications have been made to stay.   However  I  find  it  a  notable
    omission that, if  the Claimant on return in 2003 was in  fear  of  the
    Zanu-PF as a result of conduct claimed, she made no  claim  on  arrival
    back in the UK knowing as she did that she had no permanent  rights  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Similarly whilst  the  risks  associated
    with ZANU-PF activities against the MDC materially  changed  over  that
    period of time it seemed to me that the claimed lack  of  knowledge  of
    the asylum process was not  a  credible  explanation  for  the  delayed
    application nor has the Claimant provided  any  good  reasons  for  not
    doing so.  I therefore regard the Claimant's failure promptly to  claim
    protection with reference to Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 has a substantial  and  adverse
    affect her credibility.

16.  The fact was accepted by the Secretary of State that the death  of  the
    Claimant's father in 2001 occurred but there was  nothing  to  indicate
    why either at her father's funeral or when she was there or later, when
    she had left and her siblings remained,  why  Zanu-PF  should  suddenly
    turn on them  .I  do  not  accept  the  explanation  that  one  of  the
    Claimant's siblings was a senior official or was a senior  official  in
    the MDC nor was there  any  supportive  evidence.  Although  I  am  not
    requiring corroboration, from the Claimant or MDC or from  her  brother
    in South Africa concerning his status and the risks  he  posed  to  the
    Claimant on a return, but no sensible or any reason has been given  for
    the absence of  such evidence  nor  any  suggestion  it  could  not  be
    obtained. Nor  other  than  the  Claimant's  oral  evidence  was  there
    evidence that her sister(s) were involved in the MDC as she claimed.

17.  Similarly the information  as  to  the  Claimant's  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom in support  of  the  MDC  appear  to  have  particularly
    related to a branch which  no  longer  exists.  There  was  nothing  to
    indicate  that  the  Claimant  has  featured  on   television   or   in
    photographs, the press or elsewhere in relation  to  UK  demonstrations
    held about Zimbabwe.  I do not accept her claim that she has any proper
    basis for fear on return based around her political activities  in  the
    United Kingdom.  At its highest the Claimant has been a low  level  and
    occasional MDC supporter in the UK but having considered her evidence I
    find the likelihood was that such claimed  occasional  involvement  was
    done to try and support  a  claim  to  remain.  There  was  nothing  to
    indicate that her identity was likely to be  known  or  discovered  and
    there were no published news articles, blogs, photographs posted on the
    internet or elsewhere which went to show some likelihood that she could
    have come to the attention of the ZANU-PF or the Zimbabwean authorities
    or the security forces. I did not find there  was,  in  the  Claimant's
    statements, comments on the RFRL, AIR, or oral evidence at the  hearing
    any likelihood that the Claimant  wished  to  pursue  MDC  politics  in
    Zimbabwe but not do so for fear of persecution.

18.  In considering this matter I do  so  against  the  background  evidence
    which has been cited and in part selectively provided to me.  I  accept
    that such a claim of intimidation and threats is not inconsistent  with
    widely known conduct by Zanu-PF  or  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  over
    their many years in power.

19.  I find that the Claimant has no sustainable  fear,  however  subjective
    it may be, of risk of ill-treatment on return in Harare or in Bulawayo.
    As a Shona language speaker with work skills it seemed to me that there
    was no reason why she should come to the adverse or  any  attention  of
    ZANU-PF students or  members  of  ZANU-PF.   Whilst  it  was  said  the
    Claimant was heavily involved through her family  in  MDC  politics.  I
    simply do not find there was the evidence to support that claim or from
    which any inferences can be drawn that other family members  remain  of
    interest to the Zimbabwean authorities and in turn by association  her.
    I note the Claimant asserted she has lost  contact  with  her  siblings
    move to South Africa. I do not accept her assertion that they were able
    to safely telephone her before they left Zimbabwe but could not  do  so
    once in South Africa (29/1/2014, AIR Q/A 114-117)for fear of discovery:
    There was no evidence that Zimbabwean security forces have access to or
    the ability to intercept calls in the South African  telephone  system.
    It was not said the  Claimant  had  changed  her  telephone  number  or
    contact details in the UK at that time or later. Rather it seemed to me
    their 'flight' to South Africa was all part of her claim to  be  unable
    to return as an 'orphan' without family support.

20.  I note the Claimant's complaints that others are  responsible  for  the
    lateness of her claim for asylum but at its highest that relates to  an
    Article 8 ECHR claim based on   private life  rights  in  2009/2010  or
    more probably in 2013. However such matters did not reasonably  explain
    why she did not claim protection on return in 2003 or as the  political
    situation, economic down turn got worse and worse.

21.  I have considered and applied the  country  guidance  case  of  CM  (EM
    country  guidance,  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059   in
    assessing the risks on return. The case summary was as follows:

         "(1) As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
             motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared  with  the  situation
             considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does
             not show that, as a general matter, the  return  of  a  failed
             asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, having  no  significant
             MDC profile, would result I that person facing a real risk  of
             having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


         (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in  the  case
             of a person without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the UK
             after a significant absence to a rural area of Zimbabwe,  ....
             Such a person may well find  it  difficult  to  avoid  adverse
             attention, amounting to serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF
             authority figures and those they control.


         (5)  A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
             difficulties, if moving to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area.  Whilst the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile  which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


         (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
             attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces,  even  if
             he or she has a significant MDC profile."

22.  Since that general guidance I take  into  account  insofar  as  it  has
    advanced the circumstances presently there. It seemed to me looking  at
    the evidence in  the  round  that  the  Claimant  is  not  at  risk  of
    persecution or proscribed ill-treatment, can safely  return  to,  enter
    Zimbabwe and relocate if she chose from Harare to Bulawayo. I find this
    was so for the Claimant, as a failed asylum  seeker,  on  return  to  a
    metropolitan  area  of  Zimbabwe.  I  reached  these  conclusions  with
    reference to the country guidance because I do not accept the  Claimant
    has no family there or no support from the UK, were she to need it. The
    Claimant has useful working skills which are also in demand. I find  no
    reasons why the Claimant would fall into destitution  or  exploitation.
    The Claimant is in her early thirties and can have  a  working  career.
    She has work experience and has no MDC political profile. There  is  no
    apparent need to work or live in an area of high density nor  cause  to
    be targeted.

23.  I accept the Claimant would form part of a  PSG  on  return,  namely  a
    single Zimbabwean woman, and I accept the historical position  in  2001
    of her helping her father, a supporter of  the  MDC,  could  then  have
    drawn her to the attention of Zanu-PF but I did  not  find  anyone  was
    likely to recall such help as she gave nor was anything done to her  on
    her return in 2003. Nor, after 14 years in the United Kingdom were past
    actions likely to draw her to the attention of  ZANU-PF  or  Zimbabwean
    security forces on return.

24.  In those circumstances I did not find either the  state  or  agents  of
    the state or those condoned by the state will have any adverse interest
    in the Claimant on  return  to  put  her  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    proscribed ill-treatment contrary to Article 2  or  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.  For like reasons I do not see that there is any basis  for  fear
    of that ill-treatment or need for  internal  relocation  nor  does  the
    issue of sufficiency of protection arise.  I  did  not  find  that  the
    information contained in the statement  of  the  Claimant  and  in  her
    evidence tended to show that  there  was  anything  in  her  sur  place
    activities which would become known or give rise to any  real  risk  on
    return.

25.  I have noted the Claimant's comments on the RFLR. I do  not  find  they
    take this matter further save to repeat the Claimant's claims as to why
    she would be at risk of harm or serious  harm  on  return.   I  do  not
    accept the points she raised demonstrate there was that real likelihood
    of such.  In these circumstances the need for  Humanitarian  Protection
    was not engaged for the Claimant will not be at a real risk of  serious
    harm.

26.  In relation to the Claimant's health assuming  that   was  put  on  the
    basis of Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR, the evidence was scant indeed to
    show that she could not maintain herself  in  Zimbabwe  or  obtain  the
    necessary medication to manage her epilepsy.

27.  There was  nothing  to  indicate  that  hospital  services  or  medical
    services  were   not   available   nor   that   the   nature   of   the
    medication/treatment she required gave rise  to  the  likelihood  of  a
    deterioration in her health or a lack of ability to meet and pay  those
    costs of such medication.  The evidence fell far short  of  showing  in
    the context of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL31 that Article 3 rights,  would  be
    breached by removal back to Zimbabwe  either  through  the  process  of
    removal or once she had arrived there.  The Claaimant was not the  kind
    of seriously ill claimant as to be found in GS (India) [2011] UKAIT  35
    and D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and there is no evidence to truly gainsay
    the evidence submitted by the Secretary of State  in  the  Reasons  For
    Refusal Letter.  I  have  taken  into  account  the  medical  notes  or
    attendances from the Princess Alexandra NHS Trust  and  the  Claimant's
    evidence of her qualifications and work experience.

28.  I did not find the medical evidence  is  sufficient  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof to that low standard required in relation to Articles 3
    and 8 ECHR or in relation to the protection claims as  demonstrated  by
    the cases of Ravichandran (1996) Imm AR 97 or Karanakaran  [2000]  EWCA
    Civ.11.

29.    In passing I should add that the Claimant at  the  hearing  contended
    that prior to her visit to Zimbabwe in 2003 she had not been in contact
    with her relatives and nor had she thought to make enquiries about  any
    safety or difficulties on return.  It seemed to me that if the Claimant
    had had any genuine concerns that her return presented a threat to  her
    sfafety she would have raised it in  advance  and  discussed  with  her
    family members. I find she was highly unlikely  to  have  attended  the
    funeral if she thought that her past now put her life at  risk.  I  did
    not find it credible  that  her  siblings  only  thought  to  tell  the
    Claimant once she had got to Zimbabwe on a return 2003 of  risks  posed
    to her by being there or that it  was  only  when  she  got  there  she
    discovered how  heavily  her  'family'  were  involved  with  the  MDC.
    Similarly, it was easily said  that  her  siblings  faced  threats  and
    difficulties before  they  left  in  2005  but  if  they  were  of  the
    prominence claimed in 2003 it did not seem to me  consistent  with  the
    background evidence of the deterioration of circumstances  in  Zimbabwe
    that they would have  remained  for  about  another  two  years  before
    leaving for the Republic of South Africa.

30.   It seemed if there was serious risk of a material kind at  that  stage
    they would not have stayed in Zimbabwe but would have left and gone  to
    South Africa before then.  Whatever may have been driving them to do so
    ultimately in 2005 may just as easily be associated with  the  economic
    situation in Zimbabwe which at the time  can  fairly  be  described  as
    dire.  Either way I did not find the evidence  had  even  to  that  low
    standard showed there was a political basis for them to leave, they may
    have done so by choice.  I have considered the statement of Mrs Saineti
    which is in the most general terms and really  does  not  particularise
    why there are risks to the Claimant on a return to Zimbabwe.

31.    Plainly the Claimant has been in the United Kingdom for a  number  of
    years and to that extent must be taken to have  a  private  life  here.
    The exercise of private life rights was admittedly in the context  that
    she was claiming to be a student in the United Kingdom on  a  temporary
    basis with no legitimate expectation of being able  to  remain.   There
    was nothing about her medical claim that showed she  cannot  remove  or
    that the consequences of removal would be that medical treatment  would
    be denied or that the Claimant would not be able to  travel  to  obtain
    such treatment or that the cost of it would be  so  prohibitive  as  to
    prevent her receiving it.

32.  The evidence, perhaps for obvious reasons did not address  whether  the
    Claimant's family would provide support for her as a start on return or
    enable her to set up a home, rent property or whatever she chose to do.
     It seemed to me the omission of all that evidence was largely directed
    at the fact she does not wish to return and would prefer to be  in  the
    United Kingdom.

33.   In  considering  Article  8  ECHR   in   terms   of   the   Claimant's
    private/family life I do so in the context that  the  Claimant  has  no
    application under the Rules or outside of the  Rules  to  remain  other
    than by the asylum claim. The other attempts that have been  made  over
    time which have failed as set out in the RFRL.

34.  In  these  circumstances  the  Claimant's  status  has  never  had  any
    certainty in the United Kingdom other than right to be here for various
    permitted purposes. I can find nothing  to  show  that  the  Claimant's
    circumstances were exceptional or fell for  consideration  outside  the
    provisions of the immigration rules.  But if I was wrong in that view I
    agree with the reasons in the RFRL that the Claimant has not  showed  a
    proper basis under the rules to remain.

35.  I also agree with the Secretary of State's view that the  Claimant  did
    not succeed under paragraph 276ADE(iii)  to  (vi)  of  the  immigration
    rules then in force and no arguments were effectively  raised  to  show
    that the Claimant did actually meet the requirements.

36.  The Claimant's circumstances did not appear to me to  be  matters  that
    fell outside of  the  immigration  rules.  In  the  circumstances,  the
    provisions of Section 117B NIAA 2002 indicated strongly that  this  was
    not a  case  where  Article  8  ECHR  should  actually  be  considered.
    However, if I was wrong on that, in the light of my findings  above,  I
    apply Razgar [2004] UKHL27 and Huang[2007] UKHL 11 in that the Claimant
    has had a private life in the United Kingdom and the effects of removal
    are a significant interference with it, self-evidently the Secretary of
    State's decision was lawful and served identifiable purposes in Article
    8(2) of the ECHR.  I can find nothing in the  Claimant's  case  of  her
    life in the United Kingdom or her personal  circumstances  that  showed
    the decision to remove was unlawful nor that it  was  disproportionate.
    I find in light of the statutory  provisions  that  significant  weight
    must be given to the public interest which plainly lies in her removal.
    I have fully taken into account her  relatives  in  the  UK,  her  work
    record, ability to earn and speak English and  earlier  lawful  reasons
    for being in the UK as a student

37.  The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The following  decision
    is substituted.

38.     The appeal of the Claimant is dismissed.

39.   The appeal on Refugee Convention and Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR  grounds
    is dismissed.

40.  The appeal on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  in  relation  to  private/family
    life in the UK is dismissed.
Fee Award

41.  The appeal has been lost therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Anonymity Order

42.  No anonymity order was requested.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
