
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|Prepared on 22 October 2015          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. D.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms <, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor when she  was
         a child, and she claimed asylum on 17 July 2009 with  the  help  of
         her social worker.  Although  herself  a  citizen  of  Guinea,  she
         claimed asylum in the company of a cousin  who  was  a  citizen  of
         Liberia. Both girls had entered the UK  in  the  company  of  other
         family members who were citizens of Guinea, and they had then  both
         been taken into the care of their local authority as  a  result  of
         concerns about their welfare. Both denied contact with their family
         members in the UK thereafter. Although initially they  were  placed
         with foster parents together they were subsequently separated,  and
         thereafter had no contact with one another.

      2. The Appellant's application was refused by  the  Respondent  on  28
         November 2014, as was  that  of  her  cousin,  and  in  consequence
         removal decisions were made in relation to them, this Appellant  to
         Guinea, and her cousin to Liberia.

      3. The Appellant and her cousin each then  appealed  to  the  Tribunal
         against the removal decision. Although their  cases  were  in  many
         respects entirely distinct those appeals were  linked  for  hearing
         together, and thus their appeals were heard  together  on  17  July
         2015. The  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  on  both  asylum  and
         humanitarian  protection  grounds  by  decision  of  Judge  Robson,
         promulgated on 19 August 2015, although the appeal  of  her  cousin
         was dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

      4. The  Respondent's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal did not point out the  error  of  law  in  the
         Judge's decision to allow the  appeal  on  both  human  rights  and
         humanitarian protection grounds. The application did argue  however
         that the Judge had reversed the burden  of  proof  in  relation  to
         whether the Appellant had any extended family in  Guinea,  and  had
         failed to identify, (i) how she could be at risk of  harm  from  an
         extended family she denied existed, (ii) why her  membership  of  a
         particular social group should give rise to problems upon return if
         it had not given rise to any in the past, and, (iii)  any  findings
         upon whether adequate state protection existed for her in Guinea.

      5. That application was granted by Judge Grimmett on 7 September 2015.

      6. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice.

      7. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The hearing

      8. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms  Cleghorn  raised  the
         question of whether the appeal should be heard without reference to
         the appeal pursued by the Appellant's cousin against  the  decision
         to dismiss her appeal. I pointed out that there was nothing on  the
         Tribunal file maintained in relation to the Appellant's  cousin  to
         suggest either that she had applied for permission  to  appeal  the
         Judge's decision, or that this had been granted to her.  Whilst  Ms
         Cleghorn had not been furnished with any document  to  support  the
         claim, she told me that she  had  been  given  to  understand  that
         permission to appeal had been granted to  the  Appellant's  cousin,
         and that the Upper Tribunal had directed that  the  appeals  should
         remain linked. I stood the matter  down  so  that  she  could  take
         specific instructions.

      9.  When  the  hearing  resumed  Ms  Cleghorn  informed  me  that  her
         instructions were that no decision  had  yet  been  made  upon  the
         application made  by  the  Appellant's  cousin  for  permission  to
         appeal. I reminded her that the Tribunal file did  not  record  any
         application for permission to  appeal,  which  she  was  unable  to
         explain.

     10. After some discussion the parties agreed that the issues raised  by
         the Appellant's appeal, and  by  the  appeal  of  her  cousin  were
         distinct, and that I should proceed with the error of  law  hearing
         in relation to the Appellant alone.

    Error of Law; humanitarian protection?

     11. It is plain, and the Appellant does not seek to suggest  otherwise,
         that the Judge would have made a  material  error  of  law  if  his
         decision had been to allow the appeal  on  both  human  rights  and
         humanitarian protection grounds, as the concluding  passage  states
         under the heading "Notice of Decision". The issue for me is whether
         this was simply a typographical slip, or whether only one, or both,
         of those decisions must be set aside and remade in consequence.

     12. I am satisfied that when the decision  is  read  as  a  whole,  the
         Judge's intention as expressed in paragraph 128  of  the  decision,
         was to allow the appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  by
         reference to Article 3; he made no reference  to  any  humanitarian
         protection claim in the course of his analysis of the evidence,  or
         to any Article 8 claim, and it is not suggested before me that  the
         evidence before him would have permitted him to allow the appeal on
         either of those limbs. Accordingly I accept  that  the  declaration
         that the appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds is  a
         typographical error which must be set aside. Absent any other error
         of law in the decision it is agreed by both parties that  I  should
         simply remake  that  decision  so  as  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
         humanitarian protection grounds.

    Error of Law?

     13. The Appellant identified no  fear  of  a  risk  of  harm  from  the
         authorities in Guinea in the event of her return to that country.

     14. The Appellant's claim was based upon a fear of  non  state  agents,
         against whose actions it was said the  state  would  be  unable  to
         offer her  protection,  and  which  she  could  not  avoid  by  the
         expedient of internal relocation.

     15. The risk of harm from non-state agents  who  were  members  of  her
         family was said to arise because; (i) she  was  at  risk  of  being
         perceived to be an apostate, (ii) she was at risk of being  subject
         to a forced marriage, and (iii) she was at risk of being harmed  in
         response to the fact that she had given birth out of wedlock  to  a
         child. Only one of these  elements  of  her  case  was  dealt  with
         specifically by the Judge, who rejected the claim that she would be
         subject to a forced marriage, although  it  is  very  difficult  to
         discern any reasoning for that conclusion.

     16. The risk of harm from non-state agents who were not her family  was
         said to arise in the following way; (i) upon  the  Appellant  being
         perceived  to  be  an  apostate,  (ii)  upon  the  Appellant  being
         perceived to lack family protection and thus  being  vulnerable  to
         sexual assault.

     17. It is common ground between the parties that the  Judge  failed  to
         deal with the Appellant's claim that she faced a real risk of  harm
         upon  return  to  Guinea  because  she  is  a  genuine  convert  to
         Christianity from Islam. Thus it was  argued  she  would  genuinely
         wish to pursue her Christian faith, and in turn  she  would  be  at
         real risk of being perceived to be an apostate,  and  in  turn  she
         would face a real risk of persecution either from  members  of  her
         own family,  or  from  members  of  the  general  population.  Both
         representatives were agreed that this amounted to a material  error
         of law.

     18. The Appellant's evidence to the Judge was that she had never  lived
         with her parents in Guinea, or that if she had done so it was  only
         in infancy and she did not  recall  it.  The  evidence  before  the
         Tribunal in the form of her passport and her VAF did  however  show
         that at  the  least  she  must  know  who  her  parents  were.  The
         Respondent argued that the clear indication was  that  despite  her
         claim to the contrary,  she  did  have  family  members  living  in
         Guinea, and thus she did have family members to turn to for support
         in the event of return to that country. The Respondent disputed the
         Appellant's claim to face a risk of harm from them, and  her  claim
         that she would be rejected by them, notwithstanding the evidence of
         the circumstances in which she had to be taken into care.

     19. The Respondent criticises the Judge's statement "there  is  however
         no evidence before me to disprove her claim that she has no  family
         to turn to for family support", and points out that the  Judge  has
         failed to make any clear finding on whether there were close family
         members living in Guinea at the date of decision,  and  if  so  who
         they were. The Respondent argues that  the  language  used  by  the
         Judge in paragraph 120 amounts to  a  reversal  of  the  burden  of
         proof, but I am not satisfied that the matter is quite as simple as
         that. This was not a case in  which  the  Appellant  had  given  an
         account that was rejected in its entirety as a fiction, and it  was
         not possible for the Appellant to prove  a  negative,  particularly
         when on any view she left Guinea as a child  and  prima  facie  was
         estranged from the family members living  in  the  UK.  Whilst  the
         Judge could,  perhaps,  have  phrased  the  matter  better,  in  my
         judgement all that he was really saying in paragraph 120  was  that
         there was nothing to indicate  to  him  that  this  aspect  of  her
         evidence was a fiction.

     20. The Respondent argues that the Judge's approach [120-17] appears to
         have been to conclude that it did not matter whether  she  did,  or
         did not, have family in Guinea because she  would  be  rejected  by
         them as a girl who had given birth to a child outside marriage,  so
         that upon return she would be a single woman with  a  young  child,
         but without any family support. It is argued that this approach was
         on any view flawed as too simplistic, but that it would also appear
         to stem in large part from the highly selective quotation from  the
         October 2004 report of the IRB  of  Canada,  to  be  found  in  the
         skeleton  argument  provided  to  the  Judge  by  the   Appellant's
         representative. Read as a whole it is argued that  this  report  is
         evidence that the rejection of young  unmarried  mothers  by  their
         families is a practice confined to only  radical  Muslim  families,
         and there was no evidence to suggest that her own family fell  into
         that category [ApB p65].

     21. If the Judge's approach had been to conclude in paragraph 120  that
         the Appellant had no family members living in Guinea, then it would
         follow that he would indeed have fallen into  error  in  the  event
         that he had concluded that the Appellant faced a risk of harm  from
         members of her extended family living in  Guinea  (whether  because
         she had given birth to a child as an unmarried woman [125]  or  for
         any other reason). If, as she had claimed, there were no members of
         the extended family living in Guinea, then there could be  no  risk
         of harm from such individuals.

     22. If the Judge's  approach  was  to  conclude  that  members  of  the
         extended family who lived  outside  Guinea  posed  a  risk  to  the
         Appellant, then he signally failed to explain which individuals  he
         was referring to, and whether, or how, he concluded that any member
         of her extended family who  did  not  live  in  Guinea  would  know
         whether she had been returned to Guinea, or, would be able to trace
         her. The Appellant's own  evidence  was  that  there  had  been  no
         contact with any of the family members in the  UK  for  many  years
         since she had been taken into care.  The  only  exception  was  the
         cousin in the UK who was her  fellow  asylum  seeker.  (It  is  not
         entirely clear, but the Judge appears to have  accepted  that  they
         had enjoyed no contact save for the purposes of the application and
         appeal process since  a  decision  had  been  made  to  place  them
         separately with foster carers.)

     23. It is however tolerably clear in my judgement that  the  Judge  did
         not accept that the Appellant was at risk of harm from  her  father
         [124], although that has to be taken in its proper  context,  which
         was the Appellant's claim that her father was dead.

     24. Having considered  the  decision  at  some  length,  and  with  the
         assistance  of  the  submissions  of  both  representatives  I   am
         satisfied that paragraphs 125-7 of the decision only make sense  if
         they are to be read as a finding that the Appellant faced a risk of
         harm from members of the general population as an  unmarried  woman
         with a child. The  difficulty  with  the  brevity  of  the  Judge's
         approach to the reasoning that led to this finding is  his  failure
         to adequately address the issue of whether she would at least  have
         access to the support of her mother, and his failure  to  make  any
         reference to the guidance of the Tribunal in  AN  &  SS  (Tamils  -
         Colombo - risk) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063. In  that  decision
         the Tribunal held that it was appropriate to take into account  the
         availability  of  financial  support  from  the  Respondent  to   a
         returnee, through the Voluntary Returns Programme;

          1. Much has been made of the undue harshness which AN  will  face
             as a single mother without  accommodation  or  employment  and
             without friends or family to turn to in Colombo, but  this  is
             to leave out of account what even Dr Smith acknowledges to  be
             the very generous  support  package  offered  by  the  IOM  to
             voluntary returnees. After "smoothing  the  re-entry  process"
             the IOM provides "a comprehensive package of support for  five
             years after  arrival",  which  includes  "five  years  shelter
             guaranteed." We do not think it is open to  the  appellant  to
             say that, if she loses her appeal, she will not take advantage
             of this package, and to argue from that refusal that she  will
             face destitution in Colombo which, accordingly, is not a place
             to which she can reasonably be expected to relocate.

     25. In the light of that guidance it was not open to the  Appellant  to
         argue that in the event of her return to Guinea she would not  take
         advantage of whatever package of assistance was then  available  to
         voluntary returnees, or argue that she would face destitution  upon
         return. That would have a material impact upon  any  assessment  of
         the risk of a breach of her Article 3 rights upon return as a woman
         with an infant child to care for.

    Conclusion

     26. I have in these circumstances considered whether or  not  to  remit
         the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for  it  to  be  reheard,  as
         requested by the Respondent. In the circumstances of the  appeal  I
         am satisfied that this is the  correct  approach,  and  I  note  Ms
         Cleghorn's acceptance of many of  the  criticisms  of  the  Judge's
         approach. In circumstances such as these, the effect of the  errors
         of law has been to deprive the parties of the opportunity for their
         case to be  properly  and  fairly  considered  by  the  First  Tier
         Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the  Practice  Statement  of   25
         September 2012. Moreover the extent of the  judicial  fact  finding
         exercise that is required is such that having regard to  the  over-
         riding objective, it is  appropriate  that  the  appeal  should  be
         remitted to the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
         Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.

     27. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of the parties I
         make the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and  the  appeal  is
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings
             of fact are preserved. The appeal is not to be  listed  before
             Judge Robson.

         ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

        iii) The appeal is no longer to be linked to appeal AA/11101/2014.

         iv) The Respondent shall by 5pm  on  22  November  2015  file  and
             serve;

             1.  any evidence to be relied upon to  rebut  the  Appellant's
                  claims about the risks of harm she would face upon  return
                  to Guinea, and,

             2.  any evidence to be relied upon of the  immigration  status
                  within the UK of the family members who  are  believed  to
                  have brought the Appellant to the UK.

          v) The Appellant shall by 5pm on 22 December 2015 file and serve;

             1.  any evidence to be relied upon concerning the paternity of
                  her baby, and the immigration status of the father,  since
                  she maintains a claim that her baby is a British citizen,

             2.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she has
                  no family in Guinea to whom she could turn for support,

             3.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she  is
                  at risk of serious sexual violence  from  members  of  the
                  general population upon being  perceived  to  be  a  young
                  woman without family  support,  against  which  the  state
                  affords no adequate protection,

             4.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she  is
                  genuinely a convert to Christianity,

             5.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she  is
                  at risk of serious harm as one who may be perceived to  be
                  an  apostate  from  members  of  the  general  population,
                  against which the state affords no adequate protection

         vi) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at  the
             North Shields hearing centre after 1  January  2016  for  full
             hearing with three hours allowed. It is not suitable to  be  a
             float, and it is not reserved to any particular judge.

        vii) The Anonymity Direction previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal is preserved.
Decision

     28. The decision promulgated on 19 August 2015 did involve  the  making
         of an error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and the
         appeals to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal  is
         set aside and the appeal is remitted to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
         with the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and  the  appeal  is
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings
             of fact are preserved. The appeal is not to be  listed  before
             Judge Robson.

         ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

        iii) The appeal is no longer to be linked to appeal AA/11101/2014.

         iv) The Respondent shall by 5pm  on  22  November  2015  file  and
             serve;

             1.  any evidence to be relied upon to  rebut  the  Appellant's
                  claims about the risks of harm she would face upon  return
                  to Guinea, and,

             2.  any evidence to be relied upon of the  immigration  status
                  within the UK of the family members who  are  believed  to
                  have brought the Appellant to the UK.

          v) The Appellant shall by 5pm on 22 December 2015 file and serve;

             1.  any evidence to be relied upon concerning the paternity of
                  her baby, and the immigration status of the father,  since
                  she maintains a claim that her baby is a British citizen,

             2.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she has
                  no family in Guinea to whom she could turn for support,

             3.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she  is
                  at risk of serious sexual violence  from  members  of  the
                  general population upon being  perceived  to  be  a  young
                  woman without family  support,  against  which  the  state
                  affords no adequate protection,

             4.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she  is
                  genuinely a convert to Christianity,

             5.  any evidence to be relied upon to demonstrate that she  is
                  at risk of serious harm as one who may be perceived to  be
                  an  apostate  from  members  of  the  general  population,
                  against which the state affords no adequate protection

         vi) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at  the
             North Shields hearing centre after 1  January  2016  for  full
             hearing with three hours allowed. It is not suitable to  be  a
             float, and it is not reserved to any particular judge.

        vii) The Anonymity Direction previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal is preserved.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes
Dated 22 October 2015
