
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11499/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th January 2017                     |On 30th January 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                            MR MOHAMMED ABU-ANAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Frantzis, Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a person whose nationality is in dispute.  He contends
    that he is Libyan whereas the Secretary of State contends  that  he  is
    Moroccan.  His date of birth is recorded as 1st August 1985.

 2. On or about 29th December  2014  the  Appellant  made  application  for
    international protection  as  a  refugee  on  the  basis  that  he  was
    homosexual.  On or about 7th August 2015 a decision was made to  refuse
    the application and the Appellant appealed.  His appeal  was  heard  on
    2nd August 2016 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hindson sitting  at
    Bradford.  Judge Hindson dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   Not
    content  with  that  decision,  the  Appellant  made  application   for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    refused before the First-tier Tribunal but on 16th November 2016, in  a
    renewed application, permission was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam.  She found in granting permission that  the  judge  arguably
    made three errors in that he:

         i) did not consider the evidence of Dr  David  Sneddon,  a  social
            anthropologist with a special interest in North Africa, and  in
            particular North East Morocco, whose report is dated, 11  April
            2016, in the round;

        ii) applied the wrong burden and standard of proof  in  respect  of
            nationality;

       iii) misinterpreted the conclusion in the SPRAKAB Report.

 3. It was common ground that where, as in  this  case,  the  Secretary  of
    State had contended for a specific nationality that the burden of proof
    was upon her with the  standard  of  proof  being  the  ordinary  civil
    standard.  Where the Appellant contended for a particular  nationality,
    in this case Libyan,  then  the  burden  was  upon  him  to  the  lower
    standard.

 4. In refusing to accept the Appellant's account, the Secretary  of  State
    had made reference  to  inaccurate  answers  given  in  interview  with
    reliance also being placed on a language analysis  test.  The  language
    analysis test was  conducted  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  Appellant
    belonged to an Arabic linguistic community  found  in  Bengasi,  Libya.
    The alternate hypothesis was that the Appellant belonged to  an  Arabic
    linguistic community found  in  Morocco.   After  an  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's speech the author of the report stated:

         "The language analysis somewhat suggests that the results  obtained
         more likely than not are inconsistent with the linguistic community
         as stated in the hypothesis (that was with respect to the Appellant
         being Libyan)."

 5. As to the alternate hypothesis it was said:

         "The language analysis somewhat suggests that the results  obtained
         more likely than not are consistent with the  linguistic  community
         as stated in the hypothesis."

 6. At paragraph 26 of his Decision and Reasons Judge Hindson wrote:

         "I have considered the language  analysis  report.   It  is  highly
         technical and, in my view, unnecessarily complex in its own use  of
         language.  However, the  conclusions  are  that,  on  balance,  the
         Appellant is more likely to be from the north of Morocco than  from
         Bengasi, Libya.  The author of  the  report  does  not  comment  on
         whether his language is consistent with being brought up  in  Libya
         with a Moroccan mother.  I accept that the report is not conclusive
         evidence that the Appellant is Moroccan."

 7. Ms Frantzis took the point in her submissions to me that the report did
    not conclude that the Appellant  was  more  likely  to  be  from  North
    Morocco than from Libya but only that the accent with  which  he  spoke
    was more likely to be that found in Morocco than Libya and  that  there
    was therefore a nice distinction to be drawn.

 8. Following from that submission, she submitted that having erred in  the
    factual premise upon which the finding was made, without stating  where
    the burden of proof lay nor to which standard, the general findings  of
    credibility which were adverse to the Appellant were unsafe because  it
    could not be known to what extent the judge had allowed that  error  to
    influence those general findings.

 9. Further Ms Frantzis relied on the report of Dr David Sneddon dated 11th
    April 2016 which in her submission had been inadequately  addressed  by
    the judge.  Dr Sneddon is a social  scientist  with  qualifications  in
    social science and social  anthropology.   His  doctoral  research  and
    thesis was concerned with economic and political change in  North  East
    Morocco which is where he first learnt Arabic.

10. Dr Sneddon was provided with the language analysis report though, as Mr
    Diwnycz pointed out,  Dr  Sneddon  does  not  hold  himself  out  as  a
    linguist.  Dr Sneddon sets out the background to the Appellant's  claim
    and notes the Appellant's explanation as to his lack of knowledge about
    Libya as identified by the Secretary of State in  the  refusal  letter;
    the Appellant contending that he had grown up  on  a  farm  and  having
    always lived in a village, had not been to school,  and  therefore  had
    limited knowledge of Libya.  Dr Sneddon takes the view (though this was
    a matter entirely for the judge) that the Appellant's  explanations  as
    to why he had a lack of knowledge of Libyan  geography  was  plausible.
    More generally as to  historical  questions,  Dr  Sneddon  states  that
    because Libyan history is complex,  it  was  not  surprising  that  the
    Appellant did not know the answer to questions put.   Dr  Sneddon  then
    sets out in some detail the history of Libya before addressing the risk
    on return to the Appellant  in  Libya.   Dr  Sneddon  states  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk there because of his  homosexuality,  though
    really it was never in dispute that were the  Appellant  homosexual  he
    could not be returned to Libya (see paragraph 31 of the refusal letter)
    nor indeed to Morocco (see paragraph 34).  Dr Sneddon concludes on  the
    basis of the evidence that the Appellant was very likely to  be  Libyan
    as claimed.

11. At Appendix 1  of  the  report  Dr  Sneddon  addresses  the  linguistic
    analysis report.  Dr Sneddon opines that the report was not conclusive.
    I note however that is an observation which  Judge  Hindson  took  into
    account.  On the issue of language, in  the  substantive  body  of  the
    report, at 4.31 Dr Sneddon states:

         "I was able to take to [the Appellant] in Arabic and can confirm  -
         especially as my own fieldwork was undertaken in the north east  of
         Morocco, very near Oujda - that  his  speech  could  be  taken  for
         Moroccan Arabic, but also that it is not identical to the accent or
         word usage with which I am most familiar from my time in Morocco".

     That part of Dr Sneddon's report is somewhat equivocal.

12. I agree that the judge erred in failing to state where  the  burden  of
    proof lay when considering whether or not the Appellant  was  Moroccan.
    Clearly the burden of proof was upon the Respondent and the standard of
    proof was balance of probabilities.  The only reference to  the  burden
    and standard of proof is to be found at paragraph 2 of the Decision and
    Reasons which appears to place the entire burden for all  matters  upon
    the Appellant to the lower standard.

13. The issue is whether this error was material.   Though  much  was  said
    about nationality, the core of the claim related not only to  political
    opinion but to sexual proclivity in respect of which  the  judge  found
    the Appellant's credibility lacking.  I have to ask myself  whether  Ms
    Frantzis was right in her submission  that  the  findings  were  unsafe
    given the flawed  basis  upon  which  the  Judge  determined  that  the
    Appellant was Moroccan.

14. I find, notwithstanding that error, that the credibility findings  were
    open to the judge as to the core of the claim.   The  judge  took  into
    account the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been  asked  a  number  of
    questions about Libya and noted that the  Appellant  got  many  of  the
    answers wrong.  The judge made an astute observation,  in  my  judgment
    when he said in response to the Appellant's  explanation  that  he  was
    uneducated, illiterate and spent his life relatively  secluded  on  the
    family farm, that whilst that would explain why the Appellant  did  not
    know the answers to some questions, the Appellant in fact answered  the
    questions but got them wrong which as the judge  rightly  observed  was
    "somewhat different".

15. The judge also observed that in contrast to the Appellant  not  knowing
    the answer to some rather mundane questions, he  correctly  stated  the
    date of the uprising, the name of the rebel militia and  the  like  but
    when asked specifically  about  the  demonstrations  he  attended,  the
    Appellant became vague.   I  remind  myself  that  the  judge  had  the
    opportunity to view the witness; he heard the questions;  and  observed
    the manner in which the Appellant answered them. Some weight is  to  be
    given to that.

16. I have already made mention of the language analysis report. It  is  of
    note that the judge, at paragraph 26, took on board the observation  of
    Dr Sneddon that  the  language  analysis  report  was  not  conclusive.
    Clearly Judge Hindson read the appendix or otherwise he would not  have
    been able to record that observation.

17. Judge Hindson went on to consider the Appellant's assertion that he had
    the particular accent that he  had  because  his  mother  was  Moroccan
    despite working on the farm every day with his father with whom he  did
    not get on.  Judge Hindson  did  not  consider  it  credible  that  the
    Appellant would spend the vast majority of his time with his father yet
    his language would be mostly influenced by  his  mother.   That  was  a
    finding entirely open to the judge and whilst, given the  standard  and
    burden of proof was not properly set out in relation to nationality, it
    was a factor which the judge was entitled to take into account  in  the
    general consideration of  the  Appellant's  credibility.   Indeed,  the
    Appellant accepted the  premise  of  the  Respondent's  case  that  the
    Appellant did not speak with a Libyan accent or at least did speak with
    an accent influenced by Moroccan.

18. Yet another significant observation by Judge Hindson, which informs the
    general credibility findings was the absence of any witness in  support
    of the Appellant.  It is trite law to observe that corroboration is not
    required in order  to  establish  that  an  individual  is  a  refugee.
    However, where there is evidence which might easily be adduced, but  is
    not, that is a matter which a judge can take into account: TK (Burundi)
    [2008] EWCA Civ 722.  The Appellant had claimed to be in a relationship
    with a Libyan  man  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  whom  he  had  been
    associating for the last eight months but that partner did  not  attend
    the hearing.  The Appellant had said that that partner was  fearful  of
    arrest. However, as the judge fairly observed, since the judge had been
    informed that the Home Office were aware of  this  man,  and  where  he
    lived, and could have been interviewed, it followed that  that  man,  a
    potential witness, would have been no more at risk  of  arrest  at  the
    hearing than he would have been at home.   The  judge  found  that  the
    reason for that witness  not  attending  therefore  was  not  credible.
    Finally, the judge observed that although the Appellant had  said  that
    he visited a gay club with his partner he was unable to name it nor say
    where it was or if membership was required.

19. I am driven firmly to the view that  the  error  in  the  standard  and
    burden of proof was not material to the eventual outcome (though it  is
    necessary to remake the decision because of the positive  finding  that
    the Appellant is Moroccan). Further, I am driven  firmly  to  the  view
    further that the judge did in fact have regard  to  the  report  of  Dr
    Sneddon, although he could have set it out more fully as  part  of  the
    analysis.  That said, at paragraph 31 the judge makes clear:

         "In making my credibility assessment I have taken  careful  account
         of the report from Dr Sneddon.  I agree with him that the  language
         analysis is not conclusive or where the Appellant is from."

     Reference is also made to Dr Sneddon's report at paragraph  27  of  the
    Decision and Reasons.

20. If I am wrong and there were material errors of law such  that  I  were
    required to re-make the decision, then applying the observations of the
    judge with respect to the evidence given at the hearing to which I have
    already referred, I would have had no difficulty  whatsoever  in  being
    driven to the same  conclusion,  namely  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established the core of his claim being that he is  homosexual  and  at
    risk were he be returned to Libya because of his political  activities.
    I would not have been able to make a finding  that  the  Appellant  was
    Moroccan but equally given the Appellant's credibility I would not have
    been able to  find  to  the  lower  standard  that  the  Appellant  had
    established that he was in fact Libyan.

21. For the avoidance of doubt I find that the finding of fact  reached  by
    the judge that the Appellant is Moroccan cannot stand but that  is  not
    material to the eventual finding of the judge that the decision of  the
    Secretary of State was correct in that the Appellant was  not  entitled
    to international protection as a refugee nor any other protection.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

