
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11678/2014
     AA/11682/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th June 2015                     |On 8th July 2015                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                mohsen kazemi
                                daniel armani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Pickering, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants' appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dearden
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 10th February 2015.



Background

 2. The appellants are brothers, citizens of Iran and born on 3rd July 1991
    and 12th February 1984 respectively.  They arrived in  the  UK  on  6th
    January 2014 and claimed asylum on the same basis, claiming a  fear  of
    persecution on return to Iran  on  account  of  fearing  the  Ettela'at
    following a confrontation concerning smoking, and having  converted  to
    Christianity since their arrival here.  The judge dismissed the  appeal
    on all grounds. He did not believe that the story which they  had  told
    of the events prior to leaving Iran was  credible  nor  that  they  had
    genuinely converted to Christianity.

The Grounds of Application

 3. The appellants sought permission to appeal in detailed grounds  drafted
    by Ms Pickering which she relied on and expanded upon at the hearing.

 4. First it is said that the judge failed to take  evidence  into  account
    and/or misunderstood the evidence in relation to the incident with  the
    Ettela'at.  The judge had failed to record that the first appellant had
    given clear evidence that when he had previously been  asked  to  throw
    his cigarette away and had refused,  he  had  been  able  to  carry  on
    smoking unharmed. Moreover, the judge was wrong to find that the second
    appellant  had  previous  problems  with  the  authorities  because  of
    disobeying orders.

 5. Next, the judge had failed to give proper reasons for finding that  the
    appellants could not have escaped from the Ettela'at in  the  way  that
    they did. He had not provided any objective basis  as  to  why  he  had
    chosen to disbelieve their account.  He had misunderstood the  evidence
    that the first appellant would not be approached by the Ettela'at  when
    smoking a cigarette because smoking was not  a  political  crime.   The
    first appellant said that the Ettela'at were en route towards  a  group
    of students and when they passed him they asked him to go back into the
    house.  Furthermore the judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  making  a
    medical judgment when he found it implausible that the appellant  could
    have run away as claimed.

 6. It was accepted that different evidence had been given  in  respect  of
    the colour of the shirt of the  person  who  had  assaulted  the  first
    appellant but the judge did not take into account  the  fact  that  the
    second appellant had damaged eyesight in connection with an incident in
    2009.

 7. He also failed to heed the detailed evidence given in  the  substantive
    interview in relation to the subsequent raid on  the  appellant's  home
    and the arrest of their father.  The judge  had  erred  in  giving  the
    impression  that  he  required  corroboration  in  stating   that   the
    appellants had not been able to produce any confirmatory  paperwork  in
    relation to the search of family home.

 8. The judge found it not credible that the appellants' father would  have
    been able to secure the money for their escape from Iran overnight, but
    had not given proper reasons for choosing to disbelieve the appellants'
    account when the evidence was that  the  family  were  wealthy  and  no
    evidence was given as to the sums actually given.

 9. With respect to the conversion to Christianity the judge failed to make
    any findings in respect of the Reverend Borkett's  letter.   The  judge
    had erred in relying upon the case of Dorodian (02/TH/1537)  which  was
    merely a starred decision, and had  failed  to  consider  properly  the
    background evidence in respect of Christian converts.

10. Finally the judge had failed to adequately  engage  with  the  argument
    that enforced returnees were at risk.

11. Permission was granted by Designated Judge Macdonald on 23rd March 2015
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

12. On 30th March 2015 the Secretary of State served a reply defending  the
    determination.

Findings and Conclusions

13. There is no material error in this determination.

14. With respect to the argument that the judge had failed  to  record  the
    first appellant's evidence about having previously been asked to  throw
    a cigarette away it is simply wrong.  The judge said:

         "He maintains that there  was  nothing  unusual  in  the  Ettela'at
         arriving because his house overlooked a student  complex.   He  was
         asked to extinguish his cigarette and go inside the house  but  the
         appellant indicates that this was a  regular  occurrence  with  the
         Ettela'at and he declined their invitation to do so."

15. The judge plainly took into  account  the  appellant's  evidence.   The
    reference to a  failure  to  comply  with  orders  is  irrelevant.  The
    brother's evidence that he had had a brush with the authorities  during
    the 2009 election protests when glass was smashed into the  right  side
    of his face, and the reason for that brush is immaterial.

16. Second, the judge gave a number of different reasons  for  disbelieving
    the appellant's account of the escape.  He was entitled to find it  not
    credible that the appellant, who said that he  had  been  struck  by  a
    baton and was in a dazed and confused condition would have been able to
    escape from seven Ettela'at who were on motorcycles.  He  recorded  the
    appellant's evidence that their knowledge of narrow passages and  steps
    was superior to that of the Ettela'at but it was open to  him  to  take
    into account the acknowledgment that the area was patrolled by officers
    three or four times a week and in any event there was no evidence  that
    the appellants were runners of any repute.  The reference to the narrow
    passageways is only one of a number of  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    account.

17. There is no error in the judge's reasoning  that  the  first  appellant
    would not be approached by the  Ettela'at  when  he  had  no  political
    profile and he was simply smoking a cigarette which was not an  illegal
    activity.

18. So far as the inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    clothing of the Ettela'at was concerned it  was  plainly  open  to  the
    judge to hold it against the appellants that the first  appellant  said
    that his attacker wore a black shirt and the second that it was  white.
    He was not bound to record the evidence that Mr Armani's  eyesight  had
    been damaged.

19. There is no requirement for corroboration in this  determination.   The
    judge gave a number of reasons for disbelieving the appellant's account
    that the house was not raided until  after  they  had  left  the  city,
    particularly when his home was adjacent  to  the  place  where  he  was
    smoking.

20. The judge was plainly  entitled  to  find  it  not  credible  that  the
    appellants were able to travel to Tehran with a  view  to  leaving  the
    country within an hour.  He recorded the  explanation  that  they  were
    from an affluent background but did not find it credible that the money
    could have been raised in such a short period of time.

21. Ms Pickering urged me to find that cumulatively the judge  had  made  a
    number of mistakes in his assessment of credibility which  cumulatively
    rendered the determination unsafe.  On the  contrary  this  is  a  very
    detailed and careful determination in which all  of  the  evidence  was
    properly recorded.  The judge's findings were properly open to him  for
    the reasons which he gave.

22. With respect to the conversion to Christianity it is right to say  that
    the judge did not refer to  one  of  the  letters  in  the  appellants'
    bundle, that of the Reverend Phillip Borkett who wrote  in  support  of
    the first appellant's application to remain in  the  country.   He  did
    however refer to three other letters and to the oral evidence given  by
    Janet Gooch.  He recorded that she said that she  was  not  present  in
    order to vouch for the genuineness of Mr Kazemi's  conversion  and,  as
    the  Presenting  Officer  and  Ms  Pickering  confirmed,  their   notes
    correspond with that of the judge albeit that Ms Pickering's note is  a
    little fuller.  It is quite clear however that Mrs Gooch did  say  what
    the judge recorded.

23. The judge was correct to rely on the case of Dorodian which states that
    a Minister should invariably be called to give oral evidence  in  order
    to establish a claim to have converted to Christianity.  The judge said
    that despite the lack of a Minister  being  called  to  give  evidence,
    there was no application before  him  to  adjourn  the  proceedings  to
    another day.  He was entitled to take into account the fact that he had
    concluded that the appellants had been untruthful in their  account  of
    what had happened to them in Iran in  his  assessment  of  whether  the
    conversion to  Christianity  was  genuine.   He  properly  applied  the
    relevant case law, FS & Others [2004] UKIAT 00303,  which  states  that
    for the ordinary convert who is neither a leader, lay or ordained nor a
    pastor nor a proselytiser or evangelist the actual degree  of  risk  of
    persecution or treatment breaching  Article  3  is  not  sufficient  to
    warrant the protection of either Convention.

24. The same is true in relation to the argument on enforced returns.   The
    judge applied the case of SB [2009] UKAIT 00053 as he was  required  to
    do.  Ms Pickering informed me  that  the  matter  is  coming  before  a
    country guidance panel in September but at present SB remains good law.

25. The grounds and submissions in  relation  to  the  judge's  credibility
    findings amount to a sustained disagreement with the decision.   Whilst
    it is right to say that the judge did not  refer  to  the  letter  from
    Reverend Borkett, he did refer to the other letters in the bundle,  and
    to the oral evidence. In the  context  of  a  thoughtful  and  properly
    considered decision, the lack of reference to a single document is  not
    material.

Notice of Decision

26. The original decision will stand.  The appellants' appeal is dismissed.

27. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

