

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number:
AA/11145/2014






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th March 2016                             |On 11th April 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     C R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Edwards instructed by Kesar & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order in order to  protect  the
    anonymity of the respondent (CR) who claims asylum.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.


Introduction

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Callow) allowing CR's appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision  taken  on  21  November  2014  that  the   automatic
    deportation provisions in the UK Borders  Act  2007  (the  "2007  Act")
    applied.  The Secretary of State made a deportation order against CR on
    that date also.

 3. For convenience, although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I
    will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 29 January 2001.  He  is  a
    national of Sri Lanka and claimed asylum on the basis that he had  been
    detained and ill-treated by the Sri Lankan army on  suspicion  that  he
    had worked for the LTTE in Sri Lanka.  On  2  March  2011,  his  asylum
    application was refused.  He was, however, granted exceptional leave to
    enter the UK until 2 March 2005.  Then, on 9 July 2005 he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

 5. On 13 June 2012, the appellant was convicted at the Harrow Crown  Court
    on two counts: one of false imprisonment and the other of wounding with
    intent to do grievous bodily harm and was sentenced to concurrent terms
    of seven years' imprisonment on each count.

 6. On 25 July 2012, the appellant was served with notice of his  liability
    to deportation and, thereafter, submitted a questionnaire in  which  he
    claimed that his deportation would breach the Refugee Convention.  On 1
    May 2014, the appellant was served  with  a  warning  letter  from  the
    respondent that the respondent  was  minded  to  apply  s.  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("NIA  Act  2002").   The
    appellant failed to complete a screening interview but on 19 May  2014,
    further representations were made on his behalf.

 7. On 21 November 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum on the basis that he had failed to establish  that  he
    would be at risk because of his past involvement with the LTTE applying
    the country guidance case of GJ and Others (post-civil war;  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Given  the  seriousness  of  his
    offending and in the light of all the evidence, the Secretary of  State
    issued a certificate under s.72 of the NIA Act 2002 on the  basis  that
    he had been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  offence  and  his
    continued presence in the UK constituted a danger to the community.

 8. In addition, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim under
    Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR on the  basis  that  he  had  not  established
    either a risk based upon his past history or that he would, as a result
    of his mental health problem including PTSD, be at real risk of serious
    harm on return to Sri  Lanka.   Finally,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's claim under Art 8 of the ECHR.  As a result, the  Secretary
    of State concluded that the appellant did not fall within  any  of  the
    exceptions set out in s.33 of the 2007  Act  which  would  prevent  the
    application of the automatic deportation provisions.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  He relied upon  the
    Refugee Convention and also upon Art 3 of  the  ECHR,  particularly  in
    respect of the claimed  impact  upon  his  mental  health  if  he  were
    returned to Sri Lanka which, he claimed, would result in him committing
    suicide.

10. Judge Callow did not accept that s.72 of the 2002 Act applied  because,
    although the appellant had  been  convicted  of  a  particular  serious
    crime, the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he constituted a
    danger to the community in the UK.  That decision is not challenged  in
    these proceedings and I say no more about it.

11. Judge Callow went on to consider the merits of the  appellant's  asylum
    claim.  He accepted the core claim of the appellant that he had been  a
    low-level member of  the  LTTE  and  that  he  had  been  detained  and
    assaulted in detention before being released on  payment  of  a  bribe.
    However, applying GJ and  Others,  Judge  Callow  concluded  that  that
    factual matrix did not establish a real risk of persecution by the  Sri
    Lankan authority if the appellant returned to Sri Lanka.  The appellant
    has not challenged that adverse finding  in  these  proceedings  which,
    therefore, stand.

12. Finally, Judge Callow found that the appellant had established a breach
    of Art. 3 based upon the impact to him as a result of his mental health
    problem.   Consequently,  on  that  ground  Judge  Callow  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that he  fell  within  Exception  1  in
    s.33(2)(a) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision to the
    Upper Tribunal on two grounds.  First,  the  judge  had  wrongly  found
    against the Secretary of State on the certification under s.72  of  the
    NIA Act 2002.  Secondly, in allowing the appeal under Art 3, the  judge
    had failed to give  adequate  reason  for  his  finding  and  had  also
    misapplied the leading decision of the Court of Appeal  in  respect  of
    claims under Art 3 based upon a risk of committing suicide in J v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

14. Initially, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler) refused the Secretary
    of State permission to appeal on 23 July 2015.  However, on 4 September
    2015 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Plimer) granted  the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal on ground 2 alone.

15. Before me, Mr Richards who represented the Secretary of State  accepted
    that he could only rely upon ground 2 and his oral submissions were, as
    a consequence, wholly focused on that ground.

The Submissions in Summary

16. Mr Richards made two submissions.  First, he submitted that  the  judge
    had failed properly to apply the expert report of Dr Richard Bailie,  a
    Clinical Psychologist (dated 22 April 2014 and at pages L63-L121 of the
    respondent's bundle).  Mr  Richards  submitted,  in  essence,  that  Dr
    Bailie had nowhere in his  report  diagnosed  that  the  appellant  was
    suffering from severe mental illness which created a real risk that  he
    would commit suicide if returned to Sri Lanka.  At  best,  Mr  Richards
    submitted that Dr Bailie referred to an "elevated risk" at para  3.6.10
    of his report but that did not explain the level of  risk  which  could
    remain "low" having begun from  a  base  of  "no  risk".   Mr  Richards
    submitted that there was no evidential basis for the judge's conclusion
    that the appellant had established a breach of Art 3.

17. Secondly, in relying upon the ground upon which permission was granted,
    the Secretary of State also contends that the judge had failed to apply
    the "fifth principle" in J at [30] that:

           "if the fear is  not  well-founded,  that  will  tend  to  weigh
           against there being a real risk that  the  removal  will  be  in
           breach of Art 3."

18. The Secretary of State contends that the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account his finding, in respect of the appellant's asylum  claim,  that
    his fear of persecution was not well-founded.

19. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Edwards relied upon the appellant's rule
    24 reply and a skeleton argument.

20. First, he submitted that the judge had  fully  taken  into  account  Dr
    Bailie's report including his diagnosis  that  the  appellant  suffered
    from PTSD and that there was a "elevated  risk"  to  the  appellant  of
    committing suicide if he returned to Sri Lanka.  Mr Edwards relied upon
    a number of passages in Dr Bailie's report which, Mr Edwards submitted,
    had been summarised in  para  33  of  the  judge's  determination.   Mr
    Edwards submitted that there was a sound factual basis for the  judge's
    finding that there was a risk of the appellant  committing  suicide  if
    returned to Sri Lanka based upon Dr Bailie's evidence, the  appellant's
    own evidence and the background evidence that the sources available for
    treating mental health, including PTSD were not adequate in Sri  Lanka.



21. Secondly, Mr Edwards submitted that the  Secretary  of  State's  second
    ground relying upon the "fifth principle" in J had to be  read  in  the
    light of the subsequent Court of Appeal decision in Y and Z (Sri Lanka)
    v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 and, in particular, passages in the judgment
    of Sedley LJ at [14]-[16].  In particular, at [16], Sedley LJ said:

         "One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that what  may
         nevertheless be of equal importance is  whether  any  genuine  fear
         which the appellant may  establish,  albeit  without  an  objective
         foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if there  is  an
         enforced return."

22. Mr Edwards submitted the "fifth principle" in J  had  been  effectively
    amended by the Court of Appeal's decision in Y  and  Z.   He  submitted
    that the judge had taken into account the appellant's subjective  fear,
    which the judge had found to be genuine, even though based upon GJ  and
    Others the fear was not well-founded.

Discussion

23. In considering the application of Art 3, Judge Callow at para 34 of his
    determination summarised the six principles identified by the Court  of
    Appeal in J applicable when Art 3 is relied upon based upon a  risk  of
    suicide or other self-harm.  Those principles are found in the judgment
    of Dyson LJ at [26]-[31] as follows:

         "26.     First, the test requires an assessment to be made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             "necessarily be serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment":  see
             Ullah paras [38-39].


         27.      Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the
             act or threatened act of removal or expulsion and the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights.  Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:


                  'In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which  has  a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of   an
                  individual  to   proscribed   ill-treatment."    (emphasis
                  added).


                  See also para [108] of Vilvarajah  where  the  court  said
                  that the examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on
                  the  foreseeable  consequences  of  the  removal  of   the
                  applicants to Sri Lanka ...'

         28.      Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.

         29.      Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

         30.      Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a  real  risk  of  a
             breach  of  article  3  in  a  suicide  case,  a  question  of
             importance is whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in
             the receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is said  to
             be based is objectively well-founded.  If the fear is not well-
             founded, that will tend to weigh against there  being  a  real
             risk that the removal will be in breach of article 3.

         31.      Sixthly, a further question of considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.   If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."


24. That approach was subsequently approved  by  the  Strasbourg  Court  in
    Balogun v UK (2013) 56 EHRR 3 at [31]-[34].  It has been followed,  and
    applied, by the Court of Appeal, for example in  AJ  (Liberia)  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1736.  As Dyson LJ identified in J (at [29]), an Art  3
    claim may in principle succeed in  a  suicide  case.   However,  it  is
    necessary to establish that there is a real risk  that  the  individual
    will commit suicide and that a causal link exists between  the  act  of
    removal or expulsion and the violation of Art  3.   There  is  a  "high
    threshold" and it is relevant to consider whether the  receiving  state
    has "effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide".

25. The Secretary of  State's  first  ground  is  that  the  judge  had  an
    insufficient basis  derived  from  Dr  Bailie's  report  to  found  any
    conclusion that the appellant had established a real risk that he would
    commit suicide if returned to Sri Lanka.

26.  In evaluating that assumption, it is helpful to begin with the judge's
    reasoning.  At para 33 of his determination he summarised aspects of Dr
    Bailie's report which he considers important as follows:

         "33.     I turn to consider the  appellant's  mental  health.   The
             appellant is apprehensive about the possibility of an enforced
             return and has threatened to  commit  suicide  prior  to  such
             enforcement.  He bears  the  scars  of  ill-treatment  in  Sri
             Lanka.   Dr   Bailie's   report   confirms   the   appellant's
             presentation as being consistent with a diagnosis of PTSD.  At
             3.6.1 and 3.6.2 of his report:  '[the appellant] reported that
             he thought he would be killed if he was returned to Sri  Lanka
             ... if we assume that  [the  appellant]  has  experienced  the
             events that he has described during his  childhood  and  early
             adulthood then it  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  he  is
             fearful of returning to Sri Lanka and that at a rational level
             he does not think it is safe.'  At 3.6.4 it is  accepted  that
             the appellant may well experience suicidal thoughts,  feelings
             of hopelessness and  helplessness  and  associated  depressive
             symptoms in the event of being told  he  is  to  be  deported.
             This would also exacerbate his post traumatic stress  symptoms
             as  his  sense  of  safety  would  be  reduced  and  he  would
             experience a heightened level of fear that his life  would  be
             in danger.  A number of factors  heighten  the  risk  that  he
             would commit suicide in the event  of  his  enforced  removal.
             While Dr Bailie was not  in  a  position  to  state  that  the
             appellant would end his life, he was of the  opinion  that  he
             would be at an elevated risk of doing so."

27. Having set out the six principles in J and Sedley LJ's statement  in  Y
    and Z, relied on  by  Mr  Edwards,  the  judge  set  out  his  findings
    concerning the appellant's mental health and the impact upon removal of
    him to Sri Lanka in the light of the  background  evidence  as  to  the
    availability of mental health support in Sri Lanka as follows at  [36]-
    [40]:

         "36.     I note that the appellant has a genuine fear of return and
             has  difficulty  in  trusting  or  interacting  with  official
             figures, even in the UK.  He has suicidal ideation  and  plans
             to commit suicide rather than return, even though  there  have
             as yet been no attempts.
         37.      Although the appeal fails under the Refugee Convention and
             Qualification Directive, I must consider whether  the  suicide
             risk which this  appellant  presents  is  such  as  to  engage
             Article  3  ECHR.   Applying  the  J  and  Y  principles,  and
             reminding myself  of  the  gravity  of  the  appellant's  past
             experience of ill-treatment  and  his  current  mental  health
             problems I have considered whether returning the appellant  to
             Sri Lanka will breach the UK's international obligations under
             Article 3.


         38.      Drawing on the guidance in GJ and Others the  evidence  is
             that there are only 25 working psychiatrists in the  whole  of
             Sri Lanka.  Although there are some mental  health  facilities
             in  Sri  Lanka,  at  paragraph  4  of  the  April  2012   UKBA
             Operational  Guidance  Note  on  Sri  Lanka,  it  records   an
             observation by Basic Needs that 'money that is spent on mental
             health  only  really  goes  to   the   large   mental   health
             institutions in capital cities, which are inaccessible and  do
             not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people' [20].


         39.      In the UKBA Country of Origin Report issued in March 2012,
             at  paragraph  23.28-23.29,  the  following   information   is
             recorded from a BHC letter written on 31 January 2012:


                 '23.28 The BHC letter of 31  January  2012  observed  that:
                 "There are  no  psychologists  working  within  the  public
                 sector  although  there  are  [sic]  1  teaching   at   the
                 University of Colombo.  There are no numbers available  for
                 psychologists working within the private sector.  There are
                 currently 55 psychiatrists  attached  to  the  Ministry  of
                 Health and working across the country.'


             Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)


             23.29 The BHC letter of 31 January 2012 468 observed that:


                  'Post  Traumatic  Stress   Disorder   (PTSD)   was   first
                  recognised in Sri Lanka in patients affected by  the  2004
                  tsunami.  Many of the psychiatrists and support  staff  in
                  Sri Lanka have received training in Australia and  the  UK
                  for  the  treatment  of  the   disorder.    A   Consultant
                  Psychiatrist from  NIMH  said  that  many  patients  often
                  sought ayurvedic or traditional treatment for the  illness
                  long before approaching public hospitals, adding that this
                  often resulted in patients then suffering from psychosis.'

         40.      I approach assessment of the appellant's circumstances  on
             the basis that it would be  possible  for  the  respondent  to
             return the appellant to Sri Lanka without his coming to  harm,
             but once there, he would be in the hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan
             mental health services.  The resources in Sri Lanka are sparse
             and  are  limited  to  the  cities.   In  the  light  of   the
             respondent's own evidence that  in  her  OGN  that  there  are
             facilities only in the cities and that they  'do  not  provide
             appropriate care for mentally ill people', and of the severity
             of this appellant's mental illness, I am not satisfied on  the
             particular facts of this appeal, that  returning  him  to  Sri
             Lanka complies with the UK's international  obligations  under
             Article 3 ECHR."

28. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that the judge failed fully  to
    take into account, and in effect misapplied, Dr Bailie's report.

29. Dr Bailie had the benefit of interviewing the  appellant  and  also  of
    seeing his health  records.   He  clearly  formed  the  view  that  the
    appellant was genuine in that he was not exaggerating his symptoms.  At
    para 3.2.1 Dr Bailie concluded that the appellant met "the criteria for
    post-traumatic stress disorder".  Mr Richards submitted that  this  did
    not amount to a "severe mental illness" and therefore did  not  justify
    the judge taking "the severity of this appellant's mental illness" into
    account at para 40 of his determination in concluding that there was  a
    real risk of the appellant committing suicide.  In my judgment, this is
    in large measure a semantic point that does not go to the substance  of
    Dr Bailie's report.  The appellant did suffer  from  a  serious  mental
    health condition and the Judge no more than reflected that.

30. Dr Bailie's report is, as both representatives agreed, a balanced  one.
    At para 3.6.6 he notes that the appellant has "not planned and  behaved
    suicidally before" and that "[t]his reduces the risk that he  would  do
    so in the future."  However, at para 3.6.8 Dr  Bailie  notes  that  the
    appellant  has  not  previously  faced  deportation  and  that  it   is
    "difficult therefore to predict his response to a novel stressor".   Dr
    Bailie goes on in that paragraph to state:

         "However he is likely to perceive a move  to  Sri  Lanka  as  life-
         threatening.  He is likely to feel helpless and hopeless, which are
         emotions that are commonly associated with  suicidal  thoughts  and
         behaviour."

    Dr Bailie expresses the following opinion:

         "3.6.9.       In terms of protective factors,  [the  appellant]  is
                low on protective factors.  He does not have close family or
                friends; thus he does not have thoughts about others missing
                him were he to end his life.  He does not have children,  so
                similarly thoughts  about  them  do  not  prevent  him  from
                thinking about suicide, making plans and  ending  his  life.
                Prior  to  being  in  custody,   [the   appellant]   misused
                substances, these are known  to  be  disinhibiting  when  it
                comes to suicidal behaviour.  [The appellant] has been prone
                to impulsive behaviour, and rapid  emotional  dysregulation,
                both of which are associated with suicidal behaviour.


         3.6.10.       Thus, while I am not in a position to state that [the
                appellant] will end his life or seek to end his life in  the
                event of an enforced deportation, he  is  likely  to  be  at
                elevated risk of ending his life given the presence  of  the
                above risk factors and an absence of protective factors."

31. That opinion was expressed in the context of accepting the  appellant's
    past  history  which  is  precisely  what  Judge  Callow  did  in   his
    determination.  The reference to an "elevated risk" is clearly made  in
    the context that the appellant had a  risk  of  committing  suicide  at
    present.  Whilst Dr Bailie candidly accepts that he  cannot  say  "with
    any  certainty"  whether  the  appellant  will  attempt  suicide,   his
    recognition of an "elevated risk" given the  appellant's  past  history
    (which the judge accepted and set out at para 32), the appellant's  own
    evidence concerning his intentions and the background evidence referred
    to by the judge at paras 38 and 39 entitled the Judge, in my  judgment,
    to reach the conclusion that there was a real risk that  the  appellant
    would commit suicide if returned to Sri Lanka.   Mr  Richards  did  not
    seek to argue that the judge had misunderstood the background evidence.

32. Subject to the second argument raised by the Secretary of State, I  see
    no basis upon which it can be said that the evidence taken as  a  whole
    was not such as to permit the judge  to  reach  his  factual  findings,
    applying the jurisprudence applicable to Art 3 and mental health cases,
    namely that it was established that there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant will attempt to commit suicide on return  to  Sri  Lanka  and
    that therefore his return would breach Art  3  of  the  ECHR.   Whether
    couched in terms of irrationality or adequacy  of  reasons,  I  see  no
    basis upon which the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  can  succeed.
    There was a substratum of evidence before the judge and upon  which  he
    relied; his reasons (as I have set out above) engaged with the evidence
    and applicable law and demonstrate adequately why he concluded that the
    respondent's decision breached Art 3.

33. Turning now to the second point relied upon by the Secretary of  State,
    that point fails, in my view, properly to  take  account  of  the  view
    expressed by Sedley LJ in Y and Z in respect of the  "fifth  principle"
    in J.  At [14]-[16], Sedley LJ said this:

         "14.     ... if a fear of ill-treatment on return is  well-founded,
             this will ordinarily mean that refoulement (if it is a refugee
             convention case) or return (if it  is  a  human  rights  case)
             cannot take place in any event.  In such  cases  the  question
             whether return will precipitate suicide is academic.  But  the
             principle leaves an unfilled space for cases like the  present
             one where fear of ill-treatment on return, albeit held  to  be
             objectively without foundation, is subjectively not only  real
             but over-whelming.


         15.      There is no necessary tension between the two things.  The
             corollary of the final sentence of [30] of J is  that  in  the
             absence  of  an  objective  foundation  for  the   fear   some
             independent basis for it must be established if weight  is  to
             be given to it.  Such an independent basis may lie  in  trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or,  as  here,  by)
             the receiving state:  someone who has been tortured and  raped
             by his or her captors may be terrified  of  returning  to  the
             place where it happened, especially if  the  same  authorities
             are in charge, notwithstanding  that  the  objective  risk  of
             recurrence has gone.


         16.      One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in  J  that
             what may nevertheless be of equal importance  is  whether  any
             genuine fear which the appellant may establish, albeit without
             an objective foundation, is  such  as  to  create  a  risk  of
             suicide if there is an enforced return."

34. The point made by Sedley LJ is that a genuine fear of persecution, even
    when it lacks an objective foundation, may have  evidential  weight  in
    establishing what an individual may or may not do on  return  to  their
    home country.  The absence of an objective or  well-founded  fear  will
    not necessarily drive a decision maker to conclude as, in its  absence,
    an individual will not act so as to self-harm on return.   Its  absence
    is relevant, as Dyson LJ pointed out in J, but it  is  not  conclusive.
    Potentially of "equal importance" is the evidence  (if  accepted)  that
    the individual's fear is genuine despite the absence of objective risk.
     This is particularly potent in cases, such as the  present,  where  an
    individual claim is factually accepted but, on the objective  evidence,
    the risk is not well-founded.

35. In this case, the judge did not  fail  properly  to  apply  the  "fifth
    principle" in J.  Having set that principle out, the judge set out what
    was said by Sedley LJ in Y and Z  at  para  35.   Mr  Edwards  drew  my
    attention to the appellant's account of his past history in his  asylum
    interview particularly at questions 3, 11, 12 and 13  and  accepted  by
    the judge at para 32 of  his  determination.   In  my  judgment,  Judge
    Callow was entitled  to  take  into  account  the  genuineness  of  the
    appellant's fear even if that fear was not  well-founded  in  assessing
    the risk that the appellant would commit suicide  if  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.

36. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's submissions on the
    two grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted. There being no
    other challenge in  respect  of  the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    stands.

37. No other aspect of the judge's  determination  was  challenged  in  the
    grounds.

Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds stands.

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 3 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  and  that
    decision also stands.

40. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.





                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
















