
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11051/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th January 2016                 |On 21st January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                         Abdelbasist Hag Mohamed HAG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sinker of Counsel instructed by AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision of Judge M  Davies  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 4th February 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Sudanese citizen  born  1st  January  1963  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 30th April 2014, having been granted a
    visa enabling him to accompany his employer from Saudi  Arabia  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The visa was valid between 10th November 2013 and 10th
    May 2014.  The Appellant travelled from  Saudi  Arabia  to  the  United
    Kingdom, using his own Sudanese passport which he subsequently disposed
    of shortly after arrival.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on 2nd July 2014.   His  claim  was  based
    upon his ethnicity, as he claimed to be a  non-Arab  Darfuri,  being  a
    member of the  Tunjur  tribe,  and  his  political  opinion,  being  an
    opponent of the Sudanese government.

 4. In summary the Appellant's claim was that he was  born  in  Khandak  in
    north Sudan.  The Appellant had never lived in Darfur, but stated  that
    his tribe originated from  Darfur  and  he  was  therefore  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri.

 5. The Appellant  farmed  land  which  was  confiscated  by  the  Sudanese
    authorities in November 1989.

 6. The Appellant moved to live in Saudi Arabia in  June  1990.   While  in
    Saudi Arabia he spoke out against the  Sudanese  government  at  social
    gatherings.

 7. The Appellant lived in Saudi Arabia, and  worked  there,  between  June
    1990, and 30th April 2014 when he left to travel to the United Kingdom.
     He made five visits back to Sudan, in 1998 for six  months,  2003  for
    four months, 2007 for two months, 2012 for three months, and  2013  for
    four months.

 8. The Appellant married in Sudan on 24th April 1998.  When the  Appellant
    returned to Saudi Arabia, his wife would stay in Sudan  which  was  the
    reason that he returned to visit.  The  Appellant  and  his  wife  have
    three children, born in 1999, 2008, and 2010.

 9. The Appellant contended that in May 1998 two men came to his  house  in
    Sudan, took him to a police station and questioned him and accused  him
    of supporting anti-government activity.  He signed  a  piece  of  paper
    confirming that he would not carry out any further opposition activity,
    and he was then taken to an area of desert and beaten up  before  being
    allowed to return home.  He was told that when he was in Sudan  he  had
    to report every Monday to Algolid police station.

10. The Appellant did not encounter any  further  difficulties  after  that
    incident in May of 1998, until 2014 when he was due to leave Sudan  and
    return to Saudi Arabia.  He was told that his exit visa  was  with  the
    Security Department and he was to collect it  from  there.   He  feared
    that he would be arrested so he fled to Khartoum.

11. The Appellant bribed a general who obtained his passport for  him,  and
    ensured that he was able to leave the airport on 18th  April  2014  and
    return to Saudi Arabia.  The Appellant then travelled from Saudi Arabia
    to the United Kingdom on 30th April 2014, using the visa  that  he  had
    been granted on 10th November 2013, which was due to expire on 10th May
    2014.

12. The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim that he  was  entitled  to
    asylum, and did not accept that he would be  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Sudan, and therefore also rejected his claim that to return  him  would
    breach his human rights.  The reasons for refusal  are  set  out  in  a
    letter dated 27th November 2014.   In  brief  summary,  the  Respondent
    accepted the Appellant's identity and nationality.

13. It was not  accepted  that  he  was  a  member  of  Tunjur  tribe,  the
    Respondent noting that he had displayed some knowledge  of  the  tribe,
    but having considered the Appellant's credibility  in  the  round,  the
    Respondent did not accept that he had discharged the burden of  proving
    membership of that tribe.

14. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had given  a  credible
    account, and it was not accepted that his land was confiscated  due  to
    his  ethnicity  nor  that  he  had  spoken  out  against  the  Sudanese
    government, nor that the Sudanese government had any  adverse  interest
    in him.  It was not accepted that the Appellant had been beaten up as a
    result of his opposition to the  government  or  as  a  result  of  his
    ethnicity, nor was it accepted that  he  had  to  report  to  a  police
    station every Monday when he was in Sudan.

15. It was not accepted that the Appellant had left Sudan in April 2014  by
    bribing a general and it was noted that the Appellant had  returned  to
    Sudan on five separate occasions since 1990, in order to see his family
    and it was not accepted that he had encountered any difficulty.  It was
    noted that the Appellant was  issued  with  a  Sudanese  passport,  and
    issued with exit visas enabling him to leave Sudan.

16. The Respondent noted that the Appellant,  on  his  own  admission,  had
    disposed of his passport after arriving in the United  Kingdom  and  it
    was contended that section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
    of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 applied.

17. It was not accepted that the Appellant was a non-Arab Darfuri.

18. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 27th January 2015.   The
    FTT found that the Appellant was not credible and dismissed his  appeal
    on all grounds.  The FTT found that the Appellant  had  fabricated  his
    claim.

19. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no challenge to the adverse credibility findings made by  the
    FTT as to the Appellant's claimed  activities  in  Sudan,  but  it  was
    contended that the FTT had erred by failing to allow the appeal on  the
    basis that the Appellant is a  non-Arab  Darfuri,  and  had  failed  to
    follow country guidance case law, which indicated that if that was  the
    case, the Appellant would be at risk.  It was contended  that  the  FTT
    had erred by treating credibility as the primary issue, whereas country
    guidance case  law  indicated  that  consideration  of  ethnicity,  and
    whether or not the Appellant was a non-Arab Darfuri  should  have  been
    the first issue to be considered.  It was contended that the  Appellant
    had been born in Khandak, which is in north Darfur.

20. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  in  the
    following terms;

         "1   The First-tier Tribunal determination sets out at great length
             reasons why the judge did not accept the Appellant's  evidence
             as to his activities in  Sudan.   He  finds  the  account  not
             credible.

         2    The judge also finds that the Appellant is not a non-Arab from
             Darfur.  He comes to this  finding  taking  into  account  the
             Appellant's witness' evidence and the Appellant's  evidence  -
             [70] and [75].   The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
             submit that the Respondent accepts that the Appellant was born
             in Darfur and had some knowledge of the Tonjour tribe.

         3    Although the Appellant's credibility of his asylum claim in so
             far as his activities in Sudan is disbelieved  and  permission
             to appeal those findings is not sought, it  is  arguable  that
             the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in firstly  finding  that
             the Appellant had not lived  in  Darfur  when  Khandak  is  in
             Darfur and secondly  on  that  basis  failed  to  properly  or
             adequately reason his conclusion that the Appellant was not of
             the Tonjour tribe."

Error of Law

21. On 2nd November 2015 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law.  It was accepted on behalf of the Respondent that  the
    Appellant was born in Khandak, and that Khandak was in Darfur.

22. I found that the FTT had erred in law and set aside the decision of the
    FTT.  My reasons for so doing are set out in my error of  law  decision
    and directions which was promulgated on 13th November 2015.  In summary
    the decision of the FTT was set aside for the following reasons.

23. There was no finding as to whether or not the  Appellant  was  born  in
    Darfur.  Country guidance case law indicates that if an Appellant is  a
    non-Arab Darfuri, he must succeed in an international protection claim,
    and "Darfuri" is to  be  understood  as  an  ethnic  term  relating  to
    origins, not as  a  geographical  term.   Accordingly  it  covers  even
    Darfuris who are not born in Darfur.

24. The Respondent had accepted in the reasons for refusal letter that  the
    Appellant had displayed some knowledge of the  Tunjur  tribe,  although
    this did not prove conclusively that he was a  member  of  that  tribe.
    This evidence was not adequately analysed by the FTT.  The FTT did  not
    give adequate reasons for rejecting  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    member of the Tunjur tribe.

25. Although the primary finding of the FTT was that the Appellant was  not
    a member of the Tunjur tribe, it found in the alternative  that  if  he
    was a member of that tribe, his case could be  distinguished  from  the
    country guidance cases, AA (Sudan) CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Sudan)
    CG [2015] UKUT 00010  (IAC).   The  FTT  did  not  give  sufficient  or
    adequate reasons for departing from the principle that if an individual
    is a non-Arab Darfuri, he must succeed in an  international  protection
    claim.

26. Although the decision of the FTT was set aside, because there had  been
    no  challenge  to  the  findings  made  by  the  FTT  in  relation   to
    disbelieving the Appellant's account of his activities in Sudan,  those
    findings were preserved.

27. The hearing was adjourned for further evidence to  be  given,  and  the
    issue to be decided was whether the Appellant had proved that he  is  a
    non-Arab Darfuri.  If that was decided in  the  affirmative,  the  next
    issue to be decided was whether the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Sudan, and whether there are any reasons to depart from the
    principles in the country guidance decisions AA (Sudan) and MM (Sudan).



Re-making the Decision

The Law

28. The Appellant is entitled to asylum if he is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and he is recognised as a refugee, as defined in regulation
    2 of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

29. The Appellant is eligible for humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if he does not qualify as a refugee,  but
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if  he  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, he would face a real risk of suffering serious
    harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk unwilling to  avail  himself
    of the protection of the country of return.

30. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the ECHR) it is for the Appellant to  establish  that  if
    removed from the United Kingdom there is  a  real  risk  of  him  being
    killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or  degrading  treatment  or
    punishment.

31. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR the  Appellant  must  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to family  life  under  Appendix  FM,  or
    private life with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1).  If  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed under the Rules, the Appellant must show a  good  reason
    why Article 8 should be considered outside the Rules.

32. The burden of proof is on the Appellant  and  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, which is a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of a balance of probabilities.  The Tribunal must
    consider the circumstances as at the date of hearing.

Preliminary Issues

33. At the resumed hearing the Appellant attended and  I  established  that
    there was no difficulty in communication between the Appellant and  the
    interpreter, and the language used was Arabic.

34.  I  ascertained  that  the  Tribunal  had  been   provided   with   all
    documentation upon which the parties intended to rely, and  each  party
    had served the other with any documentation upon which reliance was  to
    be placed.  The documentation consisted of the Respondent's bundle with
    Annexes A-G, and the Appellant's bundle comprising 78 pages.

35. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Evidence

36. The Appellant gave oral evidence and firstly answered questions put  by
    Mr Sinker.  He stated that he had been born in Khandak, which is in the
    north of Sudan.  When asked whether that is in Darfur, he said that  it
    is not, and Khandak is in the north of Sudan,  and  Darfur  is  in  the
    west.  The Appellant confirmed  that  he  had  never  lived  in  Darfur
    although his grandfather had.

37. The Appellant confirmed that he belonged to the Tunjur tribe  and  that
    his great-grandfather was from that tribe.  His father and  his  uncles
    were also from the tribe although his mother was not.

38. The  Appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  lived  in  Khandak,  and  had
    undertaken farming  until  his  land  was  confiscated  in  1989.   The
    Appellant  confirmed  that  older  members  of  the  Tunjur  tribe  had
    distinctive markings, but younger members of the tribe did not.

39. The Appellant was cross-examined.  He confirmed that  his  parents  are
    now deceased.  His stated that his children live in Sudan and  that  he
    had no other family members there except maternal cousins who lived  in
    Khartoum and Khandak.  He said that  he  had  no  paternal  cousins  in
    Sudan, and when he was referred to his reply  to  question  11  of  his
    interview in which he stated he had three paternal cousins in Sudan, he
    said that this was incorrect.

40. The Appellant accepted that he used to have  a  Sudanese  passport  and
    that he had returned to Sudan on five separate occasions after  leaving
    in 1990 and he encountered no difficulties in entering Sudan.  His case
    was that he only encountered difficulty in leaving Sudan in April  2014
    which was when he had to bribe a general.

The Respondent's Submissions

41. Mr McVeety submitted the first issue to be considered was  whether  the
    Appellant had proved that he is a member of the Tunjur  tribe.   If  he
    had proved he is a member of that tribe, it was accepted that he  would
    be at risk according to the country  guidance  case  law.   Mr  McVeety
    pointed out that the Appellant's explanation that  Khandak  is  not  in
    Darfur, and therefore he had not been born in Darfur,  conflicted  with
    the claim made on his  behalf  by  his  solicitors  when  applying  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

42. I was asked to find that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of
    proof.  I was reminded of the credibility  findings  preserved  by  the
    FTT.  It was not accepted that the Appellant had ever been arrested  or
    encountered any  difficulties  from  the  authorities  in  Sudan.   The
    Appellant had travelled from Saudi Arabia to  Sudan  on  five  separate
    occasions without difficulty.  He had remained in Sudan for periods  of
    up to six months without experiencing difficulties.  The Appellant  had
    been issued with a passport in Sudan, and  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that
    this indicated that he was not a non-Arab Darfuri, and  the  fact  that
    the Appellant had travelled in and out of Sudan without difficulty also
    indicated that he was not a non-Arab Darfuri.

43. I was asked to note that the Appellant had  changed  his  account  when
    giving oral evidence, in that he now denied having any paternal cousins
    in Sudan, whereas when interviewed he had specifically stated  that  he
    had three paternal cousins living there.  I was asked  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

The Appellant's Submissions

44. Mr Sinker submitted that  the  case  law  is  clear,  in  that  if  the
    Appellant proves he is from the Tunjur tribe he would be  at  risk  and
    therefore entitled to asylum.  I was asked to find that  the  Appellant
    had been consistent in relation to his claim to be  a  member  of  that
    tribe.  The Appellant had been honest in giving evidence, in confirming
    that he had not been born in Darfur.

45. The Appellant had displayed some knowledge of the  Tunjur  tribe  which
    had been accepted by the Respondent.   He  had  explained  that  tribal
    markings are no longer a tradition which is why he  did  not  have  any
    such markings.

46. Mr McVeety had observed that  no  expert  report  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's ethnicity had been submitted, and Mr Sinker responded  that
    such evidence was not necessary.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had changed his account in relation to paternal cousins in  Sudan,  but
    Mr Sinker submitted that that did not undermine his case such that  his
    ethnicity should be disbelieved.  I was  asked  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had proved that he  is  a  non-Arab  Darfuri,  and  therefore
    according to country guidance case law, he was entitled to a  grant  of
    asylum.

47. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

Preserved Findings

48. I set out below the findings made by the FTT which were not  challenged
    and are therefore preserved those being at paragraphs 67, 68,  69,  71,
    72, 73, and 74;

         "67  It is clear that the Appellant is a well-educated man  but  he
             has given no detailed or credible evidence as to the nature of
             the comments made either in Sudan or Saudi Arabia  which  were
             considered to be adverse to  the  interests  of  the  Sudanese
             government.

         68   It is simply not credible if the Sudanese  authorities  had  a
             long-standing adverse interest in the  Appellant  dating  from
             1989 that the Appellant would have  been  able  to  return  to
             Sudan on five separate occasions  and  in  the  main  have  no
             difficulties whilst there.  It is not credible if the Sudanese
             authorities had such an interest in the  Appellant  that  they
             would take him from his home and interrogate and  torture  him
             in 1998, that  he  would  be  allowed  to  leave  the  country
             subsequently and return to Saudi Arabia.   Subsequent  to  the
             incident in 1998 the Appellant has had no further difficulties
             with the Sudanese authorities which amounted  to  persecution.
             I do not believe that he was ever required to  report  to  the
             police station weekly after he had visited  Sudan  from  Saudi
             Arabia.  Even if that was the  case  such  treatment  did  not
             amount to persecution.  If  he  had  reported  to  the  police
             station on such a regular basis during his visits to Sudan the
             Sudanese authorities would have had plenty of  opportunity  to
             persecute him but there is no evidence whatsoever  to  suggest
             that they did so.  If the Sudanese  authorities  had  such  an
             interest in the Appellant that he now fears persecution it  is
             wholly unbelievable that they allowed him to  enter  and  exit
             Sudan on so many different occasions.

         69   The Appellant has given no specific evidence as to the  nature
             of the comments he made about the Sudanese  government  either
             in Sudan or in Saudi Arabia and I believe his  claim  to  fear
             persecution on the basis of his  political  opinion  to  be  a
             fabrication.

         71   The Appellant's credibility is further damaged by his  failure
             to claim asylum on arrival in the United  Kingdom.   He  is  a
             seasoned traveller and educated person.   I  do  not  find  it
             credible that he would not be  aware  of  the  opportunity  to
             claim asylum on entering the United Kingdom.  The fact that he
             did not damages his credibility.  The Appellant's  credibility
             is also  further  damaged  by  his  decision  to  destroy  his
             passport.  The  Appellant,  taking  into  account  his  travel
             experiences over a long period of time would  have  been  well
             aware of the importance of his passport.  Taking into  account
             his lack  of  credibility,  the  only  reason  he  would  have
             destroyed his passport was to prevent  his  removal  from  the
             United Kingdom and obstruct  the  United  Kingdom  immigration
             authorities effecting a subsequent removal.

         72   Specific elements of the Appellant's  testimony  contained  in
             his witness statement  also  persuade  me  that  the  Sudanese
             authorities  have  no  interest  in  him.   It   is   entirely
             incredible as the Appellant claims  at  paragraph  22  of  his
             witness statement that he was forced to hide in  Khartoum  for
             two months when he has spent many months living  at  his  home
             address in Sudan during his previous visits to Sudan  and  his
             final visit.

         73   In his witness statement the  Appellant  claims  that  he  was
             under police surveillance for all the period of time he was in
             Sudan whilst visiting.  If that was the case his claim that he
             was at risk of being killed by the Sudanese  authorities  from
             1998 was entirely fanciful.

         74   The Appellant's claim at paragraph 19 of his witness statement
             that the Sudanese authorities gave him trouble every  time  he
             returned to Sudan is not supported by any  evidence  given  by
             the Appellant.  He has not stated what that trouble was."

My Conclusions and Reasons

49. In re-making the decision I have taken  into  account  the  documentary
    evidence, and I have also  taken  into  account  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence and the submissions made by both representatives.

50. I find as a fact that the Appellant was not born in Darfur.  There  was
    a misunderstanding when permission to appeal was granted,  and  at  the
    error  of  law  hearing,  caused  by  the  Appellant's  representatives
    contending that Khandak is in Darfur.  The Appellant has confirmed that
    is not the case, and it is clear from the Appellant's own evidence that
    he was not born in Darfur, and he has never lived in Darfur.  This does
    not mean that his claim cannot succeed.  I have followed  the  guidance
    and principles in AA (Sudan) CG and set out below the head note;

         "All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of  persecution  in  Darfur  and
         cannot reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan.  HGMO
         (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 is  no  longer
         to be followed, save in respect of the guidance summarised  at  (2)
         and (6) of the head note to that case."

51. I have also followed the guidance and principles set out  in  the  more
    recent decision of MM (Sudan) CG, the head note of  which  is  set  out
    below;

         "In  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA  (Non-Arab   Darfuris   -
         relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, where it is stated that if
         a claimant from Sudan is a non-Arab Darfuri he must succeed  in  an
         international protection claim, 'Darfuri' is to be understood as an
         ethnic term relating  to  origins,  not  as  a  geographical  term.
         Accordingly it covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur."

52. The issue to be decided is whether the Appellant is  a  member  of  the
    Tunjur tribe, as if he is, he is a non-Arab Darfuri, and  would  be  at
    risk if returned to Sudan.

53. The burden of proof  is  on  the  Appellant,  and  the  standard  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood.  It is accepted by the Respondent that
    the Tunjur tribe are non-Arab Darfuris and there is reference  to  that
    tribe in the Respondent's Sudan OGM updated in August 2012 at 3.10.3.

54. I do not find that the Appellant has discharged the  burden  of  proof,
    and therefore I do not accept that he has proved that he is a member of
    the Tunjur tribe.  I accept that the Appellant answered some  questions
    about the tribe correctly and I note that he was questioned  about  the
    Tunjur at questions 39-50 of his  substantive  asylum  interview.   The
    Respondent does not  contend  that  the  Appellant  answered  questions
    incorrectly stating at paragraph 27 of the reasons for  refusal  letter
    that some of the information given by the Appellant was consistent with
    background information, whilst other information  was  not  verifiable.
    The Respondent's view was that having  some  knowledge  of  the  Tunjur
    tribe did not prove that the Appellant was a member of that tribe,  and
    that is also my view.  It is possible for an individual to  learn  some
    facts about a tribe or a group, without actually being a member of that
    tribe or group.  Therefore, I do not find that answering some questions
    about the tribe discharges the burden of proof.  I have considered  the
    evidence in the round.  I note the absence  of  any  expert  report  in
    relation to the Appellant's ethnicity.   There  is  no  requirement  of
    corroboration, but the Appellant and his representatives were on notice
    as long ago as November 2014, when the reasons for refusal  letter  was
    published, that the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was  a
    member of the Tunjur tribe.   There  has  been  no  independent  expert
    evidence submitted to prove the Appellant's ethnicity.

55. Having considered the evidence in the round, I take into  account  that
    according to the country guidance case law, non-Arab  Darfuris  are  at
    risk of persecution in Darfur, and do not have a reasonable  option  of
    internal relocation.  In other words, they would also  be  at  risk  in
    other parts of Sudan.

56. It is therefore relevant to consider the Appellant's account of  having
    left Sudan in 1990, he chose to  return  on  five  separate  occasions.
    These were not fleeting visits, and he stayed for up to six months at a
    time when he stayed with his  family.   He  was  not  in  hiding.   The
    Appellant's own account is that he did not encounter  any  difficulties
    when entering Sudan.  He did so legally, with a passport issued by  the
    Sudanese authorities.  His account is that only on one occasion did  he
    encounter any difficulties in leaving, and he was  always  granted  the
    appropriate exit visas.

57. Taking into account the credibility findings of the FTT,  I  find  that
    the Appellant did not in fact encounter  any  difficulties  in  leaving
    Sudan on any occasion.

58. The Appellant's own account is that he was  not  questioned  about  his
    ethnicity or ill-treated when he entered Sudan or left Sudan.  I do not
    find that he would have been able to enter and leave Sudan without  any
    difficulty, if he was a non-Arab Darfuri.  I do  not  believe  that  he
    would have been able to apply for and be granted a  Sudanese  passport,
    without any difficulties, if he was a non-Arab Darfuri.

59. I have to balance the Appellant's assertion that he is a member of  the
    Tunjur tribe, although he accepts that he has never  lived  in  Darfur,
    together with his ability to correctly answer some questions about  the
    Tunjur tribe, against the fact that there  is  no  expert  evidence  to
    prove his ethnicity, no independent evidence to  prove  his  ethnicity,
    and  the  fact  that  he  was  granted  a  Sudanese  passport   without
    difficulty.  Also he has travelled in and out of Sudan on five separate
    occasions  without  difficulty,  and  he  has  remained  in  Sudan  for
    substantial periods of time without attracting the adverse attention of
    the authorities.

60. I conclude that the Appellant has not discharged the  low  standard  of
    proof, and he has not proved that he is a member of the  Tunjur  tribe,
    and not proved that he is a non-Arab Darfuri.

61. The Appellant therefore is not  at  risk  as  a  non-Arab  Darfuri,  if
    returned to Sudan.

62. I conclude that the Appellant, because  he  is  not  at  risk,  is  not
    entitled to a grant of asylum or  humanitarian  protection,  and  there
    would be no breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

63. In relation to Article 8, the Appellant has no family  members  in  the
    UK, he is not in a relationship in this country, and he has no children
    here.  His wife and children are in  Sudan.   The  Appellant  therefore
    cannot satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM in  relation  to  family
    life.

64. In relation to his private life, the Appellant has  only  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 30th April 2014.  He cannot  satisfy  any  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1).  With reference to  276ADE(1)(vi),
    the Appellant has not proved  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Sudan.   This  is  because   the
    credibility of his account has not been accepted, I do not find that he
    is a non-Arab Darfuri, he would not be at risk if  returned  to  Sudan,
    and he could rejoin his wife and three young children who are living in
    Sudan without any apparent difficulties.

65. With reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, I have taken
    into account the guidance in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, and  I  do
    not find  there  are  any  compelling  circumstances  which  have  been
    identified in this case, to support a claim for a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows;

    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and I see  no  need  to
make an anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 14th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

It appears that no  fee  has  been  paid  or  is  payable.   The  appeal  is
dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 14th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
