
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11330/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 13 August 2013                             |on 16 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                HEONG CHIN HEW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia, born on 4 December 1983.   He  is
   married to Cai Lin, a citizen of China.  They have 2 children born on  18
   April 2008 and 18 January 2010 in the UK.

2) The respondent refused the appellant's claims on  asylum  and  all  other
   grounds for reasons explained in a letter dated 6 December 2012.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  for
   reasons explained in her determination dated 15 February 2013.

4) These are the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

   Ground 1: Appellant's Wife's credibility


    The appellant's wife was present at the hearing  in  order  to  provide
    evidence in support of  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights.   The  IJ
    questioned the appellant's wife with regards to her own asylum claim.


    At paragraph 9 of the determination the IJ  has  stated  that  she  has
    found the appellant's wife to have made a false claim  as  to  why  she
    cannot be removed from the UK.  The IJ also comments on the appellant's
    wife's claims at paragraphs 22-25 of the determination.


    ... the appellant's wife's asylum claim was irrelevant to the Article 8
    issue before the court.  The respondent accepted that the appellant and
    his wife were married and in a relationship.  The appellant's wife  has
    leave to remain n the United Kingdom and was present purely to  support
    her husband in terms of the arguments presented in relation to  Article
    8 ECHR.  The IJ has erred by taking the past credibility findings  into
    account and forming her opinion on the matter.


   Ground 2 - Appellant's Credibility


    At paragraph 27 of  the  determination  the  IJ  has  stated  that  the
    appellant attempted  to  address  the  credibility  points  within  his
    statement: but that she finds the discrepancies have not been addressed
    by the appellant.  It is submitted that if the IJ was open to  question
    the appellant on any matter which she felt  required  clarification  or
    which she needed further information on.  By not asking these questions
    and making this finding she has acted  unreasonably  and  as  such  has
    erred.


   Ground 3 - Objective Evidence


    The IJ at paragraph 32  considers  the  possibility  of  the  appellant
    registering his children  at  the  Malaysian  Embassy  and  states  the
    documents the appellant would require to do this ...  the  IJ  has  not
    taken fully into consideration the other requirements as stated  within
    the objective evidence  (such as they must also  produce  the  original
    Malaysian Marriage Certificate of the  child's  parents,  the  original
    Malaysian identity card of both  parents  and  the  passports  of  both
    parents)  and  the  ability  of  the  appellant   in   providing   this
    information.  By failing to consider the objective evidence  fully  the
    IJ has erred.


   Ground 4 - Best Interests of the Child


    This ground relates to the best interests of the appellant's children.


    At paragraph 46 the IJ states that the  appellant  and  his  wife  have
    abused the immigration system and that this justifies  any  short  term
    interference in family life should the appellant be removed.  The IJ at
    paragraph 40 states that the best interests of the children are  served
    by being with their  parents  ...  the  IJ  has  failed  to  take  into
    consideration the case of ZH Tanzania in this regard as the immigration
    failings of the parent should not be visited  upon  the  children.   By
    removing the client from the UK  due  to  his  apparent  abuse  of  the
    immigration system, it is depriving the 2 children of their father.  By
    failing to take this into account the IJ has erred.


    The IJ stated at paragraph 48 that the needs of the children  shall  be
    met in Malaysia.  This is speculation.  There was  no  evidence  before
    the IJ regarding education, child health etc in  Malaysia  for  her  to
    come to this conclusion.  Therefore the IJ has used speculation and  in
    doing so has erred.


5) On 8 March 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer  granted  permission  to
   appeal, on the view that the judge arguably did not have proper regard to
   the fact that the appellant's wife and children had leave  to  remain  in
   the  UK  until  June  2015,  and  arguably   failed   to   consider   the
   reasonableness of their contemplated return  with  their  father  in  the
   light of that leave (ground 4).

6) The appellant renewed his application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal on the first 3 grounds.  On 15 April 2013  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Kebede for  the  avoidance  of  doubt  granted  permission  on  all
   grounds, "...albeit with regard to the  limited  merit  in  the  first  3
   grounds".

7) Mr Winter submitted in relation to the first  ground  that  although  the
   appellant's wife had not been found a credible witness in her own  asylum
   claim,  the  refusal  letter  in  the  presented  appeal   accepted   her
   relationship with the appellant and their 2 children.  He said  that  the
   judge erred by going behind those agreed facts, and by treating the  past
   unreliability of the appellant's wife as a witness as in any way relevant
   to the Article 8 assessment.

8) I observed that  the  judge  made  no  further  adverse  finding  on  the
   credibility  of  the  appellant's  wife  beyond  what  had  already  been
   established.  I also commented that it might be difficult  to  find  that
   her past unreliability as a witness  and  her  past  adverse  immigration
   history were completely irrelevant when it came to proportionality.

9) Mr Winter accepted that the judge made no further adverse  findings,  and
   that little might turn on this ground.

10) On ground 2, Mr Winter submitted that paragraph 27 of the  determination
   made an adverse finding based only on the appellant's delay in making his
   claim.  The appellant responded in his witness statement  to  the  points
   made against him in the refusal letter.   The  judge  acted  unfairly  by
   failing to put her doubts about these  responses  to  the  appellant  for
   further explanation.  He accepted that reasons might be brief,  but  more
   had to be said.  The appellant was entitled to know why his responses had
   not been accepted.  Mr Winter founded upon Koca [2005] CSIH 41.

11) I pointed out that this case was not similar to Koca in  that  (a)  both
   parties were represented in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  (b)  all  the
   points which the appellant had to answer were known in advance  from  the
   refusal letter and did  not  arise  from  the  determination  itself.   I
   doubted whether this ground disclosed any point analogous  to  Koca.   If
   there were any error, it might be lack of reasoning.

12) Mr Winter had nothing further  to  add  in  support  of  ground  2.   He
   indicated that ground 3 was not to be relied upon.

13) Turning to ground 4, Mr Winter relied upon  what  the  judge  said  when
   granting permission to appeal.  The appellant's  wife  and  children  had
   discretionary leave to June 2015 [not  indefinite  leave  as  erroneously
   stated at paragraph 1 of the determination].  The family could  not  meet
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules, but their  situation  amounted
   to a "good arguable case" for leave under Article 8  outwith  the  Rules.
   Mr Winter accepted that the judge was clearly aware that the  appellant's
   wife and children had leave, but he said that she failed to consider  the
   reasonableness of the appellant's return in that light.  The appellant is
   a citizen of Malaysia of Chinese origin.  His wife is  Chinese.   It  was
   the period of likely separation which gave rise to the  interference.   I
   enquired whether if it was reasonable to expect the appellant's wife  and
   children to join him in Malaysia in  June  2015,  why  it  might  not  be
   reasonable to expect them all to return there now.  Mr Winter  said  this
   would deprive them of enjoyment of the leave they currently have, and  of
   the opportunities of applying for further exceptional leave to remain and
   eventually for indefinite leave to  remain.   The  appellant's  wife  had
   failed in her claims.  The basis on which discretionary leave was granted
   had not been disclosed by the respondent.  Mr Winter referred next to the
   evidence of discrimination and disadvantage  suffered  by  Malaysians  of
   Chinese origin.  It was  submitted  that  this  case  raised  a  question
   similar to that in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] 2AC166 of whether  it  was
   reasonable to expect  the  children  to  live  in  another  country.   At
   paragraph 37 of the determination the  judge  found  that  the  level  of
   discrimination against the Chinese minority would not  "seriously  affect
   the access to employment, services and education for the  appellant,  his
   wife or children".  That was not the correct test of the  best  interests
   of the children.  There appeared to be universal  discrimination  against
   ethnic Chinese in admission  to  public  universities,  so  that  private
   universities had come into existence to cater for the Chinese. That would
   involve expense and discrimination which could not be in  the  children's
   interests.  The Tribunal was bound to look at the long term and not  only
   the short term interests of the children.  The background evidence showed
   that there could be an adverse impact upon  them,  especially  when  they
   came to the level of higher education.

14) As to the outcome, Mr Winter submitted that if ground 2 were  made  out,
   there should be a fresh hearing.  If grounds 1 and 4 were made  out,  the
   Upper Tribunal should reach a fresh decision based on the evidence  which
   has so far been made available.  There  was  no  application  to  produce
   further evidence, but  the  appellant  sought  the  opportunity  to  make
   further written submissions.

15) Finally, Mr Winter said he would invite me to consider Qui Yun  Chen,  5
   Sept 2013, United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh  Circuit,  Case
   12-2563.  He said that this case  showed  that  Chinese  family  planning
   policy might have wider adverse effects than the Upper Tribunal found  in
   AX China CG [2012] UKUT 97 and might place obstacles in the  way  of  the
   wife obtaining a Chinese passport for herself (or for the children).  She
   would have to provide a Chinese passport to obtain documentation to enter
   Malaysia.   (If  I  understood  the  submission  correctly,  this  was  a
   reversion to ground 3.)

16) I queried what relevance this could have.  Neither  side  presented  the
   case as involving removal to China.  Without any evidence that risk would
   arise to the appellant's wife by applying for a passport from the Chinese
   Embassy in London I did not see how the US case could begin  to  bear  on
   this one.  Mr Winter did not wish to take the matter any further.

17) Mr Mullen submitted on ground 1 that the judge simply took  the  history
   of the appellant's wife into account in relation to  proportionality,  as
   she was entitled to do.  Ground 2 did not correctly  identify  any  point
   analogous  with  Koca,  and  there  was  no  lack  of  reasoning.   Prior
   paragraphs  in  the  determination  set  out  the   appellant's   adverse
   immigration history, his previous removal  and  return,  his  significant
   delay in making the claim, and the opportunistic stage at which it arose.
    Nothing adverse had happened to him when  he  returned  to  Malaysia  in
   2007.  The respondent's case was fully set out in the refusal letter  and
   the judge was entitled  to  consider  that  it  had  not  been  answered.
   Reading the determination as a whole, it was plain why  his  asylum  case
   had been rejected.  On ground, 4 Mr Mullen submitted that it was fanciful
   that the case might have succeeded based on the children's best interests
   far in the future  through  differential  access  to  universities.   The
   children were 3 and 5 years of age, with university some 12 years off, if
   they ever reached that stage.  The wellbeing of the children was  plainly
   best served by being with their parents.  There was no  reason  to  think
   that they would  suffer  any  significant  adverse  consequences  through
   removal.   Nothing  was  disclosed  which  might  render  their   removal
   disproportionate in terms of  Article  8.   They  had  discretionary  and
   limited leave to remain, only recently granted,  and  there  had  clearly
   been a change of circumstances since - the decision in the present  case.
   They were not UK citizens or permanent residents.  The weight to be given
   to their residence here to date was relatively small, particularly  given
   their young age.  The determination should stand.

18) Mr Winter in response referred to evidence in the  respondent's  Country
   of Origin Information Report that educational difficulties or differences
   arise not only at university level.   It  appears  that  primary  schools
   teach in Malay and not in Chinese, which has led to the Chinese community
   setting up private schools teaching in Mandarin.

19) I reserved my determination.

20) Grounds 1 and 3 disclose no  error  of  law,  for  reasons  sufficiently
   mentioned above.

21) Ground 2 might have been better expressed as  a  complaint  of  lack  of
   reasoning rather of unfairness.  However, it is plain that the asylum (or
   Article 3) case was not advanced with any real enthusiasm in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.  Reading the determination fairly  and  as  a  whole,  and
   under reference  to  the  refusal  letter  and  the  appellant's  witness
   statement, the allegation that the appellant was at risk on return from a
   crime lord was a futile story.  No other outcome  could  reasonably  have
   been expected, and no more needed to be said.

22) Ground 4 is seriously overstated.  Removal of the appellant from the  UK
   does not necessarily deprive two children of their father.  There  is  no
   reason to think  that  the  family  cannot  readily  travel  to  Malaysia
   together.  It is correct that the best interests of children have  to  be
   assessed separately from  the  adverse  immigration  histories  of  their
   parents, but there is no  evidence  that  the  best  interests  of  these
   children would be adversely affected to any significant extent  by  their
   living in Malaysia with their parents.  There was no dearth of  evidence,
   as suggested in the ground; and if there had been, that would  have  been
   against the appellant's case not in his favour.  It was for him  not  for
   the respondent or the judge to cite evidence on which  interference  with
   article 8 rights might arise. Despite discrimination the Chinese minority
   thrives and achieves educational standards at least as high as  the  rest
   of the population.  The judge was aware of the leave granted to the other
   family  members.  The  ground  is  little  more  than  an  expression  of
   dissatisfaction with a proportionality decision which  was  open  to  the
   judge and which did not leave any material factor out of account.

23) Alternatively, to the extent that this factor may have been  overlooked,
   and making all due allowance for it, I would have come without difficulty
   to the same view on the proportionality of the outcome.

24) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing the  appeal  on  all  grounds,  shall
   stand.

25) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                15 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
