

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11747/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th July 2015                    |On 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HALL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                             MR. AHMAD BOHLOULI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. G Patel; Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Harrison;  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Baird and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wedderspoon
    ("the panel") promulgated on 30th April 2015, in which  they  dismissed
    an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State  to  refuse
    an application for asylum.

 2. The appeal was heard on 11th March 2015.  The panel had  before  it  an
    appellant's bundle that comprised of a chronology, a witness  statement
    dated 2nd March 2015 made by the Appellant[1]  and  various  pieces  of
    country evidence, and case law.  The decision of the panel  provides  a
    summary of the appellant's claim for asylum at [3] to [4] and at [5] to
     [9] they refer to the decision of the Secretary of State made  on  3rd
    December 2014, that gave rise to the appeal. The  appellant's  evidence
    is set out at [10] and [11] and at [19] to  [27],  the  panel  set  out
    their findings that led to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 3. The application for permission to appeal  runs  to  some  seven  pages.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald on 29th May 2015.  In doing so, he noted inter alia;

         "... the grounds of  application  states  that  the  panel  ignored
         material evidence and made inconsistent findings.

         It is arguable that the panel did not take the appellant's  witness
         statement at paragraph 20 into account; it may be arguable that the
         panel is not clear about whether he did attend  a  demonstration  -
         see what the panel said  at  paragraphs  20  and  24.  It  is  also
         arguable that the  panel  did  not  give  clear  reasons  why  they
         considered it unlikely that he lost his documentation - see the end
         of paragraph 20. It may be arguable that the panel should also have
         considered the evidence in the appellant's witness  statement  that
         he worked for a friend and that was why  the  authorities  did  not
         find him.

         The grounds make other  points  and  it  is  arguable  in  all  the
         circumstances that the reasoning of the panel was not adequate.

         There is also a current issue whether SB Iran continues to be  good
         law."

 4. A written response was submitted on behalf of the respondent under  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The respondent opposes
    the appellant's appeal and in summary the respondent contends that  the
    panel directed itself appropriately to the evidence, and that it  is  a
    matter for the panel to  decide  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    evidence.

 5. The matter comes before us to consider whether or not the  decision  of
    the panel involved the making of a material error of law.

    Background

 6. A brief summary of the basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is  to
    be found at [3] and [4] of the decision of the panel. The appellant  is
    an Iranian national who claimed that he would face mistreatment due  to
    his political opinion. He claimed to have some involvement in the Green
    movement and his case, briefly put, is that he attended a demonstration
    in Tehran following which he was arrested and interrogated. He  claimed
    that he was subjected to  regular  beatings  and  abuse  following  his
    arrest and that following an attendance at court, he was sentenced to a
    period of imprisonment for seven years and six months.  He claimed that
    in January 2011 his uncle passed away, and his father arranged for  him
    to attend the funeral by  providing  a  surety  of  300  million  Toman
    against the deeds of his house. He was granted one  week's  leave  from
    prison, but after attending his uncle's funeral, he left to  travel  to
    Tabriz.   On the suggestion of his brother, the appellant worked for  a
    friend in a masonry factory just outside the city for 3 � years  before
    leaving Iran by crossing the border into Turkey, and  then  making  his
    way by various lorries into the UK.

 7. The decision of the panel was to the  effect  that  the  appellant  had
    given an inconsistent account in various material respects.  The  panel
    concluded that although the appellant has established that there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that he left Iran illegally, the appellant  would
    not be at any risk on return to Iran.   The panel found that  there  is
    no reasonable likelihood that the appellant is known to the authorities
    as a political activist, or that he was politically active at all.

 The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The appellant attended the hearing and was represented by Miss Patel of
    Counsel.  We first heard submissions from Miss Patel who confirmed that
    she relied upon  the  matters  that  are  set  out  in  particular,  at
    paragraphs 6 to 28 of the application for  permission  to  appeal.   We
    then heard submissions from Mr Harrison who adopted the matters set out
    in the written response submitted on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   Mr
    Harrison submitted that there is no error of law in the decision of the
    panel.

 9. Before we turn to each of the matters raised by Miss Patel, we note the
    observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in Budhathoki (reasons  for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost."

10. At paragraph 20 of the decision, the panel state;

         "The  Appellant  has  given  an   inconsistent   account   of   the
         circumstances of his  exit  from  Iran.  Although  the  Appellant's
         account is consistent with the  background  material  and  what  is
         referred to in the BA case we do not find that the Appellant  would
         be at risk on return to Iran because it  is  not  accepted  he  was
         politically  active  or  imprisoned  or  known   to   the   Iranian
         authorities as a political activist. The  Secretary  of  State  has
         observed  a  number  of  inconsistences  in  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant which we find have not been satisfactorily  explained  by
         the Appellant. In particular, the evidence of the Appellant is that
         he was a  member  of  the  Green  movement.  During  his  screening
         interview with the Home Office on 8th August 2014 he stated that he
         had joined the Green movement  on  10th  May  2009.  The  objective
         information is that the Green movement was not founded  until  12th
         June 2009.  The  Appellant's  version  is  therefore  inconsistent.
         Further in his screening interview he stated he was issued  with  a
         membership card. However in his witness statement he stated he  was
         not a member (see paragraph 20). The card he said was "sort  of"  a
         membership card. Further, the Appellant has  been  inconsistent  in
         terms of his political activities. On  the  one  hand  his  witness
         statement  says  he  was  not  politically  active  but  in  direct
         contradiction to this he says he was involved in  the  organisation
         of political meetings. He has stated he  attended  a  demonstration
         following the election and the next day was identified by  security
         staff as being present and arrested.  At  interview  the  Appellant
         stated the footage was not very clear and he  did  not  partake  in
         violence. It is unlikely that an individual who  did  not  live  in
         Tehran, visited the city for  one  day,  partook  peacefully  in  a
         demonstration; where footage was unclear would  be  identified  and
         arrested  by  the  security  service.  He  could  not  provide  any
         documentation about his arrest or sentence. He had managed to  keep
         an exit document from the prison for approximately 3 years but then
         lost it in the forest. We do not accept that is likely."

11. Miss Patel makes a number of criticisms as to the findings set  out  in
    paragraph 20. We examine each in turn. First, she submits that the fact
    that the appellant's account was consistent with the  country  evidence
    clearly should have been properly taken into account in the  round,  by
    the Tribunal when assessing his  claim.   Although  the  fact  that  an
    appellant gives an account  that  is  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence is relevant to the overall assessment of the claim, that  does
    not absolve the Tribunal from making findings as to  the  core  of  the
    account relied upon by the appellant.  The panel considered the core of
    the appellant's claim, as it was required to, and rejected his account.
     That much is plain from the opening two sentences of paragraph 20.  BA
    was concerned with the risk on return arising from participation in sur
    place  activity  and  demonstrations  within  the  UK.   The   Tribunal
    confirmed that regard must be had to the level of  involvement  of  the
    individual here, as well as any political activity which the individual
    might have been involved in Iran, before  seeking  asylum  in  Britain.
    The panel at [20] found that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Iran, because it is not  accepted  that  he  was  politically
    active or  imprisoned,  or  known  to  the  Iranian  authorities  as  a
    political activist.  There can be no doubt that that was  a  conclusion
    open to the panel for the reasons that they go on  to  explain  in  the
    course of their findings.

12. Second, Miss Patel submits that the panel made a mistake of  fact  when
    referring in the decision to the answers as  having  been  given  in  a
    screening interview on the 8th August 2014, when in fact,  the  answers
    were given at an asylum interview.  It  is  correct  that  a  screening
    interview was completed on 8th August 2014 and that the inconsistencies
    referred to by the panel arise from  answers  given  by  the  Appellant
    during his substantive asylum interview on 20th November  2014.   Miss.
    Patel submits that in describing the substantive asylum interview as  a
    screening interview, the decision demonstrates that the panel failed to
    properly consider the appeal. We can  see  no  conceivable  basis  upon
    which it can be said that describing the substantive  asylum  interview
    as a screening interview, amounts to an error of law, and even less so,
    one that affected the outcome of the appeal.

13. Third, Miss Patel  submits  that  the  panel  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence set out in paragraph 20 of the appellant's  witness  statement
    that the date the appellant gave in his asylum interview as  May  2009,
    is the date when the appellant first allowed the  Mousavi  campaign  to
    use the shop for their meetings and that he attended one  demonstration
    after the election, which was when the Green Movement was formed.   The
    following is recorded in the asylum interview record;

         Q. 41.   Were you a member of Mousavi's Green Movement  or  just  a
                  supporter?

         A. I was a member, and our rug  shop  was  turned  into  a  Mousavi
                  campaign base

         Q. 42.   When did you become a member of the Green Movement?

         A. 20.05.2009

         Q. 43.   What date was the Presidential elections that year?

         A. 12.06.2009

         Q. 44.   So you joined the Movement only  in  the  run  up  to  the
                  election?

         A. yes from the day we allowed our shop to  become  a  base  I  was
                  issued with a membership card and we start  promoting  the
                  party... I even attended meetings at different houses

14. The appellant states at paragraph 20 of his witness statement  made  in
    reply to the respondents decision;

         ".. As I have clarified, I was not a member of Mousavi's party  and
         the dates I gave was when I first allowed the campaign to  use  the
         shop. I attended one demonstration following the election which was
         when the Green Movement was formed."

15.  That account given by the appellant is referred  to  at  [10]  of  the
    decision in which  the  panel  sets  out  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant at the hearing.  As the panel noted at [20] of the  decision,
    "the evidence of the appellant is that he was a  member  of  the  Green
    movement.  During his screening interview with the  Home  Office...  he
    stated that he had joined the Green movement on  20th  May  2009.   The
    objective information is that the Green movement was not founded  until
    12 June 2009. The appellant's version is therefore inconsistent."   The
    appellant had provided inconsistent evidence and it was plainly open to
    the panel to find that the  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant  had  not  been  satisfactorily  explained.    In   fact   no
    explanation is  provided  in  the  witness  statement  as  to  why  the
    appellant had expressly stated during  the  asylum  interview  that  he
    became a member of the Green movement on 20th May 2009,  and  had  been
    issued with a membership card, when in fact the Green movement was  not
    founded until 12th June 2009.

16. Fourth, Miss Patel submits that the panel failed to give proper reasons
    as to why in the context of the country material before them,  and  the
    country guidance cases of SB and BA, regarding the number of people who
    attended the demonstrations following  the  June  2009  elections,  the
    panel found it unlikely that the appellant attended a demonstration  in
    Iran and was subsequently identified and arrested. Miss  Patel  further
    submits that this finding at [20] is inconsistent with the  finding  at
    [24] that the appellant had been involved in  demonstrations  in  Iran.
    In her submissions to us Miss Patel drew attention to the extracts from
    the case of BA confirming that following the June 2009 elections, there
    were demonstrations and arbitrary arrests  of  those  involved  in  the
    protests.  It seems to us that the ground advanced  by  Miss  Patel  is
    misconceived and premised upon a misreading of [20]  of  the  decision.
    Read carefully, the panel did not reject the appellant's  account  that
    he had attended a demonstration in Tehran.  What the panel  did  reject
    was that the appellant had been identified and arrested by the security
    service. The point made by the panel upon a proper reading of [20],  is
    that it is unlikely that an individual who did not live in Tehran,  who
    visited the city for one day, who partook peacefully in a demonstration
    where footage was unclear, would have been identified and  arrested  by
    the security service.  That was a finding that was open  to  the  panel
    and is entirely consistent with what is set out subsequently in [24].

         "...  we  accept  that  the  appellant   has   been   involved   in
         demonstrations in Iran but we do not accept that he was  imprisoned
         as claimed or that the authorities had any continuing  interest  in
         him."

17. Fifth, Miss Patel submits that the panel erred in questioning  why  the
    appellant has not  provided  any  documentation  about  his  arrest  or
    sentence knowing full well that corroboration is not required  in  this
    area of law and it is not always  possible  for  an  asylum  seeker  to
    obtain documentary evidence.  It is submitted that the panel failed  to
    give reasons as to why they do not accept  as  likely,  the  appellants
    claim that he lost the exit papers from prison whilst in Turkey.   Miss
    Patel,  who  had  represented  the  appellant  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal, submitted that his evidence before the panel was that he  had
    lost a small bag with all its  contents  including  his  phone,  family
    photos and prison exit papers which were inserted in  his  diary.   The
    panel has indeed provided reasons why they did not  consider  that  the
    appellants account, is likely.   The reasons are that the appellant had
    managed to keep an exit document  from  the  prison  for  approximately
    three years, but then lost it on his journey to the UK.   The appellant
    may disagree with the finding and the reasons provided, but  the  panel
    had the opportunity of hearing the appellant give evidence, having that
    evidence tested by way of cross-examination before  them,  and  it  was
    open to the panel to form a view as to his  credibility  and  make  the
    findings that they did, for the reasons provided.

18.   Miss Patel then turns to paragraph [21] of the decision  and  submits
    that the panel failed to take into consideration paragraph  23  of  the
    appellant's witness  statement,  that  it  is  only  since  his  asylum
    interview that his brother told him about the house  being  seized  and
    that he had lied to him previously, because the family did not want  to
    tell him, to worry him.  [21] of the decision states;

         ".. The Appellant's  evidence  about  the  sanction  following  the
         surety has been inconsistent. When asked  where  his  parents  were
         living he stated at the  screening  interview  in  the  same  house
         (paragraph 158) and they were permitted to stay there for  8  years
         (paragraph 159). However at paragraph 23 of his witness  statement,
         he says he is now aware the house has been taken from his  parents.
         We agree with the Respondent  that  these  inconsistencies  in  the
         evidence give the impression that the Claimant  is  making  up  his
         evidence."

19. At [10] of the decision, the panel  records  the  appellant's  evidence
    that "following his  interview  with  the  Home  Office  the  appellant
    contacted his brother and was informed that his parents have had  their
    home seized but they did not wish to tell  the  appellant..".    It  is
    plain that the panel properly had in mind the evidence of the appellant
    that the house had been taken from his parents.  The panel make express
    reference to that in [21] of the determination.

20. Miss Patel then submits that the Tribunal erred at [22] of the decision
    by  failing  to  consider  paragraph  17  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement that he left for Tabriz from Dorood at the suggestion of  his
    brother because he had a friend he could work for in a masonry  factory
    outside the city.  [22] of the decision states;

         "Despite moving to another part  of  Iran,  he  was  able  to  work
         without difficulty for about 3 years in a factory. He has suggested
         he was in hiding for this period of time and accumulated savings of
         $8000. We do not accept that as it is said  the  security  services
         knew the Appellant's identity and he did not return to  prison,  he
         was not sought out following his failure to return  to  prison  and
         captured within this period.

21. Again, at  [4]  and  [10]  of  the  decision,  the  panel  records  the
    appellant's evidence in this respect.   It  is  plain  that  the  panel
    properly had in mind the evidence of the appellant that  the  appellant
    was able to work in a factory.  It formed no part  of  the  appellant's
    case that he had any difficulty  during  that  time.   It  was  plainly
    therefore open to the panel to reject the appellant's account  for  the
    reasons that the panel set out in [23] of the decision.

22. We pause to observe at this point that the  approach  adopted  by  Miss
    Patel, in seeking to mount a challenge  to  the  determination  on  the
    grounds that the panel failed to set out all of the matters set out  in
    the appellant's witness statement, is  wholly  misguided.  That  is  an
    approach that is positively discouraged.   As  Mr.  Justice  Hadon-Cave
    observed in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC)
    it is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal
    judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.

23. Miss Patel then turned to [23] of the decision which states;

         "... It is not accepted that the Appellant's description of  prison
         assists his credibility since the Appellant was in military service
         for two years and subject to detention during this period.  Further
         we do  not  accept  the  Appellant's  account  that  following  the
         specific targeting of the Appellant by the  authorities  to  arrest
         him he would be permitted one weeks  leave  to  attend  an  uncle's
         burial.

    Miss Patel submits that the panel erred in two material respects.

24. First, she submits that the panel proceeds upon a  fundamental  mistake
    of fact.  That is, the appellant has never claimed to be  subjected  to
    detention during the period of his military service. One  only  has  to
    read  the  interview  record  to  see  that  this  ground  is  entirely
    misconceived;

         Q. 30.   has your lack  of  religious  activity  ever  got  you  in
                  trouble with the authorities?

         A. during my military service I did

         Q. 31.   What happened?

         A. sometimes we would get detention

         Q. 32.   Can you please clarify what you mean by detention?

         A. when it was time to go to the mosque, those  who  didn't  attend
                  were either given an extension on their service or put  in
                  detention for up to 48 hours

         Q. 120.  What prison were you taken to?

         A. Heshmatieh prison Tehran

         Q. 124.  Have you ever lived in Tehran?

         A. No, only during my military service

         Q. 125.   did you know the name of the street because you  were  an
                  inmate or did you know it was in  that  street  from  your
                  military service days?

         A. During my military service

25. Miss Patel submits that there was no evidence before the panel that the
    appellant had been detained in prison during the period of his military
    service.  That is incorrect  as  is  clear  from  the  extract  of  the
    interview that we have set out above.  The  appellant's  account  given
    during interview was that he had been in detention during his  military
    service.  He knew the name of the street of the prison, not because  he
    had been an inmate there,  but  because  of  the  period  when  he  was
    undertaking military service.  It was plainly  open  to  the  panel  to
    conclude that the appellant's description of the prison did not  assist
    the  credibility  of  his  account  of  being  detained  following  his
    attendance at the demonstration.

26. Second, Miss Patel submits that the panel failed to give reasons as  to
    why they do not accept  the  appellant's  account  that  following  the
    specific targeting of the appellant by the authorities to  arrest  him,
    he would be permitted one weeks leave to attend an uncle's burial.  The
    reasons are set out in the sentence itself.  They are, that  there  had
    been, on the appellant's account, a specific targeting of the appellant
    by the authorities to arrest him.  That being so, it was  open  to  the
    panel to reject the appellants account that he would be  permitted  one
    week's leave to attend an uncle's burial.

27. As to [24] of the decision, Miss Patel appears to criticise  the  panel
    for taking into account the appellant's  failure  to  claim  asylum  in
    France.  There is no hint of any suggestion within the findings of  the
    panel that the failure to claim asylum in France was  determinative  of
    the assessment of the appellant's credibility, nor was it the  starting
    point. It does however serve to reduce the credibility  of  an  account
    that the panel had found to be lacking for the reasons  that  they  set
    out in the preceding paragraphs of the determination.

28. Finally, Miss Patel submits that the panel  accepted  at  [24]  of  the
    decision that the appellant has  been  involved  in  demonstrations  in
    Iran, but the panel failed to consider whether the appellant  would  be
    at risk by reference to the country guidance cases.   Furthermore  Miss
    Patel submits that the panel failed to  consider  the  risk  on  return
    based upon the finding at [26] that the appellant has established there
    is a reasonable likelihood that he left Iran illegally.

29. In so far as the risk upon return is concerned  the  panel  records  at
    [17] of the decision, the submissions made on behalf of the  appellant.
    There can be no doubt that the panel was bound by the Country  Guidance
    case of SB Iran, unless there was very good reason to depart from it.

30. In SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053,  the
    Tribunal held, insofar as is relevant to this appeal;

         "(i) Events  in  Iran  following  the  12  June  2009  presidential
         elections have led to a government crackdown on persons seen to  be
         opposed to the present government and  the  Iranian  judiciary  has
         become  even  less  independent.  Persons  who  are  likely  to  be
         perceived by the authorities in Iran as being  actively  associated
         with protests against the June 12 election results may face a  real
         risk of persecution or ill treatment, although much will depend  on
         the particular circumstances.

         (ii) Iranians facing enforced return do not in general face a  real
         risk of persecution or ill-treatment. That remains the case even if
         they exited Iran illegally. Having exited Iran illegally is  not  a
         significant risk factor, although if it is the case that  a  person
         would face difficulties with the  authorities  for  other  reasons,
         such  a  history  could  be  a  factor  adding  to  the  level   of
         difficulties he or she is likely to face."

31. The panel accepted, at [24] that the appellant  has  been  involved  in
    demonstrations in Iran.  The reference to "demonstrations" rather  than
    "a demonstration", Miss Patel accepted, must be  an  error.    She  was
    right to do so. The appellant's own account is that he  has  only  ever
    attended one demonstration.  His own account of  his  participation  in
    the demonstration is that he partook peacefully.   The  panel  rejected
    his account of his arrest and imprisonment and did not accept that  the
    authorities have any continuing interest in him.   We can see no reason
    why the panel should not have applied  the  country  guidance  in  this
    appeal, and having  done  so,  it  is  plain  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this appellant, there is no risk upon return.  As  the
    panel notes at [25] of the decision, Iranians facing  enforced  return,
    do not in general face a real risk of persecution or ill treatment  and
    that remains the case, even if they exited Iran illegally.

 Decision:

32. Having very carefully considered the decision  of  the  panel  and  the
    grounds rigorously advanced on behalf of the appellant by  Miss  Patel,
    it is clear to us that the appeal had been fully ventilated before  the
    panel at the hearing.  The panel rejected the  appellant's  account  of
    his arrest and imprisonment.  The panel was not bound to  embark  on  a
    sentence by sentence review of the appellant's evidence.

33. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law affecting the outcome of the decision.

34. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed:     Date:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
-----------------------
[1] The index to the appellant's bundle shows the date as 5th March 2015.
The statement was signed by the appellant and transalted to him, on 2nd
March 2015.

