
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11063/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 31st October 2016                 |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    H A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs O Duru, Counsel instructed by Jemek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Abone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iraq born  on  1st  January  1994.
    Having failed to enter the UK illegally on  26th  September  2014,  the
    Appellant returned on 15th December 2014 and applied for asylum on  2nd
    January 2015.  That application was refused for the  reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's letter of 22nd July 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hands  (the
    Judge) sitting at North Shields on 28th April  2016.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights
    grounds for the reasons given in her Decision dated 10th May 2016.  The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and eventually on  21st
    July 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.   Leave  to  appeal  was
    granted on only one ground, being that the Judge had arguably erred  in
    law in considering the best interests of the Appellant's child DBA born
    on 25th September 2015.

 3. The Judge accepted that the Appellant's child was a British citizen  as
    her father had indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK.   However,  the
    Judge found that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of HC 395 either as a spouse or as a  parent.   As  regards
    paragraph EX.1, the Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her child, but that  it  would
    not be unreasonable to expect that child to return  to  Iraq  with  her
    mother.  Alternatively, the child could  remain  in  the  UK  with  her
    father, or her father could accompany her to Iraq.  This was because he
    had been granted indefinite leave to remain not on asylum  grounds  but
    under the legacy provisions.

 4. The Judge next considered paragraph 276ADE of HC 395  but  again  found
    that it did not assist the Appellant on the basis of the length of time
    the Appellant had spent in the UK.  Finally, the Judge  considered  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    found that any interference with the family life of the  Appellant  was
    proportionate.

 5. At the hearing, Mrs Duru referred to the grounds of application and her
    Skeleton Argument and submitted that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to these conclusions.  In particular, the Judge  had  failed  to
    treat the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  child  as  a  primary
    consideration as required by the  decision  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4 and MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT  00475
    (IAC).  The Judge had not treated those interests as all embracing  and
    had taken only a narrow view of them relating to the possibility of the
    child returning to Iraq with her mother.  The Judge had failed to apply
    properly  the  provisions  of  Section  117B(6)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002   in  the  light  of  the  decision  in
    Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC).

 6. In response, Mrs Abone argued that there was no such error of law.  She
    referred to her Rule 24 response  and  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    directed  herself  appropriately,  particularly  as  regards  the  best
    interests of the child.  The Judge had made a full  assessment  of  the
    circumstances and the options open to the Appellant and had come  to  a
    conclusion which she had fully  reasoned.   The  child  was  not  being
    required to leave the UK.  It was open for her parents to  decide  that
    she would remain living in the UK even if  the  Appellant  returned  to
    Iraq.  That would not be  unreasonable,  particularly  if  the  child's
    separation from her mother was only temporary.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  Mrs Duru's  argument  is  that  the  Judge
    failed to treat the best interests of the Appellant's lone child  as  a
    primary consideration when considering paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of
    HC 395, and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  in  terms  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable or not for the child to leave the UK and return  to
    Iraq with her mother.  The Judge dealt with this issue at paragraphs 50
    and 54 to 58 inclusive of the Decision.  At the  time  of  the  hearing
    before the Judge, the child was barely 6 months old.

 8. At paragraph 54 of the decision, the  Judge  stated  that  she  had  to
    consider the best interests of the child, and in my view it is apparent
    from what she subsequently wrote that she did so.  In any event,  there
    is no error of law in the Judge considering that the child did not have
    to leave the UK.  It was up to her parents to decide  where  she  would
    live if the Appellant had to leave the UK.   The  Judge  was  right  to
    consider that fact determinative of the child's best interests when the
    child was so young.

 9. My judgment is that the  Judge  did  not  fail  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child as a primary consideration and therefore I  find
    no error of law in her decision.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

