

                                       [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: aa/11233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                          |Promulgated                         |
|On 8 September 2015                       |         On 22 October 2015         |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                    d t p
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Cameroon born on 29 January  1995.  On  27
   July 2012 he made an application for further leave to remain on the basis
   of asylum. The respondent refused his application in a  letter  dated  28
   November 2014 and concluded that he was not a refugee and did not qualify
   for international protection. The appellant appealed  that  decision  and
   his appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup  in  a
   decision promulgated on 25 March 2015.


2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against
   that decision. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Shimmin on 20 April 2015. First-tier Judge Shimmin  found  that  it
   was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in his  consideration  of
   the credibility of the appellant in respect of  the  standard  of  proof,
   failed to take account of the appellant's young age when interviewed  and
   his analysis of the evidence. Permission was granted on all grounds.

3. The first ground of appeal asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
   finding that the expert report of  Dr  Walker  Said  was  un-sourced  and
   alternatively that her report was at  variance  with  publicly  available
   background evidence. The appellant argues that the  expert's  report  was
   sourced and the First-tier Tribunal had failed to give  adequate  reasons
   for  finding  that  the  expert  report  was  inconsistent  with  country
   guidance.

4. The second ground of appeal asserts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred
   in its assessment of the Medical Foundation report  of  Dr  Bell.  It  is
   argued that basis for rejecting the medical evidence is at variance  with
   requirements of the Istanbul Protocol  and  not  based  on  any  rational
   reasons.

5. The third ground of appeal relates to the First-tier  tribunal's  finding
   that the appellant's account is implausible and  asserts  that  the  high
   test plausibility demands is not met. It is asserted that the  First-tier
   Tribunal  came  to  erroneous  conclusions  in  failing  to  consider  to
   background evidence adequately or at all and/or by finding the  claim  to
   be  implausible  when  it  was  plausible,  credible  and  supported   by
   background evidence and the expert evidence of Dr Walker Said. It is also
   asserted that the Judge failed to consider the fact  that  the  Appellant
   was a minor when interviewed.

6. The  fourth  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   findings in relation to  Article  8.  It  is  said  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal erred in failing to find family life between the  appellant  and
   his girlfriend who was pregnant and failed to consider the delay in  this
   case of two years. It  is  further  asserted  that  the  Judge  erred  in
   conflating the consideration of the appellant's private and family life.


7. The respondent provided a response to the notice of appeal under Rule  24
   of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  The  respondent
   submitted that the First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately and
   the grounds amounted to  a  mere  disagreement  with  the  decision.  The
   presenting officer had provided valid criticisms of the experts'  reports
   and adequate reasons had been provided by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
   rejecting them.


8. The matter now comes before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  whether
   there is a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and if so, what to do about it. I heard  submissions  from  both
   representatives.   Mr Jones sought to rely on a letter from Dr  Cohen  of
   the Medical Foundation dated 4 September 2015. He submitted that  it  was
   not further evidence. The First-tier Tribunal had fallen  into  error  in
   failing to deal with Dr Bell's report properly.  He  invited  me  not  to
   treat Dr Cohen's report as a further medical  evaluation.  Dr  Cohen  was
   merely filling in the submission in relation to the grounds. If Mr Melvin
   felt that Dr Cohen was going beyond what was argued  in  the  grounds  he
   could take a point on that.  Mr Jones broadly agreed with  the  heads  of
   complaint in the grant of permission. The critical flaw  related  to  the
   inherent  credibility  findings  which  impacted  on  that  valuation  by
   diminishing the weight to be  attached  to  reports.  All  findings  were
   infected.


9. Mr Jones adopted what  was  said  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   In  the
   evaluation of Dr Walker Said's  report,  at  paragraph  72  the  decision
   referred back to the guidance case of FK  (SDF  member/activist  -  risk)
   Cameroon CG [2007] UKAIT 00047. The profundity of  the  country  guidance
   was reduced due to the length of time  passed.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
   acknowledged that on country guidance there was established to be a risk.
   The FK decision was not about the SCNC. There was a finding by the  Judge
   that there would be a risk to active members and that things  would  have
   got worse. Even more critically, he found as a fact that sympathisers and
   supporters had been subjected to torture,  that  prison  conditions  were
   harsh  and  there  was  no  sufficient  protection  and  all   that   was
   significant.


10. The appellant's history was consistently related  as  to  what  prompted
   his asylum claim. He was 15 when his parents were  killed.  His  evidence
   was consistent as to his father's enduring support for the SCNC.  On  the
   day of his father's killing his father  had  no  access  to  a  prominent
   member and he had been imprisoned before.  The  appellant's  evidence  in
   relation to the killing of his parents and his own detention had all been
   consistent. There was nothing inherently implausible about  his  account.
   Paragraph 80 had not been referenced to background evidence. There was no
   finding about the appellant's political activity. The Judge  acknowledged
   in the context of a history of familial association  the  likely  imputed
   opinion to the appellant. The implausibility was in the  context  of  the
   manner of his departure, passport and the fact of his return when on  the
   evidence he was a wanted person. At p12 of the determination this was all
   about conduct after the critical events. In relation to section 8 of  the
   2004 Act, the conduct after the event could not render  the  core  events
   incredible. Mr Jones queried where the reasons  were  for  rejecting  the
   core of his claim, namely that his father, mother, uncle and brother died
   and that he was tortured. There was merely a statement  that  there  were
   inconsistencies. The judge did not identify which of those criticisms  he
   found compelling and why. When one assessed plausibility it had to be  in
   relation to the background in the country. He could not  say  whether  it
   was implausible in  the  context  of  what  was  happening  in  Cameroon.
   Plausibility was absent any particular explanation  that  the  claim  was
   beset with inconsistency.


11. The treatment of the  medical  evidence  was  flawed  and  any  rational
   observer should look at 20 plus  injuries  as  consistent  with  physical
   abuse and the abuse was plausible in relation to  the  country  evidence.
   The critical question was whether it was lawful and  rational  to  reject
   everything else on the basis of his return after his  flight.  As  First-
   tier  Judge  Shimmen  identified  when  granting  leave  there   was   no
   recognition that this was a 15 year old boy who was under control  of  an
   agent. He had endured extensive detention and had lost  his  brother.  He
   was an orphaned child in the UK put into some form of foster care and the
   only familial ties were in his country of origin. The First-tier Tribunal
   did not reflect on his statement. In his  appeal  statement  he  gave  an
   explanation as to why he went back. He said he never thought he would  be
   on his own and when she said that his uncle had been killed he  told  the
   agent to bring him back. That was his evidence. He had nothing  here  and
   was afraid. Mr Jones that it was not implausible that that child he would
   ask to go back. When we recognised how high the threshold was to  make  a
   finding of implausible it was not a sustainable proposition.


12. In relation to the passport issue which was the only other  point,  what
   was really being said here was that he had used the offices of  an  agent
   and the agent had provided everything. His signature was in his  passport
   with the same signature was used in his screening interview. Two critical
   things had to be said. He placed himself in the hands of his aunt and the
   reason why his signature matched his passport was that he had adopted the
   signature in the passport. He referred me to the  appellant's  bundle  at
   page 4, paragraph 5. The First-tier Tribunal had the advantage of country
   evidence in relation to the level of corruption which  appeared  at  page
   145 of the appellant's bundle and this spoke about the ability to  obtain
   forged documents which included the fact that legitimate documents may be
   altered. No one had contemplated that this was  a  pre-prepared  passport
   with information inserted into it. It did not imply that  every  part  of
   this was implausible. The  First-tier  tribunal  should  have  considered
   other explanations. All  of  the  other  evidence  did  not  fall  to  be
   dispensed with on those doubts. His summing up was on the culmination  of
   his criticisms and did not identify discrepancies. It was not  sufficient
   to rely upon these post-departure events. The only  reason  why  he  felt
   emboldened was that he had improperly diminished  other  aspects  of  the
   claim which were probative.


13. The First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 89 and  90  decided  to  disregard
   the medical evidence based on an apprehension that what  the  expert  had
   done was  to  attribute  causation  to  particular  injuries.  The  judge
   concluded  that  there  was  something  improper  in  the  approach.  The
   multiplicity of injuries was dealt with at paragraph 11 of the grounds of
   appeal. Individually the scars were consistent but overall the evaluation
   made it diagnostic. Dr Cohen, in response at paragraph 3  confirmed  that
   the approach to the widespread nature of the scars  was  consistent  with
   paragraph 188 of the Istanbul protocol. The Medical Foundation  confirmed
   that the approach was compatible. The First-tier Tribunal's criticism was
   incompatible with Istanbul Protocol. The report of Dr Bell was  in  2012.
   The judge said at paragraph 89 that he was going to  disregard  parts  of
   the evidence of Dr Bell. There was  nothing  to  say  the  injuries  were
   inconsistent with his history. He was in fact obliged to look  for  other
   indicators of presentation and it was necessary and appropriate  to  look
   for  other  evidential  indictors  and  import  that  into  the   overall
   evaluation. It was obviously wrong to  diminish  that.  At  page  130  of
   appellant's bundle Dr Bell identified that the appellant was  distressed.
   He went on at paragraphs 18, 19 and 20 and at paragraph  28  to  describe
   the presentations as  being  compatible  and  verified  by  his  physical
   presentation. He alluded to the fact that this was a young  man  who  was
   traumatised which was then verified by the care-plan.  Those  care  plans
   made  clear  that  they  were  compatible  generally  given  the   highly
   consistent  nature  of  injuries  and  scaring  there  was  a  diagnostic
   indicator of scaring. It was strongly arguably that  however  much  there
   were concerns in relation to the passport  that  the  presence  of  scars
   where they were was entirely plausible and must outweigh those  concerns.
   The judge did not find that the appellant's parents had not been  killed.
   At paragraphs 92-95 and paragraph 121 he said he did not find  they  were
   not murdered. The death certificates provided  evidence  that  they  were
   killed unlawfully.


14. It was not repudiated that his father was  SCNC  and  the  scarring  was
   diagnostic. The fact that he presented with a passport that  had  a  date
   that was not  consistent  could  not  displace  that.  The  decision  was
   compounded with flawed findings in relation to the  country  report.  The
   First-tier Tribunal's findings were incompatible with what  was  said  by
   the expert. At paragraph 77 it was not said  what  parts  of  her  report
   specifically were not substantiated. There was a lack of  clarity  there.
   The First-tier Tribunal stated that it was a "startling suggestion"  that
   he was at risk due to being Muslim and a large  section  of  society.  He
   could not find the proposition that  any  one  of  those  characteristics
   would be sufficient. It  was  clearly  said  by  Dr  Walker-Said  that  a
   combination of factors triggered a risk at page 100  of  the  appellant's
   bundle and fairly thorough elucidation,  she  did  say  by  reference  to
   sources and her own  experience.  She  had  a  decade  of  experience  in
   Cameroon, had been there and  worked  there  and  associated  with  human
   rights workers. She  had  produced  a  multiplicity  or  works.  She  had
   expressed variously the opinion that his  presentation  were  capable  of
   impacting on him as a risk. The First-tier Tribunal had already  accepted
   that things had got worse for Muslims and were getting worse. He was from
   an Anglophone region which comprised 20% of population and Bamilike which
   was a narrowly drawn group. It was not a reason for rejecting the report.
   Dr Said's report was not based  on  one  affiliation.  She  appropriately
   identified features of the appellant's account which were compatible with
   the country situation and consistently identified why it was plausible at
   page 103, paragraph 105 second paragraph and  p130  in  the  first  three
   paragraphs. Because of this flawed approach to the expert evidence First-
   tier Tribunal had excluded a whole vehicle from which one should properly
   evaluate the approach. That meant that the approach to credibility  could
   not stand. The country expert identified risk factors  and  circumstances
   of failed asylum seekers. The High Commission said failed asylum  seekers
   may be harassed. The expert  identified  that.  The  First-tier  tribunal
   dispensed with that and did not evaluate it despite the fact that it  was
   supported  by  the  government's  own  evidence.  The  approach  to   the
   assessment of risk was substantially flawed. There would be a  protection
   need due to the treatment of his father.


15. The Article 8 approach was substantially flawed with regard to p109  and
   p112 paragraph 276ADE and the findings in relation  to  very  significant
   obstacles. The appellant had been present in UK since the age of  16  and
   lost his parents. He was under  the  care  of  the  local  authority.  He
   presented with some form of traumatic abuse and was  a  vulnerable  young
   man on any description. He would be leaving behind his partner  of  three
   years, that partner could not relocate and that it would be a  severance.
   These matters were material. They had made a long-term commitment and the
   appeal statement before the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph stated  that
   they planned to move in together and have a family at page 38.  That  was
   all evidence of an enduring commitment and determination to have children
   together. All were clear indications  of  a  very  real  commitment.  Her
   evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal at pages 11 to 13. The First-
   tier Tribunal did not evaluate that. He had diminished it as family  life
   and had not assessed the severance as part of private  life.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal had not evaluated  the  effect  of  the  departure  of  the
   father. There was no analysis of the aspects that re-integration that  he
   was from an Anglophone area, and factors which impacted on an  assessment
   of whether there would be very significant obstacles. It was  simply  not
   assessed. Also delay was a material  consideration.  The  suggestion  was
   that the circumstances were precarious. There was a vulnerability to  his
   status but when weighed up there was a  child  under  protection  and  an
   established  enduring  relationship  who  did  not  have  nationality  of
   Cameroon. He had been and remains lawfully present from 2012 and  he  had
   made such contribution. There was an inadequate reference to section 117B
   and both assessments were inadequate. Even if there was no ongoing threat
   or persistence of risk, the fact of the history and trauma  was  relevant
   to the assessment of proportionality and should be weighed in the scale.


16. Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  point  regarding  the  country  guidance
   evidence had been addressed. It  was  clear  that  the  explanation  with
   regard to the passport was rejected. With regard to the issue of  return,
   these were not the actions of a genuine asylum seeker irrespective of the
   points made with regard to the family or local authority return was fatal
   to credibility.  The  expert's  report  entered  the  theatre  of  making
   findings which  did  not  relate  to  the  country  report.  The  Medical
   Foundation were upset and the felt it necessary to put in another report.
   The assessment of the medical evidence was open to him to make and taking
   the whole account in the round  the  medical  and  country  evidence  and
   assessed together, the findings were open to the judge to the make.  With
   regard to Article 8 and risk on return, the asylum claim was rejected and
   hence not incumbent on the judge to incorporate risk factors.


17. Both parties agreed if I were to  find  a  material  error  of  law  the
   appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision and reasons
Expert evidence - Dr Bell's report
  18.  Mr Jones asked me to admit a letter from the Medical Foundation dated
      4 September 2015. That letter is written by Dr Juliet Cohen and  deals
      with the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the report  of  Dr  Bell.
      Whilst it is not a medical  report  I  consider  that  it  is  further
      evidence and should not  therefore  be  admitted  in  relation  to  my
      decision as to whether there is an error of law in the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal.


  19. I have firstly considered the First-tier Tribunal's treatment  of  the
      expert evidence. The appellant relied on the report of Dr Bell of  the
      Medical Foundation dated 29 May 2012. At paragraph 89 of the decision,
      the First-tier Tribunal states:


   "At paragraphs 38 and 39 of the refusal  letter  the  Respondent  claimed
   that Dr Bell had made pronouncements on the credibility of the account. I
   note that in two paragraphs of his report, Dr Bell appears to  have  gone
   further in his report  than  was  either  necessary  or  appropriate.  At
   paragraph  42  he  referred  to  the   Appellant   being   subjected   to
   indiscriminate beatings with a baton and boots. At paragraph 44  he  said
   that there was nothing in his account to suggest that the history he  had
   given was other than in keeping with the documented injuries. I therefore
   disregard those parts of the reports".

  20. At paragraph 90 of the decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  finds  that
      there is a flaw in Dr Bells reasoning. He states:


   "My main concern about Dr Bell's report is that his opinion's relating to
   scars being "highly consistent"  appears  not  to  relate  to  the  scars
   themselves but to the presence of "so many  other  scars  caused  by  the
   beating". It would therefore appear that he  has  formed  the  conclusion
   that the Appellant was beaten and used that to support his  opinion  that
   two of the scars were highly consistent with beating by a baton".

  21. In KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230  (IAC)
      the Upper Tribunal  held  that  when  preparing  medico-legal  reports
      doctors should not, and should not feel obliged to  reach  conclusions
      about causation  of  scarring  which  go  beyond  their  own  clinical
      expertise. Doctors preparing medico-legal reports for  asylum  seekers
      must consider all possible causes of scarring. Whilst if best practice
      is followed medico-legal reports will make a critical evaluation of  a
      claimant's account of scarring said to have been  caused  by  torture,
      such reports cannot be equated with an assessment to be undertaken  by
      decision-makers in a legal context in which the burden of proof  rests
      on the claimant and when one of the purposes of questioning is to test
      a claimant's evidence so as to decide whether (to the lower  standard)
      it is credible.


  22. Dr Bell's report does not, I find, attempt to usurp the  role  of  the
      decision-maker in relation to findings of credibility. Dr Bell carried
      out a critical evaluation  of  the  appellant's  account  of  scarring
      taking into account other possible causes of injuries.  In  accordance
      with paragraph 187 of the Istanbul Protocol he evaluated  each  lesion
      according to the five degrees of consistency set out  there  and  then
      properly  considered  in   accordance   with   paragraph   188   that,
      "Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and  not  the
      consistency of each lesion with a particular form of torture  that  is
      important in assessing the torture story (see Chapter IV.G for a  list
      of torture methods)."


  23. He concluded at paragraph 43 that: "He has two highly consistent scars
      and 25  consistent  scars  among  the  38  scars  he  shows,  but  the
      widespread scarring over the whole body is highly consistent with  the
      history of beatings and although individually the scars are consistent
      with  their  respective   attributions,   the   diffuse   nature   and
      multiplicity of the scars makes them diagnostic of beating."


  24. He further concludes at paragraph 44 that: "Being aware of his age and
      noting his demeanour and emotional reactions during interviews,  there
      is nothing in his account to suggest that the history he has given  is
      other than in keeping with the injuries I have documented".


  25. Those conclusions, were, I  find,  fully  reasoned  and  justified  by
      reference to the prescribed clinical criteria. Dr Bell did not, as the
      First-tier  tribunal  found,  comment  on  the  credibility   of   the
      appellant's account, or go further in his report than was necessary or
      appropriate. He gives sound and evidenced clinical reasons for finding
      that the scars are diagnostic of beating.  Scars S1 and S2  are  found
      to be highly consistent with the appellant's attribution of being  hit
      by a baton and in the presence  of  so  many  other  scars  caused  by
      beating are found by Dr Bell to be highly consistent as being preceded
      by a baton blow. I do not consider that Dr Bell's  reasoning  here  is
      flawed. The reasoning accords  with  paragraph  188  of  the  Istanbul
      Protocol.


  26. The First-tier Tribunal, having rejected Dr  Bells  finding  that  the
      scars were diagnostic of beating, finds at paragraph  91  that  whilst
      the multiple scarring is consistent with beating, it does  not  follow
      that it was caused in way described by  the  appellant  and  that  the
      medical evidence is to be considered in the round. Having  had  regard
      to the other evidence and made adverse credibility findings in respect
      of it he concludes at paragraph 106 that he is unable to attribute the
      cause of injuries consistent with scarring. He states  that  the  fact
      that injuries are consistent with beating does not mean that they were
      cause by beating  even  if  there  were  as  many  scars  as  Dr  Bell
      described.


  27. For the reasons given above, I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      rejection the conclusions of the medical report that  the  appellant's
      scars were diagnostic of  beatings  was  irrational.   His  consequent
      finding that the injuries were merely consistent with and  not  caused
      by beating therefore cannot stand.


The expert report of Dr Said
  28. The grounds of appeal assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
      finding  that  the  expert  report   of   Dr   Said   was   un-sourced
      alternatively, it was at variance with publicly  available  background
      evidence. The First-tier  Tribunal  commented  at  paragraph  77  that
      having considered the background evidence he could find no support  in
      that evidence for many of the  claims  made  by  Dr  Walker  Said  and
      therefore treated her report with very considerable care. He concludes
      at paragraph 78 that her report appears to be  inconsistent  with  the
      country guidance case and  at  paragraph  80  that  he  has  not  been
      informed of any background evidence which supports  Dr  Walker  Said's
      statement that family members of SCNC activists are also at  risk.  He
      concludes at paragraph 81 that her opinions relating to the  risk  the
      Appellant faces on return therefore depend entirely on the credibility
      of his claim and on whether he accepts  that  the  appellant  and  his
      father had some involvement with the SCNC. The report is not mentioned
      again in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it is clear  that
      no weight was given to its conclusions in relation to the risk to  the
      Appellant.


  29. In NA v UK Application 25904/07 2008 ECHR 616, the Court, at paragraph
      120, said that "in assessing  such  material,  consideration  must  be
      given to its source, in particular its independence,  reliability  and
      objectivity. In respect of reports, the authority  and  reputation  of
      the author, the seriousness of the investigations by  means  of  which
      they are compiled, the  consistency  of  their  conclusions  and  that
      corroboration by other sources are all relevant considerations."


  30. The First-tier Tribunal does not, at paragraph 77, identify  which  of
      the claims made by Dr Walker Said are not supported or corroborated by
      the background evidence, save for her claim that a  single  young  man
      without family, who is also a Muslim from the Anglophone area,  is  by
      these factors alone or taken together, at risk. However, each of these
      opinions is sourced. She sets  out  the  evidence  with  footnotes  at
      paragraph 1 of page 4 of her report in relation to  why  young  people
      are considered threatening to the state. She explains at page  5  that
      Muslim youth in Cameroon are now under extremely high surveillance  as
      Boko  Haram  recruits  young  Muslim  men  to  join  their  anti-state
      terrorism. She gives two sources her this opinion. She also refers  at
      page 19 of the report to the expectations for Muslim Youth in Cameroon
      in the light of recent event and explains, with reference to  sources,
      why the Cameroonian government is highly likely to  be  suspicious  of
      young, Muslim men without families. The background evidence at 504  of
      the appellant's bundle was cited by the First-tier Tribunal and it was
      acknowledged on the basis of this evidence that Islamic movements  are
      now more closely watched.  Further, the First-tier Tribunal  does  not
      find that Dr Walker Said's opinions are contradicted by the background
      evidence.


  31. The First-tier Tribunal finds, at paragraph 78, that Dr  Walker-Said's
      report appears to  be  inconsistent  with  the  country  guidance.  No
      reasons are given  for  this  conclusion.  The  only  current  country
      guidance case is FK (SDF member/activist - risk)  Cameroon  CG  [2007]
      UKAIT 00047. The Upper Tribunal was not  directly  concerned  in  that
      case with SCNC. However, the Tribunal accepted, at paragraph 29 on the
      basis of the evidence "relating to the detention and  imprisonment  of
      SCNC supporters that some prominent active opponents of the government
      may, depending on their  own  particular  profile  and  circumstances,
      continue to be at real risk of persecution." The  First-tier  Tribunal
      accepted, at paragraph 74 that since 2007 persecution of SCNC  members
      appeared  to  have  resumed  and  may   have   intensified.   In   the
      circumstances, I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  give
      any or any adequate reason for finding that the  expert  evidence  was
      inconsistent with country guidance.


  32. Dr Walker Said sets out her expertise and experience at page 1 of  her
      report. She holds a PHD in African history from Yale University and is
      currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of African  Studies
      at John Jay College of Criminal Justice at the University of New York.
      She has  written  papers  and  articles  and  given  presentations  on
      politics, history and human rights in Cameroon.


  33. Dr Walker-Said's credentials  and  standing  as  an  expert  were  not
      challenged by the First-tier Tribunal.  Her conclusions  were  sourced
      and reasoned and although the  First-tier  Tribunal  asserts  that  no
      support for many of her claims can found in  the  background  evidence
      this is not particularised and the Tribunal  did  not  find  that  her
      opinions  were  contradicted  by  the  background  evidence.  In   the
      circumstances therefore I find that the First-tier Tribunal both  gave
      inadequate reasons for rejecting the report.


Plausibility
  34. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph 99, that  the  appellant's
      account, summarised in paragraph 98, taken as a whole, was "not merely
      implausible but lacking in credibility".  That account  was  that  the
      appellant's "parents were killed in June and he  was  detained  for  5
      months before his escape. He then remained in Cameroon with  his  aunt
      while an agent obtained a  passport  and  student  visa.  Although  he
      claimed that he had suffered extreme hardship  while  being  detained,
      which included the death of his brother and being confined in  a  cell
      with his brother's body for 5 days, he did not  claim  asylum  on  his
      arrival in the UK and returned to Cameroon 5 months later even  though
      he feared for his life".


  35. There is  a  significant  amount  of  case  law  in  relation  to  the
      application of the concept of plausibility in the assessment of asylum
      claims.  When assessing credibility, judges are entitled  to  draw  on
      their common  sense  and  ability  to  identify  what  is  or  is  not
      plausible, as long as it is based on hard evidence. In HK v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ  1037  Neuberger  LJ
      said at paragraph 28:


   "The ingredients of a story, and  the  story  as  a  whole,  have  to  be
   considered against the available  county  evidence  and  reliable  expert
   evidence, and other familiar factors, such as consistency with  what  the
   appellant has said before, and other factual evidence".


  36. The First-tier Tribunal was undoubtedly correct to conclude that  this
      aspect of the appellant's claim was a significant  credibility  issue.
      However, I conclude that in view of the flawed approach to the  expert
      evidence the  First-tier  Tribunal  excluded  relevant  and  probative
      evidence from which he should properly have evaluated credibility as a
      whole.  Further, the First-tier Tribunal also found at  paragraph  107
      of the decision that the appellant's  claim  was  totally  lacking  in
      credibility because  it  was  "one  beset  with  inconsistencies".  At
      paragraph 105 he states that he has taken account of the reasons given
      by the respondent for doubting the appellant's credibility,  does  not
      repeat  them  and  does  not  disagree  with  them.  None   of   these
      inconsistencies are set out in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and
      no account is taken of the appellant's  rebuttal  statement  where  he
      dealt with  each  of  the  points  in  the  refusal  letter.   In  the
      circumstances I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  inadequate
      reasons for finding that the appellant gave an  inconsistent  account.
      In the circumstances I  find  that  the  credibility  findings  cannot
      stand.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  matter
for rehearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the  findings  are
preserved.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.
I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed                                             Dated




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L Murray

