
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11913/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 October 2016                         |On 25 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     ASA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ouattara, IAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, ASA, was born in 1968 and is a male citizen  of  Jordan.
    He appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  Davies)  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 20 August 2015 to refuse to grant  him
    asylum and humanitarian protection.   The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  27  June  2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant seeks to challenge the credibility findings of the judge.
     In brief, the appellant claimed that he owned a supermarket in  Amman,
    Jordan.  In August 2014 the appellant was asked by a former customer of
    the supermarket to assist her in carrying heavy shopping into her home.
     The appellant did so.  He was subsequently confronted by  the  woman's
    mother-in-law and sister who accused him of having an affair  with  the
    woman (Mrs [J]).  Subsequently, the appellant claims his  property  had
    been burnt down and that "shots were fired."  The appellant  moved  his
    wife and children away from his home to the home of his wife's  family.
    Ultimately, the appellant travelled to Jamaica on a visa  but  did  not
    claim asylum there.

 3. The dates in this case are confusing.  The confusion  begins  with  the
    appellant's  own  Asylum  Interview  Record  and  is  repeated  in  the
    Secretary of State's  refusal  letter.   The  appellant  spoke  of  the
    initial incident (carrying the shops into the house)  as  occurring  in
    August 2014 and that his property was destroyed and shots were fired on
    6 August 2015, "the day after the incident."   The  grounds  of  appeal
    complain that the judge [63] stated that the appellant had stated at  a
    "very late stage in the asylum process" that Mrs [J] had  been  killed.
    The appellant says that he learned of the  killing  of  this  woman  in
    November 2015 and not 2014 as the judge appeared to  believe.   In  the
    light of  the  numerous  other  findings  as  regards  the  appellant's
    credibility (which I know in no way are associated with the findings at
    [62]), I do not find that the judge has seriously  erred  in  law.   It
    appears that the judge was told of the death of Mrs [J] at the hearing;
    the judge makes it clear at [62] that the evidence of the appellant "at
    the  hearing  takes  his  case  no  further  forward."    The   judge's
    observations regarding the death of Mrs  [J]  do  not  appear  to  have
    materially affected his assessment of the appellant's credibility.

 4. At [55] the judge found it  was  "wholly  unbelievable"  that,  as  the
    result of a single innocent incident, Mrs [J]'s family  would  conclude
    that the appellant was having a  sexual  relationship  with  her.   The
    appellant asserts that the judge has failed to place  the  incident  in
    the cultural context appertaining in Jordan.

 5. I find that the ground has no merit.  It is clear that  the  judge  did
    have regard to the customs, traditions and social  mores  of  Jordanian
    life [52].  Notwithstanding that context, it was open to the  judge  to
    conclude, on the basis of all the evidence, that it  was  not  credible
    that the  woman's  family  would  react  in  the  way  claimed  by  the
    appellant.  There  was  also  no  obvious  contradiction  between  that
    observation and the judge's finding at [52] that, being aware  of  "the
    customs, traditions and social mores of Jordanian  life,"  it  was  not
    credible that the appellant had set foot in the  woman's  home  in  the
    first instance.  The point being made by the judge is that it  was  not
    culturally acceptable for the appellant as a man to enter the home of a
    woman who was not chaperoned but, equally, it  was  also  not  credible
    that such an incident alone would lead the woman's family members to be
    so convinced that the woman was having an  affair  with  the  appellant
    that they would threaten the appellant and  attack  his  property  with
    such vehemence.  It was necessary to remember that these findings  were
    being made in the context of the appellant's unsatisfactory immigration
    history.  The judge recorded [54] that  the  appellant  did  not  claim
    asylum en route to the United Kingdom in Turkey  because  "he  did  not
    think he could get work there."  Further, the appellant had  failed  to
    give any proper explanation for  his  failure  to  claim  international
    protection in Jamaica  [53].   The  question  of  credibility  was  one
    entirely for the judge to decide  by  way  of  an  anxious  but  robust
    assessment of the evidence and I have no  doubt  that  he  has  reached
    findings which were open to him on that evidence and has  given  cogent
    reasons for doing so.  In the circumstances, the appeal  is  dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal. No fee order is appropriate.


Signed                              Date 10 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

