
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11724/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 4 November 2016                        |On 18 November 2016         |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     R N
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Thomas for Compass Immigration Law Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. There was in place an anonymity direction and that shall continue.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated  on  22  July  2016  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  remove  the
   Appellant from the UK following the decision to  refuse  the  Appellant's
   claim for asylum.
Background
4. The Appellant was born on 25 January 1996 and is a national of Iran.
5. On 30 July 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum  on  the  basis  of  his
   political activities in Iran. Since the Appellant arrived in  the  UK  he
   claims to have converted to Christianity.
6. On 13  August  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Fox ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged in  essence  arguing  that  the  Judge  had
   placed insufficient weight on material  evidence  when  reaching  adverse
   conclusions: had placed insufficient weight on the evidence  of  Reverend
   Threlfall; failed to give  adequate  weight  to  the  documents  produced
   although she appeared to  accept  that  the  documents  showed  that  the
   Appellant had divorced.
9. On 16 August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pullig  gave  permission  to
   appeal on all grounds.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Ms  Thomas  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Judge failed to properly assess the documentary evidence  in  that
      she appeared to accept that the Appellant had  changed  his  name  and
      divorced but placed no weight on the other documents.

   b) The Judge failed to assess the Appellants explanation as given in  his
      witness statement for failing to refer to his 2011  detention  in  the
      Screening Interview.

   c) In relation to Reverend Threlfall it was clear she had regular contact
      with the Appellant although  another  colleague  conducted  the  Bible
      Studies and conversion process.

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) In relation to the claimed conversion the weight the Judge gave to the
      evidence of the Reverend was a matter for her and she gave reasons why
      she gave limited weight to the  evidence  adduced.  Her  evidence  was
      second hand as she does not speak Farsi.  The  reason  given  for  the
      Ministers non attendance given the importance of the appeal  was  poor
      to non existent. The decision to give little weight to  the  Reverends
      evidence was open to her.

   b) The Judge was not accepting that any of the  documents  produced  were
      reliable and gave reasons and does not  find  that  the  documents  in
      relation to the name change and divorce were reliable.

   c) In relation to the Appellants failure to mention the 2011 detention it
      was clear that the Judge had read the witness statement but  concluded
      that the explanation did not satisfy her.

   d) The Judges approach to the documents was correct: she looked  at  them
      in the round and gave them the weight she felt was appropriate.

12. In reply Ms Thomas on behalf of the Appellant submitted  that  paragraph
   40 appeared to suggest that the Judge accepted the Appellant was divorced
   and had changed his name.

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

15. In relation to credibility generally in Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ
   367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

   "Where, as in this case,  complaint  is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
   adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is   to   say
   credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that  the  criticism
   is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and does not merely
   reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate  tribunal  that  it  might
   itself have taken a different view of the matter from that that  appealed
   to the adjudicator."
16. In relation to how decisions are written I remind myself of Piglowska  v
   Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360 Lord Hoffmann said  at  p.  1372  that   "The
   exigencies of daily court room life are such that  reasons  for  judgment
   will always be capable of having been better expressed......."


Finding on Material Error

17. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

18. It is always important to  read  a  decision  as  a  whole  rather  than
   focusing on a paragraph out of context.I am satisfied that  the  argument
   that there is a contradiction in  the  Judges  findings  in  relation  to
   documents between paragraph 40 and paragraph 53  which  is  a  conclusion
   about documents is not made out when the decision is read as a whole. The
   Judge starts her findings at paragraph 38 by stating  that  she  did  not
   find that the  Appellant  had  established  his  case  to  the  requisite
   standard of proof. She then sets out  what  she  describes  as  his  core
   account at paragraphs  38  onwards  and  it  is  clear  to  me  that  she
   highlights what she considers to be those aspects of the claim  that  are
   incredible and why they do not meet the standard of proof  and  that  his
   claim in relation to  his  divorce  and  name  change  is  one  of  those
   assertions that she does not accept. Thus in a detailed assessment of the
   evidence she highlighted those areas of the claim that clearly caused her
   not to accept that the Appellant was a credible witness as  to  his  core
   claim:
   a) That the Appellant had been dismissed  from  the  Iranian  Engineering
      Company in 2012 for anti authority activities (para 39) yet managed to
      secure  a  more  senior  role  with  his  new  employer   the   Tehran
      Telecommunications Country.
   b) Although he claimed he was dismissed from his new  employment  he  was
      able to remain at home without incident until he left Iran on 29  July
      2014 using his own passport.
   c) The Appellant was divorced on 12 April 2014 and registered a change of
      name and yet while making such fundamental  changes  to  his  personal
      life  and  formal  identity  this  aroused  no  attention   from   the
      authorities.
   d) The passivity of the authorities was considered in the context of  his
      employer's decision to communicate his activities to third parties.
   e) The Appellants employers only  investigated  his  activities  a  month
      after dismissing him.
   f) While the Appellant claimed that the police would not be  involved  in
      his illegal activities this was inconsistent  with  the  core  of  his
      claim that he would be at risk on return.
   a) The Appellant was able to leave Iran using his  own  passport  without
      being detained. There was no evidence that his father had any  problem
      returning to Iran or had had any problems since his  return  and  this
      was incredible.
   b) The Appellant failed to mention his detention and torture  from  March
      2011 to April 2011 in his screening interview and his failure to do so
      without a reasonable explanation undermines his credibility.
   c) It was not credible that in spite of evidence of recent travel and his
      illegal activities the authorities would give him 10 days to surrender
      to bail.

19. In relation to  the  overall  assessment  of  documents  the  Judge  was
   entitled to take into account in paragraph 53 the fact that the documents
   were not originals and the prevalence of fraudulent  documents  in  Iran.
   She also took into account at paragraph 44 and 47 his explanation that he
   received his  copy  documents  by  email  from  his  sister  because  the
   authorities monitor the postal service and the  originals  could  not  be
   posted was inconsistent with the background material and his own claim to
   have come to the attention of the authorities on two  occasions  and  the
   fact that he has kept in touch with his family by email since he has been
   in the UK when. Given those findings it was open to the  Judge  that  the
   documents could not be relied on to establish that the Appellant  was  of
   interest to the authorities.

20.  In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to take into  account
   the Appellants evidence  both  oral  and  in  his  witness  statement  in
   assessing why he had not referred  in  his  Screening  Interview  to  his
   detention in March to April 2011 I am satisfied  that  this  argument  is
   unsustainable. She refers to the Appellants bundle of documents and heard
   oral evidence from him which she summarises and she was not  required  to
   detail each in her decision. It is nevertheless clear that she  read  the
   witness statement and she was entitled to conclude that given his  arrest
   , detention and torture in 2011 were  traumatic  events  his  failure  to
   refer to them undermined his credibility.

21. In relation to the evidence of the  Reverend  Threlfall  is  clear  from
   reading the  decision  and  her  detailed  assessment  of  the  Reverends
   evidence at 59-69 that the Judge did not regard her  adverse  credibility
   findings as to the core account were determinative of the  assessment  of
   the Appellants conversion to Christianity. The Judge was however entitled
   to place what weight she felt was appropriate  on  the  evidence  of  the
   Reverend. I am satisfied that she gave adequate reasons why looked at  in
   the round she gave limited weight to the Reverends evidence
   a) In relation to his conversion the  Appellant  was  vague  and  evasive
      about the plight of Christians in Iran and only appeared t acknowledge
      that he was at risk as an apostate.
   b) She took into account the evidence  of  the  Reverend  who  gave  oral
      evidence as to the procedures followed for converts but noted that the
      Reverend did not personally oversee the Appellants conversion as  that
      was the responsibility of another minister who did not  give  evidence
      and that did not assist the Appellant.
   c) She found that the Appellant had contrived his conversion  to  support
      his claim and given the  period  of  this  deception  she  found  this
      undermined his general credibility.

22. It would also have been open to her to find as  Mr  Mc  Vitie  suggested
   that the failure of the minister who was  personally  involved  with  the
   Appellant, who was presumably an Iranian as  he  spoke  Farsi,  was  very
   surprising in  the  light  of  the  guidance  in  Dorodian  ,  the  vital
   importance of his evidence given the risk  to  him  on  return  that  was
   claimed and the rather vague explanation as to why he could not attend. I
   am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to reject  the  claim  that  the
   Appellant was a genuine convert and gave well reasoned findings for  that
   conclusion.

23. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

24. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.


CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.

27. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.

28.



Signed                                                              Date
18.11.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


