
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number:  AA/11197/2015
                                                         AA/11207/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House on                        Decision & Reasons
Promulgated On 30th March 2016                             On 1st July 2016

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                   (1) GSN
                                   (2) ASN
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:       Mr M Saleem, Solicitor, Malik & Malik Solicitors

For the Respondent:   Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Anonymity

1.    This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made by the First-tier
      Tribunal. Neither party invited me to rescind the order. I continue it
      pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

Introduction

2.    The Appellants are father and son and are  nationals  of  Afghanistan.
      They appeal against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Robinson dismissing their appeals against the Respondent's decision on
      29 July 2015 refusing their applications for international  protection
      on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      McDade on 21 January 2016 in the following terms:


      "The grounds of application for permission  to  appeals  [sic]  assert
      that the judge has misapprehended certain aspects of the evidence. For
      example that the judge misapprehended the relative  of  the  Appellant
      who  the  Appellant  claimed  is  actually  missing,  and  an  adverse
      inference had been drawn from the Appellant's failure to refer to  the
      satanic verses of the Bible in his statement or any references to  his
      father's  library  and  that  this  was  procedurally  unfair  as  the
      appellant was not given the opportunity  to  respond  at  the  hearing
      [sic]. These points taken together constitute  an  arguable  error  of
      law."



Background

4.    The background to the Appellants claim is  as  follows.  There  was  a
      dispute between the First Appellant in his capacity as a  teacher  and
      Commander Mohammed Islam - the father of a student - after  he  failed
      the student in his exams. The student made  threats  which  the  First
      Appellant reported to the head teacher who, in turn,  advised  him  to
      report the threats to the police. The police took no  action  and  the
      student continued to harass and threaten  the  First  Appellant  which
      culminated in an incident where  unknown  persons  armed  with  knives
      attended his home and threatened his  wife.  Subsequently,  the  First
      Appellant failed the student again in his exams  and  Commander  Islam
      continued to threaten the First  Appellant  and  his  family.  A  land
      dispute then ensued between the First Appellant  and  Commander  Islam
      and the Appellants were attacked by his  bodyguards.  Upon  the  First
      Appellant reporting the incident to the police the matter was referred
      to  the  appropriate  authority  in  Kabul  and  the   Counter   Crime
      Department. By this time the Appellants had been granted  visit  visas
      to come to the UK.

5.    After the Appellants left  Afghanistan,  Commander  Islam  raided  the
      First Appellant's home and found works of  Marxism;  Salman  Rushdie's
      novel "The Satanic Verses" and a Bible. Commander Islam  informed  the
      local Iman who issued a fatwa against the First Appellant. During this
      raid, the wife of the Second Appellant was  beaten  and  she  and  her
      brother are now missing.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.    The Judge set out the Appellants'  case  in  a  comprehensive  summary
    between [3] and [6], and made detailed reference  to  the  evidence  and
    submissions between [7] and [38], the standard and burden  of  proof  at
    [39], the contra case between [40] and [43], and his conclusions between
    [44] and [77]. The consideration  of  the  parties'  positions  and  the
    evidence is detailed.


7.    The Judge concluded that the Appellants account was not  credible.  He
    noted that no reference was made by either Appellant  at  the  screening
    interview to a land dispute or an assault noting,  in  particular,  that
    the Second Appellant had expressly indicated that he was not  persecuted
    by Commander Islam [50]. This was found  to  be  inconsistent  with  his
    witness statement wherein he described an assault to which  he  and  his
    father had been subjected to by Commander Islam.  The  Judge  noted  the
    contents of the police letter and the Appellants request for protection,
    and  observed  that  very  shortly  thereafter   the   Appellants   left
    Afghanistan to visit a family member in England. The Judge found that it
    was highly unlikely  that  the  Appellants  would  leave  behind  family
    members whilst simultaneously claiming that they were under threat [52].




8.    The Judge further found that it was highly  unlikely  that  anyone  in
    Afghanistan would present an English version of the Satanic Verses to  a
    friend as a gift considering that it was the least  likely  book  to  be
    kept by anyone in Kabul, in light of the internationally renowned  fatwa
    made by Ayatollah  Khomeini  against  Salman  Rushdie  [53].  The  Judge
    concluded that the First Appellant had  identified  three  controversial
    books likely to upset conservative Muslim thinkers and claimed  that  he
    had them in his library. The Judge did not consider the manner in  which
    the First Appellant obtained the books and how  they  were  subsequently
    discovered was plausible.  In  reference  to  the  documentary  evidence
    personal to the Appellants, the Judge noted that the originals were  not
    available and that the scanned copies were not all of good  quality  and
    their provenance unclear. The Judge took  into  account  the  Appellants
    failure to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an  asylum
    claim as damaging to their overall credibility.


9.    In summarising his  conclusions,  the  Judge  stated  that  whilst  he
    accepted that the  First  Appellant  was  a  teacher,  he  rejected  the
    remainder of the account [62]. He concluded that there was  no  risk  to
    the Appellants as failed asylum seekers  in-line  with  current  country
    guidance, and found that they could safely return to  Kabul.  The  Judge
    thus concluded that the Appellants were not  entitled  to  international
    protection.


10.   The Judge proceeded to  consider  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on Article 8 grounds outside of the Rules and  concluded  that
    the Respondent's decision was proportionate at [76].


Decision on Error of Law


11.   Having given careful consideration to Judge Robinson's decision  as  a
    whole, the grounds and submissions, I  am  just  persuaded  by  a  very
    narrow margin that the Judge  erred  in  law  such  as  to  render  the
    decision unsustainable.

12.   Whilst the grounds of appeal plead four  errors  of  law,  Mr  Saleem,
    rightly, recognised the inherent weakness in some of  them  because  he
    made no material  reference  to  them  at  the  hearing  and  his  oral
    submissions were faithful to the grant of permission and limited to the
    pursuit of paragraphs  3  and  5  of  the  grounds,  which  encompassed
    essentially two points,  namely,  a  failure  to  consider  a  material
    fact(s) and unfairness. Outside of these two points insofar as  I  need
    to deal with them there is no merit  in  the  grounds  pleaded  in  the
    application.


13.   The first  point  raised  relates  to  the  accuracy  of  the  Judge's
    understanding of the Appellants' claim. An aspect  to  it  is  was  the
    event that led the Appellants to claim asylum, namely, the receiving of
    a telephone call on 22 March 2015 from the Second Appellant's father-in-
    law stating that his home had  been  raided  the  day  before  and  his
    daughter [the Second Appellant's wife] and her  brother  were  missing.
    There is no merit in this ground. The Judge was clearly  aware  of  the
    fact that the Appellants' home was raised  on  22  March;  that  family
    members were said to be missing, and that, this  information  had  been
    communicated  through  a  telephone  call  received  from  the   Second
    Appellant's father-in-law - see [6], [19], [62] and [68]. Whilst it  is
    regrettable that at [68] the Judge stated: "I do not  accept  that  the
    appellants' son and daughter-in-law is missing", thus  identifying  the
    wrong family members, I consider nothing turns on this - the  error  is
    not material. The Judge was clearly aware  of  the  claim  that  family
    members were missing which in fact, I note, he correctly identified  at
    [62]. Further, it is not incumbent on a Judge to detail every  minutiae
    detail of a claim and I am satisfied that  he  took  into  account  the
    details of the claim in its entirety. There is no merit in this ground.




14.   Nevertheless, it is apparent  from  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter
    that credibility was always in issue in this  case.  The  Secretary  of
    State did not accept the Appellants' claim and found it to  be  lacking
    in credibility. The Appellants gave oral evidence. Most of the  matters
    on which the Judge based his adverse credibility findings were grounded
    in the Appellants' oral evidence and his assessment of the  documentary
    evidence. So far, so good.


15.   However, in the midst of [53], which encompasses some of  the  Judge's
    reasons he stated thus:


    "The main discrepancy in this case are highlighted by the respondent in
    the refusal letter [sic]. The appellants sought to address these issues
    in their written statements. I note that Ahmad Samin makes no reference
    to the Satanic Verses' or the bible in his written statement and refers
    simply to "unIslamic books". He also makes no reference to his father's
    library."


16.   The Judge then  proceeded  to  ventilate  other  reasons  and  in  his
    omnibus conclusion at [55] stated:


    "In my view the discrepancies which I have highlighted above go to  the
    core of the appellant's [sic] claim."


17.   In my judgement it is apparent that the  factual  omissions  from  the
    Second Appellant's witness statement were  of  concern  to  the  Judge;
    factors which he considered related to the core  of  the  claim.  Given
    that the omissions formed part of  the  Judge's  reasoning  as  to  the
    credibility of the claim, he must have considered that they  undermined
    the account. Whilst it was legitimate for the Judge to have  taken  the
    failure into account, the question is, whether it was fair to hold this
    against  the  Appellants  without  allowing  the  Second  Appellant  an
    opportunity to deal with the matter.


18.   Whilst I acknowledge that the Appellants were represented  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the omissions identified by  the  Judge  were  not
    obvious  and  were  unlikely  to  have   been   contemplated   by   the
    representative on hearing  the  Appellants  evidence  unfold.  This  is
    particularly so given that, I note, the Second Appellant  did  identify
    the books at interview [Q.66] and is a factor which the  Judge  appears
    to have overlooked. It also appears that the omissions were not  relied
    upon by the Respondent's representative at the hearing before the Judge
    and, nor was the Second Appellant cross-examined on the  point.  In  my
    judgement the omission was not therefore an obscure issue  and  it  was
    one of the bases upon which the Judge came to the conclusion  that  the
    Appellants were not to be believed. In  my  judgement,  the  Judge  was
    undoubtedly influenced by what he viewed as  an  inconsistency  in  the
    account,  which  I  acknowledge  was  a  view   compounded   by   other
    discrepancies. Notwithstanding, in my view, fairness dictates that  the
    concerns should have been ventilated and  the  Appellants  should  have
    been afforded an opportunity to address the point, and that the failure
    to do so caused material unfairness. I am satisfied  that  the  Judge's
    approach was conceivably unfair affecting  the  Appellants  inalienable
    right to a fair hearing - see AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656
    (IAC).


19.   Whilst this is an otherwise well-reasoned decision the  assessment  of
    the Appellants credibility has not been adequately  undertaken  through
    the lens of the concept of fairness. Whilst the challenge is  a  narrow
    one, given the fundamental nature  of  the  protection  sought  by  the
    Appellants, the need for anxious scrutiny in cases of this type  is  of
    considerable importance. That concept must entail the Appellants  being
    put on notice of the points that are to be taken against them and calls
    for a rounded assessment. I am satisfied that this did  not  happen  in
    this case and the matter must be reheard. The  Appellants  right  to  a
    fair hearing dictates this course.


20.   The representatives were in agreement should I  find  that  the  Judge
    erred that the appropriate course of action was remittal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I  agree  that  is  the  right  course  given  that  the
    credibility of the claim will have to be looked at afresh, with none of
    Judge  Robinson's  findings  preserved,   save   for   those   relating
    exclusively to the Article 8 claim which are not challenged.


Decision


21.   The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal. For the reasons elaborated above the appeals  are
      allowed. As the Appellants were denied a fair hearing  remittal  to  a
      differently constituted First-tier Tribunal is the appropriate course.





Signed :                                Date : 1st July 2016





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

