
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11113/2013
                                                               AA/11114/2013
                                                               AA/11115/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 24th June 2014                               |On 10th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                     AZ
                                     MZ
                                     CAC
                            (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins, Counsel instructed by Irving and
                    Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Gregor Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellants are citizens of  Iran  who  were  born  on  the  (1)  21st
   September 1975, (2) 24th February  2007  and  (3)  4th  June  1981.  They
   appeal, with permission, against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
   (Judge Wright) to dismiss their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
   respondent to refuse their applications for asylum  and  to  remove  them
   from the United Kingdom. The first appellant is the husband of the second
   appellant and the father of the third appellant. All  further  references
   to "the appellant" are to the first appellant.

The appellant's case

2. The appellant's case may be summarised as follows.

3. About 19 years ago, the appellant was detained for a  period  of  8  days
   due to his participation in an anti-government protest that  concerned  a
   fire at a school in which some of the students died.

4. Whilst at university, he was cautioned  by  the  authorities  on  several
   occasions as a result of his activities  with  the  Islamic  Association.
   These activities culminated in him being detained and beaten  by  members
   of the Iranian internal security forces  over  a  period  of  nearly  two
   months. Upon his release, he was banned from returning to the  university
   for a period of two semesters.

5. The appellant campaigned  on  behalf  of  Mr  Khatami  in  the  May  1997
   Presidential elections. Mr Khatami was duly  elected  and  the  appellant
   thereafter settled down to his  studies,  which  he  completed  in  2001.
   However, his activities as a student prevented further study with a  view
   to him becoming a surgeon, and the authorities denied him  a  licence  in
   order to practice as  a  general  practitioner.  He  did  however  secure
   employment as a medical practitioner with an oil company in Gachsaran.

6. The appellant was later forced to move to Mahshahr due  to  his  father's
   trade union activities in Gachsaran.  Mahshahr  had  a  significant  Arab
   population, many of whom he treated for injuries sustained  during  their
   conflict with the government in  2005.  He  was  however  warned  by  the
   authorities to desist from doing this.

7. In 2006, the appellant wrote an open letter to the  government  in  which
   he expressed concern about the adverse effects on public health that were
   being  caused  by  pollution  in  Mahshahr.  This  letter  received  much
   publicity in the broadcast and printed media. The appellant was  arrested
   and detained for a period of 2 weeks. He was told that  if  he  retracted
   the letter his father (who was serving a term  of  imprisonment  for  his
   trade union activities) would be released but, if he did  not,  he  would
   never see him again and other family members would also be detained.  The
   appellant therefore gave a filmed interview in  which  he  retracted  his
   earlier claims and said that there were no problems with pollution. As  a
   result, the appellant was released him  on  condition  that  he  took  no
   further part in  anti-government  activities.  His  father  was  released
   shortly afterwards and  the  appellant  was  issued  with  a  licence  to
   practice medicine.

8.  Upon  his  release,  the  appellant  opened  his  own  surgery,   whilst
   continuing to work at the hospital attached to the oil company.

9. During the 2009 Presidential election campaign, the appellant  campaigned
   on behalf of Mr Moosavi.  However,  on  the  day  of  the  election,  the
   authorities closed down his surgery and  seized  his  computers.  He  was
   informed that the closure would be indefinite. Two weeks  later,  he  was
   sacked from the hospital without being notified of the reason.

10. Two or three months  after  the  election,  the  appellant  returned  to
   Gachsaran where he worked in the medical practice  of  a  friend.  During
   this period, he travelled twice to Shiraz in order to participate in anti-
   government demonstrations. Whilst in Shiraz, he met a number  of  friends
   from the Islamic Association who informed him  of  the  routine  rape  of
   prisoners who were being held in Iranian jails.  At  their  request,  the
   appellant signed a petition that was  to  be  sent  to  Geneva.  He  also
   visited an Iranian prison where he examined two prisoners who claimed  to
   have been raped. This was at the beginning of 2010.

11. In June 2010, the appellant was arrested whilst at  his  father's  house
   in Gachsaran. He was detained in Shiraz for 40 days, during which time he
   was interrogated about the petition that  he  had  signed.  He  was  then
   remanded in custody by a judge in Dadgostri. Upon his return to detention
   in Shiraz, he told his inquisitors that  he  did  not  have  any  further
   information to give them. However, he suggested that if he  was  released
   he would assist them in discovering the identity of others who had signed
   the petition. He was released for a period  of  two  weeks,  in  November
   2010, upon the security of the title deeds to  properties  owned  by  his
   mother and his brother. This was arranged so that  he  could  attend  his
   father's  funeral.  However,  he  went  into  hiding   and   stayed   for
   approximately 2 months at the house of a friend in Shiraz. His  wife  and
   son remained in Mahshahr

12. In January 2011, the appellant left Iran using  a  false  passport  that
   had been provided to him by an agent. He flew to Dubai  where,  two  days
   later, he was joined by his wife. He travelled to  Abu  Dhabi,  where  he
   applied for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom,  in  his  own  name,
   before returning to Dubai. However, he  was  forced  to  return  to  Iran
   because his leave to remain in Dubai (which was only valid for  10  days)
   was due to expire. His wife followed him two or three  days'  later,  and
   they continued to live at a friend's house in Shiraz. In  February  2011,
   the UK embassy in Abu Dhabi granted the appellant's application for entry
   clearance. Therefore, in April 2011, the appellant travelled  to  Turkey,
   upon a false passport, where he met his wife. They then boarded a  flight
   to the United Kingdom, using the  visa  that  had  been  granted  to  the
   appellant in his own name.

13. The appellant fears that if he returns to Iran he will be  arrested  and
   ill-treated because he is wanted in  connection  with  his  human  rights
   activities and because  he  absconded  whilst  on  temporary  leave  from
   prison.

The primary decision

14. The respondent's official (hereafter,  "the  decision-maker")  concluded
   that the appellant's account was  not  credible.  This  was  because  she
   considered that there were several aspects  of  that  account  that  were
   contradictory,  implausible,   and   contrary   to   background   country
   information.  In  reaching  this  conclusion,  the  decision-maker   gave
   separate consideration to each of the various aspects of the  appellant's
   history that he claimed had led to his departure from Iran. At  paragraph
   37 of her explanatory letter to the appellant, she also provided detailed
   reasons for why she considered that the documents that he had provided in
   support of his claim were unreliable.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

15. The judge noted that the appellant had set out his claim in a  Screening
   and an Asylum Interview, transcripts of each of which  were  appended  to
   the respondent's bundle of documents [paragraph  4].  He  summarised  the
   appellant's claim, in a single sentence, at paragraph 9:

    In broad terms, the appellant claimed to fear mistreatment (on  return)
    due to his imputed political opinion.

   He then set out the respondent's reasons  for  rejecting  that  claim  in
   twenty separate sub-paragraphs  [paragraph  11]  before  summarising  the
   respondent's reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  other  claims  (for
   humanitarian protection and respect for his rights under  Article  8)  at
   paragraphs 12 to 19. At paragraph  21,  he  summarised  the  respondent's
   bundle of documents by making explicit reference  to  the  Screening  and
   Asylum Interviews, the appellant's witness statement, and the Reasons for
   Refusal Letter. He summarised the  appellant's  bundle  of  documents  by
   making explicit reference to a further witness statement by the appellant
   and a statement by his wife, a  copy  law  report,  and  the  appellant's
   skeleton argument. In neither case did he make express reference to  what
   the appellant  claimed  were  official  Iranian  documents  that  he  had
   submitted as support for his claim. The  judge  thereafter  set  out  the
   appellant's oral testimony at paragraphs 24 to 27,  by  noting  that  the
   appellant had adopted his witness statement (the contents of which he did
   not summarise), the appellant's replies to some supplementary  questions-
   in-chief, and a detailed account of the  appellant's  replies  in  cross-
   examination by the Home Office Presenting Officer. He  followed  this  by
   setting out the oral testimony of the appellant's  wife  in  like  manner
   [paragraphs 29 and 30].  At paragraph 37 and 54,  he  noted  (by  way  of
   "postscript") that the appellant's representatives had subsequently  sent
   him a written statement by an interpreter who had been present during the
   appellant's  oral  testimony,  and  who  alleged  that   the   Tribunal's
   interpreter had not accurately translated some of that testimony.  Having
   noted that this objection had not been raised at the hearing,  the  judge
   stated that he remained satisfied with the soundness of his findings  and
   his conclusions, and he found that the interpreter's claim was only being
   raised at this stage in an "attempt by them to frustrate the outcome  (in
   their anticipation  of  it  being  negative)".  Having  directed  himself
   appropriately in relation to the burden and standard of proof, as well as
   stating that he  had  placed  the  evidence  "into  the  context  of  the
   situation in Iran", the judge proceeded to give a total of 25 reasons for
   why he did not find the appellant's account credible [paragraphs 41,  45,
   and 47). Finally, at paragraph 48, the judge said  that  these  "negative
   credibility findings" led him to conclude as follows:

    I do not accept the appellant was arrested or detained on  any  of  the
    occasions mentioned (or released on bail) or that he was (or is or ever
    has been) of any interest to the Iranian authorities or that he  exited
    Iran illegally, or that the documents  submitted  listed  at  paragraph
    8(a) to 8(p) of the Refusal Letter dated 9/12/2013 are genuine or  that
    reliance can properly be placed thereon in the round (Tanveer Ahmed)

The grounds of appeal

16. The grounds of appeal are extremely lengthy and I intend  no  disrespect
   in suggesting that they may be summarised as follows. Firstly, the  judge
   failed to  direct  himself  or  apply  the  quadripartite  assessment  of
   credibility  in  asylum  claims  that  was  approved  by  Brooke  LJ   in
   Karanakaran v SSHD [2002] 3 All E R 449. Instead,  the  judge  improperly
   adopted "a simple binary position". Secondly, the judge failed to give  a
   reasoned  consideration  of  the  background  evidence,  especially  that
   relating to the raping of prisoners in Iranian jails. Thirdly, the  judge
   had provided a very cursory assessment of the appellant's documents,  and
   had put "the cart before the horse" in assessing the credibility  of  the
   appellant's account before dismissing  those  documents  as  unworthy  of
   further consideration. Fourthly, the cursory reference to the appellant's
   case, followed by a detailed recitation of that of the  respondent,  gave
   an appearance of bias in the judge's determination of the appeal.

17. I am not persuaded that the first two grounds of appeal have  merit.  So
   far as the first ground is concerned, the quadripartite analysis  of  the
   assessment of evidence (that which  is  certainly  true,  that  which  is
   probably true, that which is possibly true, and that which is not true at
   all)  was  not  intended  to  provide  a  prescriptive  approach  to  the
   evaluation of evidence. Thus, in Kaja v SSHD [1995] Imm AR  1,  in  which
   the quadripartite analysis of evidence was first propounded, the Tribunal
   was careful to say that the decision-maker may have to take account of  a
   whole bundle of disparate pieces of evidence which could fall into one or
   more of the four categories. Moreover, the  judgement  of  Brooke  LJ  in
   Karanakaran suggests that the so-called  'binary  approach'  is  in  fact
   appropriate:

         "This approach does not  entail  the  decision-maker  (whether  the
         Secretary of State or an  adjudicator  or  the  Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal itself) purporting to find "proved" facts, whether past or
         present,  about  which  it  is  satisfied   on   the   balance   of
         probabilities. What it does mean, on the other  hand,  is  that  it
         must not exclude any matters from  its  consideration  when  it  is
         assessing the future unless it feels that  it  can  safely  discard
         them because it has no real doubt that they did not in  fact  occur
         (or, indeed, that they are not occurring at present). Similarly, if
         an applicant contends that relevant matters  did  not  happen,  the
         decision-maker should not exclude the possibility that they did not
         happen (although believing that they probably did) unless it has no
         real doubt that they did in fact happen."

   This approach no doubt reflects the fact that the first three  categories
   of evidence all fall to be counted in  the  appellant's  favour,  whereas
   only the fourth category of evidence can safely be discounted. The  judge
   was thus in my view entitled, in principle  at  least,  to  discount  the
   entirety of the appellant's account on the basis that  he  had  "no  real
   doubt" that none of the events described therein had in fact occurred.

18. So far as the second ground of appeal is concerned, it is  true  to  say
   that the judge made only a general reference to  the  background  country
   information at paragraph 45 of his determination. However,  the  evidence
   that the incidence of rape in Iranian prisons had become something  of  a
   political issue in that country could only  have  taken  the  appellant's
   case so far. Thus, even if  (as  he  should  have  done)  the  judge  had
   acknowledged that the appellant's  account  of  his  involvement  in  the
   campaign against the rape of prisoners  was  consistent  with  background
   country information, he would still have been entitled to disbelieve that
   account for other reasons. It would have been  open  to  the  judge,  for
   example, to conclude that the appellant had weaved a  fictitious  account
   around events which had almost certainly occurred, but in  which  he  had
   not been involved.

19. However, I am satisfied that the third and fourth grounds are made  out.
   The third ground of appeal (the judge's perfunctory consideration of  the
   appellant's  numerous  documents)  may  in  some  ways  be  viewed  as  a
   particular example of the complaint in the fourth  ground,  namely,  that
   the judge's determination gave an appearance of bias. I  shall  therefore
   consider these grounds together.

20. The test for apparent bias was laid  down  by  the  House  of  Lords  in
   Magill v Porter [2002] 2 AC 357. The question I have to ask myself is:

         "whether the fair-minded observer,  having  considered  the  facts,
         would conclude that there was a real possibility that the  tribunal
         was biased".

21. Mr Jack argued that the judge had demonstrated that he fully  considered
   the appellant's account by (a) incorporating it into his determination by
   reference to the appellants Screening and  Asylum  Interviews  [paragraph
   4], and (b) reciting the oral testimony of the appellant  [paragraphs  25
   and 26]. However, the fair minded observer may well wonder why the  judge
   felt able to summarise the appellant's case in a single sentence, without
   any reference at all to his narrative, and yet at the same time  felt  it
   necessary to spell out, in  considerable  detail,  the  entirety  of  the
   respondent's case as it  appears  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.
   Furthermore, the judge's recitation of the appellants oral testimony (and
   that of his wife) involved nothing more than  the  observation  that  the
   appellant had adopted his witness statement, a description of the replies
   that the appellant had given to a few supplementary  questions  that  had
   been asked of him by his representative, and a  detailed  description  of
   Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  cross-examination.  The  fair-minded
   observer would not in my view have been able to conclude from  this  that
   the Tribunal had given proper consideration to the appellant's case,  and
   would thus have concluded that there was a real  possibility  that  there
   had been bias in the determination of his appeal.  If  an  appearance  of
   bias is to be avoided, it is essential that the case of the  unsuccessful
   party is fully considered, if not that of the successful party.

22. Essentially the same problems arise from the judge's  treatment  of  the
   appellant's documents. At no stage did he attempt to summarise the nature
   of those documents, still less to examine  their  contents.  Instead,  he
   simply cross-referred the reader  to  a  paragraph  in  the  Reasons  for
   Refusal Letter in which those documents  are  listed,  before  dismissing
   their worth in less than one half of one sentence, at paragraph 48 of his
   determination. Such a cavalier  approach  to  the  appellant's  documents
   would also, in my judgement, lead a fair-minded observer to conclude that
   there had been a real risk of bias in the determination of the appeal.

23. I am further satisfied that the judge put the 'cart  before  the  horse'
   when deciding to attach no weight to the appellant's documents. He stated
   that he had considered the documents "in the round". However, it is clear
   from the structure of his determination  that  he  had  in  fact  already
   determined all the facts against the appellant, prior to concluding  that
   no weight attached to his documents. That approach contrasts starkly with
   the detailed evaluation of those documents that  was  undertaken  by  the
   decision-maker, and was not in any sense redeemed by a passing  reference
   to the reported decision of Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] INLR 345.

24. I am therefore satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
   of this appeal must be set aside and that none of  its  findings  can  be
   preserved. The appellant is entitled to a first-instance determination of
   his appeal that is manifestly fair  and  unbiased,  and  I  am  therefore
   satisfied that this  is an appropriate case in which to remit the  matter
   to a judge of the First-tier Tribunal (other than Judge Wright) for it to
   be determined afresh. Enquiries at the relevant hearing  centre  indicate
   that this can be accommodated on the 15th December 2014.

Decision

25. The appeal is allowed. The decision to dismiss the appeal is  set  aside
   and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Anonymity directed





Signed                                  Date

David Kelly


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


