
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11302/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2017                         |On 22 January 2018            |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE GOSS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     hae
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chahan, Counsel instructed by Immigration
Solutions Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal.    That   decision   was
    challenged by the appellant and permission was granted to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  At a hearing  on  15  February  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin found an error of law stating:-

         "So far as the judge's findings in relation to asylum are concerned
         the adverse credibility  findings  have  not  met  any  significant
         challenge and indeed reading the judgment as a whole  it  is  clear
         that there are numerous well-reasoned adverse credibility  findings
         as to the asylum claim itself and therefore  those  are  preserved.
         Accordingly the sole outstanding issue is  Article  15(c)  and  for
         that reason the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside
         with all findings preserved save the decision under Article  815(c)
         which shall be re-decided in the Upper Tribunal."

2.   Since then there has been a decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    issue of the Article 15(c) risk in Libya ZMM (Article 15(c))  Libya  CG
    [2017] UKUT 263.  In light of that and in light of  the  concession  by
    the Secretary of State that  she  is  not  contesting  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal should not follow ZMM we are satisfied that the appeal  should
    be allowed on the basis that there is a risk to the appellant such that
    the violence in Libya has reached such a  high  level  that  there  are
    substantial grounds shown for believing that he as a returning civilian
    would solely on account of his presence in that country and accordingly
    the appeal must be allowed on that  basis  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds only.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds only

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
