
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11399/2014
                                                               IA/01263/2015
                                                               IA/01266/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th June, 2016                            |On 10th August 2016           |
|Signed 7th July, 2016                         |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       w h H (FIRST NAMED RESPONDENT)
                        S L (second named respondent)
                         J L (THRD NAMED RESPONDENT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz
For the Respondent:    Ms Sarah Rogers, of Immigration Advice Centre (for
the first respondent)
     No representation for the second and third named respondents


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to  her  as  being
    "the claimant".

2.   The  first  named  respondent  is  the  husband  of  the  second  named
    respondent. The second named named respondent  is  the  mother  of  the
    third named respondent.

3.   All three respondents are citizens of the People's Republic  of  China.
    The first named respondent was born on [ ] 1985.  He  claimed  to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom in September 2011, and claimed asylum  on
    15th November, 2013.  His claim to asylum was refused by the  claimant,
    who made a decision to remove the respondent as an illegal  entrant  by
    way of directions under paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of  Schedule  2  of  the
    1971 Immigration Act.

4.   The second named respondent was born on [ ] 1983.  She  and  the  first
    named appellant have a son, J, who was born on [ ] 2013 and E  who  was
    born on [ ] 2015, who are dependants. The first named respondent is not
    the biological father of the third  named  respondent,  but  the  third
    named respondent is the son of the second named respondent.

5.   The second and third named respondents  made  application  both  within
    and outside the Immigration Rules to vary their leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on 17th April 2014.  On 9th December, 2014 the  claimant
    refused both applications.  They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   Dealing first with the first named respondent,  when  he  received  the
    decision of the claimant refusing his application he  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cox.  Judge Cox allowed the first named respondent's appeal.

7.   However, in his determination, at paragraph 31 Judge Buster  Cox  makes
    it clear that following the conclusion of the  hearing  he  engaged  in
    internet research for information on the Chengguan and says that  as  a
    result, he is satisfied that the first named  respondent's  account  of
    the incident he claimed to have had with the Chengguan  was  consistent
    with background material.

8.   The claimant sought and obtained permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge's engaging in such independent research, amounted to  an
    error of law on the part of the judge.

9.   There were other challenges also, but at the hearing  before  me  today
    Miss Rogers indicated that she was not going to seek to persuade me  to
    uphold the determination which she agreed was flawed.  She  invited  me
    to find that the claimant had been denied a fair hearing and  to  remit
    the hearing for hearing afresh by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  by  a
    different judge.

10.  The Home Office Presenting Officer was content with that course.

11.  In relation to the first named respondent's appeal, I find  that  there
    was a material error of law on the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in considering evidence not presented to  him  by  either  party,
    without drawing that evidence to the  attention  of  both  parties  and
    seeking their submissions on it.  The judge has considered evidence  on
    which he has not heard submissions from either party  and  that  is  an
    error of law.  If he was intent on doing his own  research,  he  should
    have had the appeal relisted before him  and  supplied  copies  of  the
    evidence  he  had  found  to  the   parties   in   order   that   their
    representatives could have the opportunity to make whatever appropriate
    submissions they wanted to make on it. As a result,  I  have  concluded
    that his determination cannot stand and I set is aside.

The Second and Third Respondents

12.  Turning  now  to  the  second  and  third  respondents,  following  the
    Secretary of State's refusal of their application, they too appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  their  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer sitting in Bradford on  24th    September,  2015.
    In a determination promulgated by Judge Saffer on 28th September, 2015,
    the judge purported to dismiss both the respondents' appeals under  the
    Immigration Rules, but to allow both appeals on Article 8 grounds.

13.  Judge Saffer was aware that the first  named  respondent's  appeal  had
    already been heard by the First-tier Tribunal and had been allowed.

14.  The appellant sought permission to appeal, because in dealing with  the
    respondents' claims, he failed  to  apply  any  of  the  provisions  of
    Section 117 to the Article 8 assessment and failed to  give  sufficient
    reasons as to  why  the  appellant's  decision  was  considered  to  be
    disproportionate.

15.  In reading the determination it was also clear to me that Judge  Saffer
    appears to have allowed the appeals of the second and third respondents
    on the basis that earlier a judge had already allowed the appeal of the
    first named respondent.  His determination gives the appearance at  the
    very least of having been predicated on that basis.   Of course, I have
    already set aside the appeal of the first named respondent.

16.  At the hearing  before  me  the  second  and  third  named  respondents
    appeared in person unrepresented.

17.  Fortunately, I had the services of a Mandarin interpreter  and  ensured
    that he and the second named respondent could  understand  each  other.
    The second named respondent indicated  that  she  did  understand  some
    English.  The third named appellant and his mother had discussions with
    each other during the hearing.

18.  I explained the purpose of the hearing and that it had been alleged  by
    the Secretary  of  State  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge contained errors of law, such that  it  meant  that  his
    determination should be set aside.  I also explained that I had earlier
    set aside the determination in respect of the first  named  respondent.
    Given that the judge who heard the appeal of the second and third named
    respondents  had  proceeded  on  the  basis  that   the   first   named
    respondent's  appeal  had  been   allowed,   I   explained   that   the
    determination was defective and that I was being asked to set it aside.
      I  explained  that  the  claimant  believed  that  there  were  other
    difficulties with the determination also.

19.  The second named respondent told me that she was happy for  her  appeal
    and that of her son's appeal to be reheard with her  husband's  appeal.
    She had no comment to make on the alleged errors of law.   I  told  her
    that having read the determination and the grounds that I believed that
    there was merit in them and that the  determination  could  not  stand.
    She asked me to clarify who had made a mistake and I explained that  it
    was not being alleged that she had made a mistake but instead that  the
    judge had made a mistake.  She appeared to be happy with my explanation
    and with my proposed decision.  I explained that the appeals  would  be
    heard afresh by a different judge.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  second
    named respondent understood me throughout the hearing.

20.  I am satisfied that the determination of  Judge  Saffer  cannot  stand.
    He considered the appeals of the second and third  respondents  in  the
    light of decision of Judge Cox in the earlier appeal of the first named
    respondent.  He could not have known that the decision of Judge Cox was
    defective and was correct in the circumstances to apply Tanveer  Ahmed.
    Whilst the grounds  assert  that  the  judge  has  failed  properly  to
    consider the Article 8 claim  under  the  Immigration  Rules  first,  I
    believe that paragraphs 27, 28 and 29 demonstrate that in fact  he  did
    consider the entitlement of the respondents under the Immigration Rules
    and concluded that they did not fulfil any of them.

21.  At paragraph 30 of the determination the judge  noted  that  the  first
    respondent's appeal had been allowed and that unless that decision were
    to be set aside, he would not be required to leave the  United  Kingdom
    and the children,  if  they  were  to  remain  with  the  second  named
    respondent, would be separated from him for an indefinite  period.   He
    found that it would be in the best interests of the  family  to  remain
    together as a unit and would  be  disproportionate  to  interfere  with
    their family  life   despite  the  need  to  retain  the  integrity  of
    immigration control and the burden on the public purse.

22.  At paragraph 31 he said:

         "I therefore accept  that  there  are  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave outside the Rules and compelling  circumstances  not
         sufficiently  recognised  under  them  and  that  it  would  be   a
         disproportionate interference with the respect to  which  they  are
         entitled regarding their family life to require them to leave while
         [the first named respondent] is entitled to remain here."

23.  I believe that the judge has further erred in law by  failing  to  give
    adequate   reasons   as   to   why   the   appellant's   decision    is
    disproportionate.

24.  I have concluded that in order to prevent delay in disposing  of  these
    appeals the most appropriate course of action is for me to  remit  them
    for hearing afresh by the First-tier Tribunal by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Saffer.   They should be heard together,  the  parties  or  their
    representatives having already agreed to the appeals being  linked.   A
    Mandarin interpreter is required.

Summary of Decisions

25.  All three appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh before judges other than Judge Buster Cox and Judge Saffer.   It
    is respectfully suggested that three hours should be  allowed  for  the
    hearing of the appeal and that a Mandarin interpreter is required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
