
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11603/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |        Decision and Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                          |
|On 2nd October 2015                 |        On 14th October 2015         |
|                                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                           Mr MANDEEP SINGH SANDHA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:    Miss C H Bexson (counsel) instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. Despite what is said in the instance  of  the  decision
promulgated on 12 June 2015, no anonymity direction was made  previously  in
respect of this Appellant.  Having  considered  all  the  circumstances  and
evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Howard promulgated on  12  June  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3.  The Appellant was born on 30 September 1977 and is a national of India.

4. On 11 December 2014 the respondent decided to remove the  appellant  from
the UK. The appellant claimed that he has  established  family  and  private
life UK and that the respondent's decision is a  breach  of  his  article  8
ECHR rights.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Howard ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  8  July  2015  Judge  Lever  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "..... The judge had concluded that the interference with family  life
      would be of sufficient gravity to pass the earlier stage in Razgar. He
      appears to have looked little further in terms of proportionality than
      the contents of s. 117B and arguably by looking at family life  rather
      than simply private life in that context may  arguably  have  made  an
      error of law."

The Hearing

7. Ms Bexson, for the appellant adopted the terms of the grounds of  appeal,
and argued that the judge had focused entirely on section  117B  and  failed
to carry out an adequate assessment of proportionality.  She  told  me  that
although the judge accepts that a relationship exists between the  appellant
and his British citizen partner and her child,  the  judge  failed  to  take
proper account of the role the appellant plays in the life of his  partner's
child. She argued that the judge conflated private  life  and  family  life,
and in so  doing  failed  to  properly  carry  out  the  balancing  exercise
required when considering article 8 ECHR. She  relied  on  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 and  told  me  that
inadequate  consideration  was  given  to  section  55  of   the    Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 had been; she argued that conflicts  in
the judge's findings had not been properly resolved. She urged me  to  allow
the appeal.


8. Ms Everett for the respondent adopted the terms of the rule  24  response
dated 30 July 2015. She told  me  that  the  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law, and relied on the cases of AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]
UKUT  260  (IAC),    Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC),   and
Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  00415  (IAC).
It was her position that, on the evidence presented to  the  judge,  he  had
manifestly carried out an adequate  balancing  exercise.  She  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the judge's decision to stand.





Analysis

9. In Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with  Rules)  [2015]  UKUT  00415
(IAC) it was held that (i)  For courts and tribunals, the coming into  force
of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (ss.117A-D)
has not altered the need for a two-stage approach to Article 8 claims;  (ii)
. Ordinarily a court or  tribunal  will,  as  a  first  stage,  consider  an
appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules  that  set
out  substantive  conditions,  without  any  direct  reference  to  Part  5A
considerations. Such considerations have no direct application to  rules  of
this kind.  Part 5A considerations  only  have  direct  application  at  the
second stage of the Article 8 analysis. This method  of  approach  does  not
amount to according priority to  the  Rules  over  primary  legislation  but
rather of recognising their different functions.

10. In Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) it was held that (i)  Key
features of ss.117A-117D of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002 include the following: (a) judges  are  required  statutorily  to  take
into account a number of enumerated considerations. Sections  117A-117D  are
not, therefore, an a la carte menu of  considerations  that  it  is  at  the
discretion of the judge to apply or not apply.   Judges  are  duty-bound  to
"have regard" to the specified  considerations.  (b)  these  provisions  are
only expressed as being binding on a "court or tribunal".  It  may  be  that
the  Secretary  of  State  will  consider  it  in  the  interests  of   good
administration and consistency of decision-making on  Article  8  claims  at
all levels to have express regard to  ss.117A-117D  considerations  herself,
but she is not directly bound to do so. (c) whilst  expressed  in  mandatory
terms, the considerations specified are not expressed as  being  exhaustive:
note use of the phrase "in particular" in s.117A(2): " In  considering  the
public interest question, the court or tribunal must  (in  particular)  have
regard- ". (d) section 117B enumerates considerations  that  are  applicable
"in all cases", which must include foreign criminal cases. Thus when  s.117C
(which deals with foreign criminals) states that it  sets  out  "additional"
considerations that must mean considerations in addition to  those  set  out
in s.117B. (e) sections 117A-117D do  not  represent  any  kind  of  radical
departure from or "override" of previous case law on Article  8  so  far  as
concerns the need for a structured approach.  In  particular,  they  do  not
disturb the need for judges to ask themselves the five questions set out  in
Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   Sections  117A-117D  are  essentially  a  further
elaboration  of   Razgar's   question   5   which   is   essentially   about
proportionality and justifiability. (ii) It is not an error of law  to  fail
to refer to ss.117A-117D considerations if the judge has  applied  the  test
he or she was supposed to apply according to  its  terms;  what  matters  is
substance, not form.


11.  In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that
Parliament has now drawn a sharp distinction  between  any  period  of  time
during which a person has been in the UK "unlawfully",  and  any  period  of
time during which that person's immigration status  in  the  UK  was  merely
"precarious"; those who at any given  date  held  a  precarious  immigration
status must have held at that date an otherwise lawful  grant  of  leave  to
enter or to remain. A person's immigration status is "precarious"  if  their
continued presence in the UK  will  be  dependent  upon  their  obtaining  a
further grant of leave; in some circumstances it may also  be  that  even  a
person with indefinite leave  to  remain,  or  a  person  who  has  obtained
citizenship, enjoys a  status  that  is  "precarious"  either  because  that
status is revocable  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  a  result  of  their
deception, or because of their criminal conduct. In such  circumstances  the
person will be well aware that he  has  imperilled  his  status  and  cannot
viably claim thereafter that his status is other than precarious.

12. Between [12] and [17] the judge analyses  the  evidence  and  find  that
because of the  financial  requirements  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the
requirements of appendix FM. At [18] and [19] the judge considers  paragraph
276  ADE  and  concludes  at  [19]  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet   the
requirements of the immigration rules.

13. Between [20] and [22]  the  judge  finds  that  there  are  grounds  for
considering the appellant's article 8 ECHR rights out-with  the  immigration
rules. The judge then considers  the  five-step  test  contained  in  Razgar
before setting out section 117A and 117B of the 2002 act. He then  correctly
finds that there are more factors weighing against the appellant then  weigh
in his favour.

14. The judge's findings at [16]  &  [23]  indicate  that  he  accepts  that
family life exists within the meaning of article 8 for the appellant in  the
UK. It is clearly implicit in the  decision  that  the  judge  accepts  that
private life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR exists for  the  appellant
in the UK.

15. It would have been helpful  if  the  judge  had  clearly  separated  his
consideration of family life and private life, but that is no  more  than  a
stylistic criticism. The content of the decision  when  read  with  a  fair,
objective & impartial eye indicates that considerations of both  family  and
private life were at the forefront of the judge's mind. It is true that  the
judge used section 117 of the  2002  Act  as  the  prism  through  which  he
focused his assessment of proportionality, but that does not  amount  to  an
error of law.

16. A fair assessment of proportionality was carried out by the  judge  with
a careful eye on statutory considerations.

17. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  an
appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from
either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,  or
the  strength  of  his  financial   resources.   In   Forman   (ss   117A-C
considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  public
interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by  the  consideration
that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no time  been  a
financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is likely to  remain
so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where they  are
not present the public interest is fortified.

18. It is argued that the interests  of  the  appellant's  child  not  been
adequately considered, but the findings of the judge indicated that he  was
not satisfied that the appellant is in loco parentis.  The  effect  of  the
respondent's decision would separate the appellant from his partner and her
child, but the child would remain with his mother. The child's  life  would
be changed by the absence of  a  regular  visitor  to  his  home,  but  the
arrangements for his care, well-being, education and  health  would  remain
the same.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.


20.     It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to  give
too little weight or too much weight to a factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to  deal
with every factual issue under argument. Disagreement with  an  Immigrations
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law. I find that the Judge's determination when read  as  a  whole  set  out
findings that were  sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed  and  based  on
cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore find that no errors of law have been  established  and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





