
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11486/2012
     AA/00353/2013
     AA/00352/2013
     AA/00354/2013
     AA/11484/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 3rd September 2013                           |on 6th September 2013      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                       mrs HJMF, and her four children
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellants:    First 4 Appellants - Mr A Devlin, Advocate,
                    instructed by Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors

     5th Appellant - Mr R Gibb of Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are a mother and her  four  children,  all  citizens  of
    Iraq.  An anonymity direction is in place.

 2. The husband and father of the family is an Iraqi academic.  Around 2006
    to 2007 the family lived in Jordan, while the husband continued to work
    as a lecturer in Iraq.  They returned to Iraq in  December  2007.   The
    husband was accepted on a "scholarship rescue fund programme"  in  2008
    and continued working in Iraq until  he  secured  a  placement  at  the
    University of Glasgow in October 2010.  The appellants followed him  to
    Glasgow once they obtained visas in March 2011.  The Appellants'  visas
    expired on 24th September 2011 and were not renewed, but they continued
    to live in Glasgow.  The husband returned to Iraq to renew his visa  in
    November to December 2012.  On return to the UK he was  refused  entry.
    The reason appears to be  that  the  Appellants  had  by  then  claimed
    asylum, and he was thought to be seeking to enter  the  country  for  a
    purpose other than as stated in his visa.  He did not seek asylum,  but
    returned to Iraq.  He continues there in his academic post.

 3. The Appellants give a history of threats  and  various  incidents  from
    2004  onwards,  arising  mainly  from  the  husband's  position  as  an
    academic, and also because of the fifth Appellant  wearing  non-Islamic
    clothing.  They claim to be at risk of persecution  from  Ansar  Al-Haq
    and other militant or terrorist groups in Iraq.

 4. The Respondent refused the claim by letters dated 7th and 12th December
    2012.  The Respondent thought it unlikely that Ansar  Al-Haq  or  other
    militants would have an adverse interest in the Appellants, and did not
    find it credible  that  they  had  been  threatened  as  claimed.   The
    Respondent also considered that even if the claims were taken at  their
    highest they would fail on grounds of legal sufficiency of  protection,
    or  of  availability  of  internal  relocation.   The  Respondent  gave
    specific examples of another part of Baghdad; Doura,  Erbil,  Basra  or
    another area of southern or  central  Iraq;  or  the  Kurdish  Regional
    Government area (KRG).

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd dismissed the  Appellants'  appeals,  on
    all available grounds, by determination dated 8th April 2013.  The case
    was rejected essentially on  credibility  grounds,  although  there  is
    brief reference to internal relocation at paragraph 47.

 6. The Grounds of  Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the  first  four
    Appellants are set out in  ten  paragraphs.   The  first  paragraph  is
    introductory, and Mr Devlin referred to paragraphs 2 to 9 as Grounds  1
    to 8.

 7.  Separate  Grounds  of  Appeal  for  the  fifth  Appellant,  in   seven
    paragraphs, adopt the Grounds of Appeal of the other Appellants and add
    criticism of findings about her  purchase  of  a  t-shirt.   They  also
    allege absence of protection due to the links between  the  authorities
    and terrorist organisations; absence  of  reasoning  for  declining  to
    accept that the fifth Appellant received threats; and failure  to  have
    regard to an expert report stating  the  Appellants'  testimony  to  be
    plausible  in  accordance  with  the  historical   record   and   Iraqi
    conditions, including targeting of the families of academics.

 8. Further to paragraph 2/Ground  1,  directed  to  paragraph  35  of  the
    determination, Mr Devlin submitted that the legal error here was of the
    same nature as brought out by most of  the  grounds,  failure  to  take
    account  of  all  relevant  considerations.    The   judge   found   it
    inconceivable that the husband would have taken  two  years  and  eight
    months to leave Iraq and continue to work at the  same  university  and
    live at the same address if there were any threat.  This overlooked his
    explanation that it took substantial time, for administrative  reasons,
    to find a host institution and an  academic  post  abroad.   The  judge
    overlooked a letter sent by the representatives of the Appellants after
    asylum interview, setting out those  circumstances.   That  explanation
    showed that the husband "had not simply sat by and done nothing".

 9. Paragraph 3/Ground 2 is directed to paragraph 36.  Mr Devlin said  that
    the judge plainly found it adverse that threats were  not  reported  to
    the authorities, and that there was no documentary evidence of a threat
    from students being notified to  the  Dean  of  the  University.   This
    overlooked the evidence that the first Appellant considered the  police
    of no use due to their links to terrorist  organisations,  and  that  a
    report would increase their problems, a belief supported by  background
    evidence.  Therefore, the conclusion could not be reasonably drawn from
    absence of reporting that there was absence of risk.  The judge  failed
    to take into account the expert report by  Dr  George  on  this  issue,
    which relied on information from UNHCR, as set out in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  To draw an adverse inference also amounted to the legal  error
    of requiring corroboration.

10. On paragraph 4/Ground 3, directed to paragraph 37 of the determination,
    Mr Devlin submitted that the judge erred in fact by founding  on  delay
    by the Appellants in seeking visas until four months after the  husband
    came to the UK.   This  was  not  correct,  because  documents  in  the
    Respondent's  bundle  showed  that  applications  were  first  made  in
    September 2010.

11.  Paragraph 5/ground 4 complains of error at paragraph 39 in founding on
    the husband returning to Iraq to renew  his  visa  in  late  2011/early
    2012, because the renewal was granted in Jordan.

12. Paragraph 6/ground 5 attacks the finding at paragraph 41 that there was
    no reasonable explanation of the Appellants' delay in claiming  asylum.
    The ground says that the first Appellant explained why her husband  was
    reluctant to claim, and that  she  had  not  known  that  she  and  the
    children could claim in their own right.  The explanation  was  capable
    of being found a reasonable one, and it was therefore an error  not  to
    mention it.

13. As to paragraph 7/Ground 6, going to paragraph 45 of the determination,
    Mr Devlin submitted that the judge fell into conjecture and speculation
    in finding that the husband would not  have  put  his  academic  career
    ahead of the safety of himself and his family.

14. As to paragraph 8/Ground 7, Mr Devlin submitted that  at  paragraph  46
    the judge erred in declining to accept that the family of any  academic
    in Iraq was at real risk, whereas this was a proposition  supported  by
    the Respondent's Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,  by  country
    guidance, and by the expert report of Dr George.

15. Paragraph 9/Ground 8 also attack  paragraph  46  of  the  determination
    insofar as  it  reaches  a  finding  on  internal  flight.   Mr  Devlin
    submitted that the Appellants could not relocate to the KRG  without  a
    Sponsor.  Although the Appellants had relatives in the KRG it  did  not
    appear that they could sponsor the Appellants, as they were  themselves
    Arabs who had been sponsored for residence in the KRG.   The  essential
    point is that there would be difficulty for the Appellants in obtaining
    sponsorship, without which internal relocation would not  be  available
    to them.  Mr Devlin acknowledged that this  challenge  became  relevant
    only if the credibility challenges were also established.

16. Mr Gibb for the fifth Appellant submitted that the  additional  factors
    in her case were that she might be required  to  conceal  her  personal
    identity through conformity to norms such as the hijab and other  dress
    rules.  Gender is an immutable characteristic.

17. I observed that it was difficult to see how  the  case  for  the  fifth
    Appellant was to be made out in law, even if her allegations  had  been
    found credible.  Mr Gibb submitted that her case was based on an actual
    threat in her individual case from terrorist groups.

18. Mr Matthews submitted that paragraph 35  of  the  determination  was  a
    rational resolution of a major credibility point, and that the  grounds
    showed no error therein.  Paragraph 36 of  the  determination  narrated
    that threats were not reported to the authorities and that there was no
    documentary evidence of  the  particular  threat  from  students.   The
    narration was accurate and  could  give  rise  to  no  complaint.   The
    background evidence showed problems in the police, but just because all
    background evidence was not recited did not mean that the judge was not
    well aware of it.  There is no obligation to  set  out  every  item  of
    evidence.  The nature of the Iraqi police is well-established  and  was
    not  contested  at  the  hearing.   That  evidence  did  not  compel  a
    conclusion that reporting the incidents would have adverse consequences
    for the Appellants.  The ground was only disagreement  with  a  factual
    finding.  There was  no  error  of  imposing  a  legal  requirement  of
    corroboration, particularly in a case where  the  principal  object  of
    alleged persecution, the husband, is living in Iraq and there would  be
    no difficulty in securing evidence through  him.   Although  Mr  Devlin
    argued to the contrary, an  absence  of  corroborating  evidence  which
    should readily be available can detract from credibility.  There was  a
    factual error at paragraph 37, but that was not material to the overall
    conclusions.  There was also error at paragraph  39  over  whether  the
    husband returned to Iraq at the end of 2011, but Mr Devlin now accepted
    that was not material.  Paragraph 6/Ground 5, going  to  paragraph  41,
    showed only disagreement with conclusions properly reached.  The  judge
    was not required to set out slavishly all evidence before him, and said
    that no "reasonable explanation" had been given.  That showed  that  he
    had in mind that an explanation had been offered.  He was  entitled  to
    reject it.  Paragraph 7/Ground 6,  going  to  paragraph  45,  was  only
    another disagreement.  At paragraph 46 of the determination, the report
    by Dr George did not require the  conclusion  by  the  judge  that  all
    academics were at risk, let alone their families.  The Appellants could
    not succeed simply by showing that they were members of the  family  of
    an Iraqi academic.  The principal findings in  the  determination  were
    all sound.  The credibility challenges were not made out.  The evidence
    about entry to the KRG did  not  state  that  the  Sponsor  had  to  be
    Kurdish, and the Appellants accepted they had family there.  They could
    presumably obtain sponsorship from the same sources as their  relatives
    had.  The separate submission regarding the fifth Appellant  went  much
    too far.  She had not come near to making  out  a  case  based  on  her
    preference for western-style clothing.  In any event,  the  credibility
    of her particular claims had rightly been rejected.

19. Mr Devlin in response said that  although  he  accepted  there  was  no
    obligation on a judge slavishly to recite all matters, the  error  here
    was failure to mention relevant considerations.  Those did have  to  be
    set out, and if not, there was a clear implication that they  were  not
    taken into account.  On Ground 1, the history of  threats  against  the
    Appellants was that they had not suffered any incidents from 2008, when
    they returned from Jordan, until 2010, when they were  preparing  again
    to leave Iraq.  In that context, they were making efforts to leave  and
    the apparent delay of two years  eight  months  should  be  seen  in  a
    different light.  On Ground 2, the issue was again not now whether  the
    Appellants' explanation was entitled to credit, but whether it had been
    taken into account.  TK Burundi  was  authority  that  the  absence  of
    documentary corroboration could not go to the credibility of  evidence,
    only to the weight to be given to it.   Ground 3 had been  acknowledged
    to be sound.  On Ground 5, the Presenting  Officer  correctly  observed
    that judge said no reasonable explanation had  been  offered,  but  the
    error remained  of  failing  to  give  any  reason  for  rejecting  the
    explanation.  It  was  not  an  obviously  incredible  one.   Paragraph
    7/Ground 6 showed more than disagreement, because the judge  failed  to
    evaluate the circumstances of  the  husband  in  reaching  his  adverse
    conclusion.   As  to  paragraph  8/Ground  7  the  judge  could   reach
    conclusions which differed from those of Dr George, but he had to  give
    reasons for doing so.  The whole thrust of  the  appeal  was  that  the
    judge  reached   his   conclusions   out   of   context   of   relevant
    considerations.

20. Mr Gibb submitted that the fifth Appellant could have a  discrete  case
    along the lines of HJ and HT [to which no reference was made].  He said
    that he recalled some authority that females from Somalia might  be  at
    risk in similar circumstances from extremists, who  were  of  much  the
    same nature as those in Iraq.  A more significant error was in founding
    on non-production of the threatening letter from the  school.   As  the
    fifth Appellant had said  that  she  handed  the  letter  to  her  head
    teacher, that amounted  to  the  error  of  seeking  corroboration.   I
    observed that if there  were  any  error  therein,  it  was  not  in  a
    misconception that there is a legal requirement for corroboration,  but
    in misapprehending the nature of the case put.

21. I reserved my determination.

22. Although Mr Devlin categorised his grounds  as  disclosing  failure  to
    take account of material matters, there was no  material  matter  which
    the Judge failed to resolve.  The issues raised seem more of the nature
    of attacks on the adequacy of  reasoning,  while  trying  to  import  a
    requirement to deal with every facet of the evidence.  I remind  myself
    of some authorities on challenges to adequacy of reasoning.

23. The dictum of Lord  President  Emslie  in  Wordie  Property  Co  Ltd  v
    Secretary of State for Scotland 1984 SLT 345 at 348 may be taken  as  a
    starting point:

         The decision must, in short, leave  the  informed  reader  and  the
         court in no real and substantial doubt as what the reasons  for  it
         were and what were the material considerations that were taken into
         account in reaching it.

24. The Court of Appeal in England and Wales gave  general  guidance  in  R
    (Iran) and Others v SSHD [2005] Imm AR 435  at  542.   (The  regulatory
    framework has since changed, but the principles remain the same.)
   1. ... Adjudicators were under an obligation to give  reasons  for  their
      decisions  (see  reg  53  of  the  Immigration  and   Asylum   Appeals
      (Procedure) Regulations 2003), so that a breach of that obligation may
      amount  to  an  error  of  law.  However,  unjustified  complaints  by
      practitioners that are based on an alleged failure to give reasons, or
      adequate reasons, are seen far too often.  The  leading  decisions  of
      this court on this topic are now Eagil Trust  Co  Ltd  v  Pigott-Brown
      [1985] 3 All ER 119 and English v Emery Reimbold & Strick  Ltd  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 605, [2002] 1 WLR 2409. We will adapt what was said in  those
      two cases for the purposes of illustrating the relationship between an
      adjudicator and the IAT. In the former Griffiths LJ said at p 122:
      "[An adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient detail to show
      the [IAT] the principles on which  he has acted and the  reasons  that
      have led him to his decision. They need not  be  elaborate.  I  cannot
      stress too strongly that there is no  duty  on  [an  adjudicator],  in
      giving his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument  presented  by  [an
      advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient  if  what  he  says
      shows the parties and, if need be, the [IAT], the basis  on  which  he
      has acted, and if it be that the [adjudicator] has not dealt with some
      particular argument but it can be seen that there are grounds on which
      he would have been entitled to reject it, [the IAT] should assume that
      he acted on those grounds unless the appellant can point to convincing
      reasons leading to a contrary conclusion."
   1. In English Lord Phillips MR said at para 19:

      "[I]f the appellate process is to work  satisfactorily,  the  judgment
      must enable the [IAT] to understand why the [adjudicator] reached  his
      decision. This does not mean that every factor which weighed with  the
      [adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be  identified
      and explained. But the issues the resolution of which  were  vital  to
      the [adjudicator]'s conclusion should be identified and the manner  in
      which he resolved them explained. It is  not  possible  to  provide  a
      template for this process. It need not involve a lengthy judgment.  It
      does require the [adjudicator] to identify and  record  those  matters
      which were critical to his decision. If the critical issue was one  of
      fact, it may be enough to  say  that  one  witness  was  preferred  to
      another because the one manifestly had a clearer recollection  of  the
      material facts or the other gave answers which demonstrated  that  his
      recollection could not be relied upon."

25. I also have regard to HA v SSHD [2007] CSIH 65, in particular paragraph
    17:

         In the light of the cases cited to us  it  is  convenient  at  this
         stage to formulate some propositions  about  the  circumstances  in
         which an immigration judge's decision on a matter of credibility or
         plausibility  may  be  held  to  disclose  an  error  of  law.  The
         credibility of an asylum-seeker's account is primarily  a  question
         of fact, and the determination of that question of  fact  has  been
         entrusted by Parliament to the immigration judge  (Esen,  paragraph
         21). This court may not  interfere  with  the  immigration  judge's
         decision on a matter of credibility simply because on the  evidence
         it would, if it had been the fact-finder, have come to a  different
         conclusion (Reid, per Lord Clyde at 41H). But  if  the  immigration
         judge's decision on credibility discloses an error of  law  falling
         within the range identified by Lord Clyde  in  the  passage  quoted
         above from Reid, that error is open to correction by this court. If
         a decision on credibility is one which depends for its validity  on
         the acceptance of other contradictory facts or inference from  such
         facts, it will be erroneous in point of law  if  the  contradictory
         position is not supported by any, or sufficient,  evidence,  or  is
         based on conjecture or speculation (Wani, paragraph 24, quoted with
         approval in HK at paragraph 30). A bare assertion of  incredibility
         or implausibility may disclose error of law; an  immigration  judge
         must give reasons for his decisions on credibility and plausibility
         (Esen, paragraph 21). In reaching conclusions  on  credibility  and
         plausibility an immigration judge may draw on his common sense  and
         his ability, as a practical and informed person, to  identify  what
         is, and what is not, plausible  (Wani,  paragraph  24,  page  883L,
         quoted with approval in HK at paragraph 30 and in Esen at paragraph
         21). Credibility, however, is an issue to  be  handled  with  great
         care and sensitivity to cultural differences (Esen, paragraph  21),
         and  reliance  on  inherent  improbability  may  be  dangerous   or
         inappropriate where the conduct in question has taken  place  in  a
         society whose culture and customs are very different from those  in
         the United Kingdom (HK at paragraph 29). There will be cases  where
         actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if  judged  by   domestic
         standards may not merit rejection on that  ground  when  considered
         within the context  of  the  asylum-seeker's  social  and  cultural
         background (Wani, paragraph 24, page 883I, quoted with approval  in
         HK at paragraph 30). An immigration judge's decision on credibility
         or implausibility may, we conclude, disclose an error of law if, on
         examination of the reasons  given  for  his  decision,  it  appears
         either that he  has  failed  to  take  into  account  the  relevant
         consideration that the probability of the asylum-seeker's narrative
         may be affected by its cultural context, or has failed  to  explain
         the part played in his decision by consideration of  that  context,
         or has based his conclusion on speculation or conjecture.

26. On Ground 1,  I  commented  during  submissions  that  the  explanation
    offered went to the time taken to find an academic opportunity  abroad,
    not to any difficulty in escaping from danger.  Mr Devlin replied  that
    the husband had indeed been trying to leave  Iraq  and  that  a  person
    might show fortitude in the face of adversity, but that  could  not  be
    held adverse to credibility.  It might have been open to the  judge  to
    conclude as he did, but there was a legal  error  of  failing  to  take
    account of all material points in coming to that decision.

27. I see no error in view the judge took.  It was good  common  sense.   A
    slow process of finding an academic placement is  an  explanation  only
    worth mentioning to show how feeble it is.  The Appellants did not rely
    on cultural or other evidence that Iraqi academics are more heedless of
    the safety of their families than Scottish lawyers or anybody else.

28. No direct reference was made to TK  Burundi.   Its  case  reference  is
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40.  Thomas LJ, with whom  Moore-Bick  and  Waller  LJJ
    agreed, said at paragraph 21:

         The  circumstances  of  this  case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
         independent supporting evidence which  is  available  from  persons
         subject to this jurisdiction should be provided  wherever  possible
         and the need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious  approach
         to the  evidence  of  an  appellant  where  independent  supporting
         evidence, as it was in this case, is readily available within  this
         jurisdiction, but not provided. It follows that where  a  Judge  in
         assessing  credibility  relies  on  the  fact  that  there  is   no
         independent supporting evidence where there  should  be  supporting
         evidence and there is no credible account for its  absence  commits
         no error of law when he relies  on  that  fact  for  rejecting  the
         account of an appellant.

29. I cannot see any meaningful or useful distinction between matters which
    may be adverse to credibility and matters which  can  go  only  to  the
    weight of evidence.  TK does not appear to me to support the submission
    by Mr Devlin.  If anything, it shows that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    give  some  significance  to  absence  of  documentary   corroboration,
    although I do not think that was a major factor in his decision.

30. Mr Matthews acknowledged that the Judge went wrong on the  question  of
    when the appellants sought visas (Ground 3/paragraph  4).   Looking  at
    the determination again after the hearing, I observe that at  paragraph
    10 the judge set out that the Appellants did  not  follow  the  husband
    immediately because they were refused visas in  September  2010,  after
    which they remained in Baghdad until they obtained visas in March 2011.
     Either the judge forgot about this when he returned to the  matter  at
    paragraph 37, or he had in mind that they  might  have  reapplied  more
    promptly, or that they would not have remained in  Baghdad  if  at  any
    real risk.  However, it is safest to regard this as  an  error  in  the
    determination, and to consider whether it can survive excision  of  the
    point.

31. As to paragraph 5/ground 4 I pointed out that although the judge erred,
    the fact is that the husband has returned to Iraq twice at  least,  and
    in December 2012 was returned there from the  UK  without  choosing  to
    make an asylum claim.  This error could therefore hardly be said to  be
    material.  Mr Devlin  accepted  that  observation,  and  withdrew  that
    ground.

32. Mr Gibb developed no meaningful separate case for the  fifth  Appellant
    either on her individual claims, or by reference to  authority,  or  by
    analysis of legal error.  There is nothing to establish that  her  case
    required any more consideration from the judge  than  it  received,  or
    that she might have succeeded where the other Appellants failed.

33. A distinction has to be  drawn  between  those  appeals  which  involve
    questions of  law  and  those  which  are  essentially  argument  about
    findings of fact, presented in some language  of  legal  error.   Fault
    should not be found by burrowing out areas of the evidence  which  have
    been dealt with less fully than others, and presenting that as a  legal
    flaw.  The Grounds in this case do not amount to more than a series  of
    factual disagreements, and those disagreements which have been found to
    have  any  substance  are  on  unimportant  points.   Reading  the  FtT
    determination fairly and as a whole, it makes it clear  enough  to  the
    Appellants and any other reader why their evidence has not  been  found
    probative in its essential features.



34. There is little reason to think that the Appellants might be  kept  out
    of the KRG by difficulty of finding a sponsor, but even if  they  were,
    that would be far from decisive.  The challenge on internal  relocation
    overlooks that the Respondent's decisions are extensively based on  the
    possibility of relocation throughout the rest of Iraq,  including  even
    Baghdad, not only in the KRG.   The  Appellants  have  not  shown  risk
    elsewhere in  the  country,  and  have  not  refuted  the  Respondent's
    thorough analysis of availability of internal relocation.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  said  little  about  it,  the  Appellants  having
    focussed on credibility, but this was a case plainly defeated upon  the
    alternative of internal relocation, an issue from which the  Appellants
    sought to shift the focus.

35. No error has been shown such as to require  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be set aside, and it shall stand.




[pic]

6 September 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
