

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/11203/2014
                                                               AA/11222/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2016             |On 8 April 2016                 |
|Prepared on 1 March 2016        |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between
                                    M. G.
                                    S. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are nationals of Uganda, who entered  the  UK
           as visitors, accompanied by two adults, Mr & Mrs S, who were
           represented to be their parents when applications  had  been
           made on the Appellants' behalf for entry  clearance  to  the
           UK.
        2. The Appellants became overstayers on  27  April  2011.  Each
           claimed asylum on 25 November  2011  as  a  child  giving  a
           different name to that under which  they  had  been  granted
           entry clearance; the family name of S was simply dropped.
        3. The Appellants' applications were refused by the  Respondent
           on 4 February 2012, because the  accounts  upon  which  they
           were based were rejected as untrue, although they were  then
           each granted periods of DLR until 21  October  2013  because
           the Respondent did accept that they were both children.
        4. Each of the Appellants applied to  vary  their  leave  on  2
           October 2013. Those applications were refused on 3  December
           2014, and in consequence  removal  decisions  were  made  in
           relation to both of them.
        5.  The  Appellants  both  appealed  against  the   immigration
           decisions made in  relation  to  them.  Their  appeals  were
           linked for hearing together, since they raised common issues
           of fact, and they were heard together on  29  January  2015,
           and allowed on  Article  8  grounds  by  decision  of  Judge
           Manchester, promulgated on 27 February 2015, with all of the
           other grounds of appeal dismissed.
        6. The Respondent's application to the First Tier Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal the Article  8  decision  raised  three
           complaints, and that application was granted  by  Designated
           Judge McClure  on  1  May  2015  on  the  basis  there  were
           inconsistencies in the conclusions that  had  been  reached,
           and conflicts in the evidence that he had failed to resolve.
           As nationals of Uganda  with  relatives  in  Uganda  it  was
           arguable the Judge had failed to take the  correct  approach
           to the assessment of the proportionality of their removal.
        7. The Appellants filed no Rule 24 Notice.
        8. Thus the matter comes before me.


      The hearing
        9. When the appeal was called on  for  hearing  Mr  Mangion  on
           behalf of the Respondent  sought  permission  to  amend  the
           grounds of appeal  so  as  to  adopt  the  contents  of  the
           document he had served, and filed, by fax the previous  day.
           Mr Selway for the Appellants opposed that amendment  on  the
           basis that it was far too late for the Respondent to do  so.
           He accepted however that he had been given adequate time  to
           consider the contents of the document in  question,  and  he
           conceded that if the document had  simply  been  entitled  a
           skeleton argument that he could have had no objection to the
           Respondent  relying  upon  its  content.   Specifically   he
           accepted that fairness did not require the  hearing  of  the
           appeals to be adjourned in the event that I  were  to  grant
           permission to amend the grounds.
       10. I am satisfied that Mr  Selway  was  correct  to  take  that
           approach, because as indicated  at  the  hearing  I  am  not
           satisfied that the  document  in  question  does  raise  new
           grounds of  appeal.  It  is  in  reality  no  more  than  an
           expansion  and  explanation  of  those  that   were   always
           advanced. I need say no more about it, save to  record  that
           if I am wrong in that analysis of its content, I would  have
           granted permission to amend. In any event both parties  made
           oral submissions in relation to its content.


      The case advanced by the Appellants
       11. In 2011 the Appellants each made an application to  the  ECO
           in Nairobi for leave to enter the UK for the purposes  of  a
           holiday, in which it was asserted  they  would  travel  with
           their sibling and their parents, and visit the  UK  for  one
           week. In their visa applications (which  the  Tribunal  file
           records were placed  in  evidence  at  the  hearing  by  the
           Respondent) it was declared that they were the  children  of
           Mr & Mrs S, and an address was given at which the family had
           lived for the preceding 16 years.  Their  visa  applications
           were made in names which included the family name of S,  and
           they were supported with  legitimate  Ugandan  passports  in
           those names. The visa applications made by Mr & Mrs S  named
           the Appellants as  but  two  of  their  own  four  dependent
           children, and they had  gone  on  to  give  details  of  the
           businesses and investment assets from which they  were  said
           to derive a significant income.
       12. The Judge noted that this was not the first  visa  that  had
           been issued to A2 to enter the UK [73]. An earlier visa  had
           also been issued to allow her to visit the UK in 2009 in the
           company of Mr & Mrs S, who  were  then  also  named  as  her
           parents. It had been issued in the same name as  that  under
           which A2 had made her  2011  application.  The  Respondent's
           record of the decision upon the 2009 application (which  the
           Judge noted had been placed in evidence at  the  hearing  by
           the Respondent) recorded that her birth certificate had been
           inspected by the ECO in the course of  processing  the  2009
           application. The Judge also noted that  at  some  stage  the
           Appellants had produced a Ugandan identity card issued to A1
           which recorded Mr & Mrs S as his parents.
       13. The Judge concluded that passports in the full  names  given
           by the Appellants  in  their  entry  clearance  applications
           (including the family name S), which recorded that Mr &  Mrs
           S were their parents, were produced  to  the  Respondent  in
           support  of  their  applications  for  entry  clearance.  He
           concluded that the appropriate background checks would  have
           been carried out by the ECO  before  visas  were  issued  to
           either of the Appellants [72].
       14. In the course  of  the  asylum  applications  they  made  in
           November 2011, and renewed in October 2013,  the  Appellants
           gave shortened names for themselves,  in  which  the  family
           name of S was omitted from  the  names  in  which  they  had
           applied for entry clearance, and in which passports had been
           issued to them. Each specifically denied that  Mr  &  Mrs  S
           were their parents. Each claimed to have  been  orphaned  in
           2004. Although they accepted that they had  been  cared  for
           subsequently by Mr & Mrs  S,  they  denied  that  they  were
           related to Mr & Mrs S in any way. They claimed to have  been
           brought to the UK by Mr & Mrs S in order to be left  in  the
           care of Ms N, who they claimed as their aunt, although  they
           denied that they had ever met Ms N before their  arrival  in
           the UK in 2011.
       15. The Appellants accepted that they  had  attended  a  private
           boarding school in Uganda at the expense of Mr  and  Mrs  S.
           Nevertheless they maintained a claim to have been subject to
           physical abuse by Mr & Mrs S, and that there was  no-one  in
           Uganda who could care for them  appropriately  upon  return.
           Thus they claimed that they would be destitute upon  return,
           and at real risk of serious harm  as  young  adults  in  the
           course of trying to  support  themselves  in  the  event  of
           return.  Moreover,  specifically,   A1   claimed   to   fear
           conscription in Uganda, and A2  claimed  to  fear  a  forced
           marriage in Uganda.


      The decision
       16. The Judge dismissed the claims that removal to Uganda  would
           give rise to a real risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention
           reason, or to a real risk of a breach  of  their  Article  3
           rights, and the claim that they were entitled to a grant  of
           humanitarian protection. The Appellants have lodged no cross
           appeal against those decisions.
       17.  In  reaching  those   decisions   the   Judge   noted   the
           inconsistency between the claim  to  have  been  subject  to
           abuse  and  ill  treatment  by  Mr  &  Mrs  S  and  to  face
           destitution upon return to Uganda on the one hand,  and  the
           acceptance that Mr & Mrs S had paid for their  education  at
           boarding school, and had paid for them to be brought to  the
           UK, on the other hand. He rejected the claim that  they  had
           been subject to ill treatment by Mr and Mrs S as untrue.  He
           also rejected as untrue  the  claim  that  A1  faced  forced
           conscription into the Ugandan Army,  and  that  A2  faced  a
           forced marriage, at the instigation of Mr and Mrs S  in  the
           event of their removal to Uganda [75-7].
       18. The Judge also rejected as untrue the explanation of how  Mr
           & Mrs S had located Ms N in the UK  [78-9].  He  noted  that
           although there had been ample opportunity to arrange for its
           production, no DNA evidence had been produced  to  establish
           any biological link to any degree between the Appellants and
           Ms N. Whilst he noted that North Tyneside Council  had  been
           prepared to place the Appellants  with  Ms  N  as  a  foster
           carer, and that the Appellants had been willing for that  to
           occur, he noted  with  concern  that  on  the  face  of  the
           evidence before him the social workers concerned had  simply
           accepted at face value all that they had been  told  by  the
           Appellants and Ms N.
       19. The Judge made no positive finding that the  Appellants  and
           Ms N were related  in  any  way,  and  he  was  clearly  not
           persuaded on the balance of probabilities that they were.
       20. Against  that  somewhat  unpromising  background  the  Judge
           allowed the Article  8  appeals  on  the  basis  that  their
           removal was  not  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public
           interest  in  the  maintenance  of   effective   immigration
           controls, and it is his decision  to  do  so  which  is  the
           subject of challenge by the Respondent before me.


      Error of law?
       21. The grounds raised three complaints;
           First, the Judge made inconsistent findings of fact, so that
           his finding that the Appellants were orphaned  in  2004  was
           not open to him, and/or was flawed for lack of any  reliable
           evidence to support it.
           Second, it was not open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
           Appellants had established "family life" for the purposes of
           Article 8 with Ms N, when he had  found  that  she  was  not
           related to them, and that Mr and Mrs S who were either their
           parents, or who had acted as such in Uganda, were alive  and
           well and living in Uganda.
           Third, it was not open to the Judge to find in the light  of
           his previous  findings,  that  the  best  interests  of  the
           Appellants were served by anything other than  a  return  to
           Uganda to their parents, where they could return in  safety,
           and where they would enjoy  adequate  shelter  and  support.
           Moreover they had no right to continue  their  education  in
           the UK.
       22. Despite Mr Selway's best efforts to do so I am not persuaded
           that these complaints are merely  a  disagreement  with  the
           decision. At the heart of both the Article 3 and  Article  8
           appeals lay the same disputed issues of  fact;  whether  the
           Appellants had told the truth  about  their  parentage,  and
           their  circumstances  in  Uganda  in  the  course   of   the
           applications they made in  November  2011,  and  in  October
           2013.
       23. As the Judge identified there was a wealth of evidence  that
           indicated firmly that they had not done  so.  That  evidence
           was not limited to the declarations made in  the  course  of
           the 2009 and 2011 entry clearance applications,  or  to  the
           contents of the birth certificates and passports  issued  to
           them by the Ugandan authorities, or even to the  names  used
           in the entry clearance applications of 2009 and 2011.  Their
           claim to have suffered ill treatment at the hands  of  Mr  &
           Mrs S, and to face a real risk of  harm  from  them  in  the
           event  of  return,  was  entirely  inconsistent  with  their
           acceptance that they had been  educated  in  Uganda  at  the
           expense of Mr and Mrs S at private boarding schools.
       24. The Judge rejected the Appellants' claim to face any risk of
           harm in Uganda as not credible, and  he  thus  rejected  the
           asylum and Article 3 appeals. He was plainly right to do so,
           and indeed the Appellants have not sought to  challenge  his
           decision to do so.
       25. In my judgement when the decision is read as a  whole  there
           is a clear inconsistency between the rejection as untrue  of
           the Appellants' account of their past experiences in  Uganda
           and their claims to face a  risk  of  harm  in  Uganda  upon
           return on the one hand, and the finding in paragraph 85 that
           the Appellants were orphaned in 2004 as they had claimed  to
           be when making their asylum claims in November 2011  on  the
           other. Although the Judge refers to "consistencies"  in  the
           Appellants' account when making that finding,  his  decision
           entirely fails to identify any consistencies in the evidence
           they  relied  upon  that  were  relevant  to  that  finding,
           although   he   does   identify   a   number   of   material
           inconsistencies. Mere repetition of the bald assertion  that
           they were orphans would carry no material evidential  weight
           in  these  circumstances.  There  was  no   other   material
           "consistency" to be  found  in  the  decision.  Thus  in  my
           judgement the finding that the Appellants were  orphaned  in
           2004 was inconsistent with the Judge's earlier  findings  of
           fact  which  rejected  their   evidence   concerning   their
           experiences in Uganda and fear of future harm in Uganda, and
           it must therefore be set aside as unsafe.
       26. In any event, and even if the finding  that  the  Appellants
           are orphans should stand, the grounds do establish that  the
           Judge  fell  into   error   in   his   assessment   of   the
           proportionality of the removal of the Appellants.
       27. Even if they  were  orphans  it  did  not  follow  that  the
           Appellants had no family  in  Uganda,  and  no  prospect  of
           shelter and support from Mr and Mrs S upon return to Uganda.
           There was no reliable evidence  that  would  have  permitted
           such a finding to be made on the balance  of  probabilities.
           As noted in AA (Iran) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1523,  "absent  the
           persecutory background,  continuing  contact  is  inherently
           likely".
       28. Moreover the approach taken to the  best  interests  of  the
           Appellants was flawed because it assumed, wrongly, that they
           could only pursue a relationship with Ms N, and  could  only
           pursue their further education if  they  were  permitted  to
           live in the UK.
       29. It is also quite clear that the Judge was persuaded  by  the
           advocate  who  then  represented  the  Appellants  that  the
           Respondent  had  failed  to  discharge  her  duty  to   make
           enquiries to trace the Appellants' family members in  Uganda
           [83-4]. There was no error in that  conclusion,  because  Mr
           Mangion accepts  that  no  attempt  was  ever  made  by  the
           Respondent to do so. In my judgement the Judge's approach to
           the failure to discharge that duty did however lead him into
           further error [83-4 & 94-95]. His reference to the  decision
           in Rashid v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 744 in the terms  in  which
           it was made, in my judgement discloses that the  Judge  felt
           obliged in some way to somehow award some advantage  to  the
           Appellants as a result of the Respondent's breach  of  duty,
           in the course of his assessment of  the  proportionality  of
           the removal decisions. As the Supreme Court  have  explained
           in MA and  AA  (Afghanistan)  [2015]  UKSC  40,  Rashid  was
           wrongly decided and should not be followed. As  it  happens,
           it is plain on these facts that the breach of  the  duty  to
           trace and make enquiries of Mr and Mrs S had no  consequence
           at all for the Appellants' ability to present their appeals,
           and it is not suggested by Mr Selway that it did.
       30. Thus I am satisfied that the Judge's decision does  disclose
           an error of law in the approach taken to the  assessment  of
           the proportionality of  the  removals,  which  requires  the
           decision to allow the Article 8 appeals to be set aside  and
           remade.


      Conclusion
       31. What then is  the  proper  approach  to  the  assessment  of
           proportionality?
       32. The starting point must be the unchallenged rejection of the
           Appellants' claims that they could not return in  safety  to
           Uganda.
       33. The Judge was not satisfied that the Appellants had told him
           the truth about their childhood in  Uganda  in  several  key
           respects, although even they accepted  that  they  had  been
           privately educated at the expense of Mr and Mrs S,  and  had
           been brought to the UK by Mr and  Mrs  S.  This  would  have
           involved Mr and Mrs S in significant expense  as  the  Judge
           recognised.
       34. The clear inference is that Mr and  Mrs  S  are  either  the
           parents of the Appellants, or  close  relatives  of  theirs.
           Even if they are  not  the  Appellants'  parents,  it  still
           remains the fact that on their own case, Mr and  Mrs  S  had
           accepted an obligation towards  the  Appellants  to  act  as
           their parents from 2004 to 2011 during their formative years
           in Uganda, and that they had expended significant sums  upon
           both their  care  and  education  in  Uganda,  and  then  in
           bringing them to the UK.
       35. In the light of the Judge's unchallenged  rejection  of  the
           claims that Mr and Mrs S had ill treated them in  the  past,
           or would do so in the future, the  only  sensible  inference
           that any Tribunal properly directing itself could draw would
           be that Mr and Mrs S would in  all  probability  resume  the
           provision of shelter and support to the  Appellants  in  the
           event of their return to Uganda, and, that upon  return  the
           Appellants would simply resume the  relationships  they  had
           previously enjoyed with Mr and Mrs S  and  their  other  two
           children.
       36. Educational and employment opportunities would  be  open  to
           the Appellants in Uganda, no doubt enhanced with the benefit
           of the education they have received in the UK since 2011. If
           either wished to pursue a tertiary education in the UK, then
           they could apply for entry clearance to do so, and study  at
           their own expense, rather than public expense, in the  usual
           way.
       37. In consequence of the rejection of the claim that  Ms  N  is
           related to the Appellants to  any  degree,  a  finding  that
           "family life" had been created between them would appear  to
           be flawed, although I accept that  the  Judge's  alternative
           finding that this was a "private life" appeal "at the top of
           any scale" was well open to him.  As  the  Court  of  Appeal
           noted in Singh [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630  @25,  to  focus  upon
           whether a given set of facts  constituted  a  "family  life"
           rather than a "private life" is likely to arid and academic,
           although it is an exercise that Parliament has  demanded  be
           undertaken  by  the  Tribunal  through  the  differentiation
           between the two in s117A-D 2002 Act.
       38. The consideration of the issue of  proportionality  must  be
           undertaken in the light of the terms of ss117A-117D  of  the
           2002 Act, and, the guidance to  be  found  thereupon  in  AM
           (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260.
       39. The decision of the Supreme Court in Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72
           sheds light upon the proper approach to be taken;
                 "It is important to remember that article 8  is  not  a
                 general dispensing power. It  is  to  be  distinguished
                 from the Secretary of State's discretion to allow leave
                 to remain outside the rules, which may be unrelated  to
                 any protected human right. The merits of a decision not
                 to depart from the rules are not reviewable on  appeal:
                 section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call
                 in Pankina for "common sense" in the application of the
                 rules to graduates who have been studying in the UK for
                 some  years  (see  para  47   above).   However,   such
                 considerations do not by themselves provide grounds  of
                 appeal under article 8, which is concerned with private
                 or family life, not education as such. The  opportunity
                 for a promising student to complete his course in  this
                 country, however desirable in general terms, is not  in
                 itself a right protected under article 8." [57]
       40. Viewed in this light the Respondent's breach of her  tracing
           duty carried no evidential relevance to  the  assessment  of
           proportionality,  because   the   available   evidence   did
           establish that support and shelter  were  available  to  the
           Appellants upon return to Uganda. Moreover, given  the  lack
           of truth in the claims made about Mr and Mrs S, and about  a
           parental relationship with Ms N, it was highly unlikely that
           the Appellants had lost contact  with  Mr  and  Mrs  S.  Any
           attempt by the Respondent to contact Mr and Mrs S and secure
           the co-operation in providing  a  truthful  account  of  the
           Appellants' past  circumstances,  or,  in  facilitating  the
           Appellants' return to Uganda was  also  highly  unlikely  to
           succeed. Even as wealthy  Ugandans,  they  would  have  been
           involved in significant expense in bringing  the  Appellants
           to the UK compared to the wealth of the average Ugandan, and
           having managed to do so, they would be unlikely to  want  to
           co-operate in either telling the truth, or  in  facilitating
           the return of the Appellants. Indeed they would have a  very
           strong incentive not to do  so,  and  any  information  they
           provided would be of doubtful value. MA  paragraphs   52-55,
           64
       41. As to their life in the UK, the Judge had rejected the claim
           that the Appellants were related to Ms  N,  and  again  that
           finding is unchallenged. Although he  undoubtedly  correctly
           accepted  their  claim   to   have   established   a   close
           relationship with Ms N since  their  arrival  in  2011,  the
           finding  he  made,  which  Mr  Mangion  does  not  seek   to
           challenge, was "there has developed a loving and close  bond
           between them and the Appellants are very happy with her.  In
           those circumstances I find that they have  established  what
           amounts to family life with her, and,  taking  into  account
           the  age  of  the   First   Appellant,   that,   given   his
           circumstances the bond has a dependency element  that  takes
           it beyond the existence of normal emotional ties. Even if  I
           am wrong in  that  conclusion  I  find  that  they  have  an
           established  private  life  in  the  UK   based   on   their
           friendships education and career opportunities and  that  if
           their relationship  with  their  alleged  aunt  were  to  be
           regarded as an element of private life it  would  result  in
           their right to private life being properly considered to  be
           at the top of any scale."  [92]
       42. Thus the Tribunal must place the relationships  formed  with
           Ms N into their proper context, which include  the  findings
           made about the truth of the relationships  enjoyed  with  Mr
           and Mrs S, and their ability to return to Uganda in  safety.
           The Appellants have taken full advantage of the  educational
           opportunities available to them whilst they  held  DLR,  and
           their success is undoubtedly a credit to both them, and  the
           teachers who have sought to assist them achieve. They  would
           return to Uganda with that benefit. The  Judge  was  plainly
           concerned as to the need  for  the  Appellants  to  continue
           their education [99], but there was no evidence  before  him
           that would  have  allowed  him  to  conclude  that  tertiary
           education was unavailable to them in Uganda,  or,  that  the
           Appellants did not have access to  the  financial  resources
           that would allow them to pursue it. Put simply they  had  no
           right to continue  their  education  in  the  UK  at  public
           expense, and no right to take employment in the UK.
       43. If the Appellants did return  voluntarily  they  would  also
           have the financial  assistance  of  any  current  relocation
           package available from time to time to those who  choose  to
           do so. The guidance of the Tribunal in AN  &  SS  (Tamils  -
           Colombo - risk) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063 was that  it
           was appropriate to take into  account  the  availability  of
           financial support from the Respondent to a returnee, through
           what was then the Voluntary Returns  Programme  run  by  the
           IOM;
          1. Much has been made of the undue  harshness  which  AN  will
             face as a single mother without accommodation or employment
             and without friends or family to turn to  in  Colombo,  but
             this is  to  leave  out  of  account  what  even  Dr  Smith
             acknowledges  to  be  the  very  generous  support  package
             offered by the IOM to voluntary returnees. After "smoothing
             the re-entry process" the  IOM  provides  "a  comprehensive
             package of support for five  years  after  arrival",  which
             includes "five years shelter guaranteed." We do  not  think
             it is open to the appellant to say that, if she  loses  her
             appeal, she will not take advantage of this package, and to
             argue from that refusal that she will face  destitution  in
             Colombo which, accordingly, is not a place to which she can
             reasonably be expected to relocate.
       44. In the light of  that  guidance  it  was  not  open  to  the
           Appellants to argue that in the event  of  their  return  to
           Uganda they would not take advantage of whatever package  of
           assistance was then available  to  voluntary  returnees,  or
           argue that even if they could not access  financial  support
           from Mr and Mrs S that  they  would  face  destitution  upon
           return.
       45. Moreover it is  also  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the
           proportionality of the removals to recognise  that  although
           the Appellants were children at the time, who were under the
           control of the adults  involved  in  their  life,  they  had
           nonetheless entered the UK  illegally,  and  they  had  then
           actively pursued as young adults an attempt to deceive  both
           the Respondent, and in due course the Tribunal, as to  their
           true circumstances in Uganda.
       46. Neither of the Appellants was ever a "qualifying child"  for
           the purposes of s117A-D of the 2002 Act, and their status in
           the UK had only ever been either  unlawful,  or  precarious,
           within the meaning of s117B. Thus the Tribunal was required,
           at best, to give little weight to any  "private  life"  that
           they had established in the UK.
       47. Even giving full weight to the strength of the relationships
           formed with Ms N in the course of her  care  of  them  since
           2011, the Tribunal would be obliged to note that it would be
           perfectly possible for Ms  N  to  visit  the  Appellants  in
           Uganda in safety whenever she chose to do so. She had  never
           been recognised as a refugee from Uganda. If she had in fact
           retained her Ugandan citizenship then  she  could  visit  as
           often as she wished, or indeed  settle  there,  without  any
           visa requirements.
       48. Thus, looking at the matter in the round, I am not persuaded
           that the Tribunal if properly directed, could properly  have
           reached the conclusion that the removal  of  either  of  the
           Appellants was disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  public
           interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration  controls.
           Accordingly, for the reasons set  out  above  I  remake  the
           Article 8 decisions so as to dismiss them.

   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
      27 February 2015 contains an error of law in the decision to allow
      the appeals of the Appellants on Article 8 grounds  which  require
      that decision to be set aside and remade. There is no error of law
      in the decision to  dismiss  the  appeals  of  the  Appellants  on
      asylum, Article 3, or  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  the
      decision to do so is confirmed.


      I remake the decision so as to dismiss the Article  8  appeals  of
      the Appellants.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 1 March 2016

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs  otherwise  the  Appellants
        are granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No  report
        of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify
        them. This direction applies both to the Appellants and to  the
        Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
        proceedings being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 1 March 2016
