
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11819/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2015                              |On 28th May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            Mugunthan Tharmapalan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit of Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka born on 9th July 1984.  He
    first arrived in the UK on 21st January 2010 when he was granted  leave
    to enter as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  until  24th  October  2011.
    Thereafter the Appellant was granted successive  periods  of  leave  to
    remain in that and other categories until 16th  August  2014.   On  8th
    July 2014 the Appellant  applied  for  asylum.   That  application  was
    refused on 28th November 2014 for the reasons given in the Respondent's
    letter of that date.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler (the Judge) sitting  at  Birmingham
    on 11th February 2015.  He decided to dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds for the reasons given
    in his Decision dated 5th March 2015.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision,  and  on  7th  April  2015  such  permission  was
    granted.

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it  should  be  set  aside.   According  to  the
    Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  because  he  found   the
    Appellant's account of events in Sri Lanka lacking in credibility.   He
    found the Appellant's evidence of detention incredible, and that it was
    highly unlikely that the Appellant's scars were caused by torture.  The
    Judge came to that conclusion because he found the Appellant's evidence
    to be inconsistent, giving a number of examples.  The Judge decided  to
    attach no credibility to the evidence of a witness, Mr  Ashok,  on  the
    basis that he was a friend of  the  Appellant  and  that  his  evidence
    appeared "convenient".  The Judge considered a  medical  report  by  Dr
    Martin concerning the Appellant's scars and a psychiatric report by  Dr
    Dhumad.  The Judge attached little weight to the latter report  on  the
    basis that it was based entirely upon  the  account  of  the  Appellant
    without considering if that account was true.  Finally, the Judge found
    that the Appellant's account of his  diaspora  activities  was  grossly
    exaggerated.  The Judge applied these findings to the country  guidance
    decision of GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and found that the Appellant was not at risk on
    return to Sri Lanka.

 3. At the hearing, Mr Muquit referred to the grounds  of  application  and
    submitted that the Judge had erred in law  in  his  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.  The Judge had given no  adequate  explanation
    for his reason to discount the evidence  of  Mr  Ashok.   He  had  also
    failed to consider all of the evidence in the round.   Indeed,  he  had
    not dealt with the medical evidence and particularly that of Dr  Martin
    until after he had made a finding as to the Appellant's credibility.

 4. In response, Mr Bramble argued that there had been  no  such  error  of
    law.  He referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that the Judge had
    carefully analysed the  evidence  and  in  the  main  had  relied  upon
    inconsistencies which had never  been  satisfactorily  explained.   The
    Judge had considered the medical report of Dr Martin  relating  to  the
    Appellant's scars.  The Judge had been entitled to  take  into  account
    the  timing  of  the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum,  and   had
    considered all of the  relevant  evidence,  attaching  the  appropriate
    weight to it, before coming to his decision.

 5. I do find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  so  that  it
    should be set aside.  The decision of the Judge to dismiss  the  appeal
    follows from his conclusion that the Appellant's account as  to  events
    in Sri Lanka and of his diaspora activities in  the  UK  could  not  be
    believed.  The Judge gave some valid explanations  for  that  decision,
    such as the inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence, and the timing
    of the Appellant's application for asylum, but  the  Judge's  reasoning
    for discounting the  corroborative  evidence  of  Mr  Ashok  is  wholly
    inadequate.  Further, the structure of  the  Judge's  analysis  of  the
    evidence, making a finding as to  credibility  before  considering  the
    medical report of Dr Martin, indicates that  he  failed  to  take  into
    account of all the evidence in the round.  The Judge  did  not  explain
    what weight he attached to Dr Martin's evidence which  is  particularly
    significant in that that evidence  was  that  "the  scars  were  highly
    consistent with  the  mechanisms  of  the  injuries  described  by  the
    Appellant."

6.    I  therefore  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision.   As   findings   of
    credibility and as to fact will have to be remade, I remit  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided again by a  Judge  other  than
    Judge Butler in accordance with the provisions of paragraph  7.2(b)  of
    the Practice Statements.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided again.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to make one.



Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

Dated

