
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11464/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2015                    |On 13  October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
        2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
        Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
        proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
        indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction  applies
        to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

     2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the  First-
        tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State's
        decision taken on 17 December 2014 to refuse to grant his claim  for
        asylum.

Background Facts

     3. The claimant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born  on  8  September
        1998. He entered the UK in July 2008 as a student with a visa  valid
        until 31 October 2012 to undertake a degree  course  in  accountancy
        and finance at Canterbury Christ Church University.  He  ceased  his
        studies at the end of the second year because he  was  not  able  to
        afford to continue with his studies. He did not inform the Secretary
        of State or make an application for leave to remain on  a  different
        basis. From that point he had no valid leave to remain in the UK. He
        started working in the UK as a carer. In April 2012 he  arranged  to
        pay �3,000 to an organisation called  fast  track  visa  experts  to
        obtain a visa. He was arrested at the USA embassy on 3 June 2013 and
        interviewed by an immigration officer about  his  passport.  He  was
        served with form  IS151a  on  3  June  2013  informing  him  of  his
        immigration status and liability to detention and  removal.  He  was
        detained on 8 September 2014 and released on 22 September 2014.

     4. He claimed asylum  on  29  September  2014.   That  application  was
        refused because the Secretary of State was not  satisfied  that  the
        appellant had  demonstrated  that  he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
        persecution on account of his political opinion or that  he  was  in
        need of Humanitarian protection or that  his  removal  would  breach
        Articles 2 or 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  The
        Secretary of State also considered that he did not qualify under the
        Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) ('the Immigration  Rules')  for
        leave on the basis of his Article 8 rights and that  there  were  no
        exceptional circumstances to consider a grant  of  leave  to  remain
        outside of the Immigration Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

     5.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
        determination promulgated on 9 June 2015, Judge Thanki dismissed the
        appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found   that   the
        appellant does not have a genuine fear of  persecution  in  Zimbabwe
        and that, even if his claim was accepted at its  highest,  he  would
        not be at risk on return. The judge also found that the  appellant's
        private life rights required little weight to be attached  to  them,
        that there was no evidence that the appellant's partner  would  have
        any difficulties in settling in Zimbabwe and that his removal was in
        accordance with the law and necessary in  a  democratic  society  in
        order to maintain an effective immigration policy.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On
        1 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted  the  appellant
        permission to appeal.  Judge Landes considered that it was  arguable
        that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment  of  proportionality
        was flawed and that it is arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  take
        account of the background material when making findings  as  to  the
        appellant leaving Zimbabwe. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Legislative Provisions

   Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 ('NIA Act')

     7. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new Part  5A  of  the
        NIA Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires,  in
        legislative form for the first time, the Tribunal  to  take  certain
        factors into account when determining whether a decision made  under
        the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private and  family  life.
        The decision in the instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
        Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

     8. The relevant generally applicable considerations in  s.117B  are  as
        follows:

        "117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
        cases

               1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             ...

               4) Little weight should be given to-

                   a) a private life, or

                   b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

Discussion and Summary of the Submissions

   Ground 1- failure to give reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claimed
   ill treatment

     9. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to give  adequate
        reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to  ill  treatment.  The
        judge states, at paragraph 91, 'As a member of the  MDC  it  is  not
        credible that the ZANU-PF would maintain such  an  interest  in  the
        appellant' yet gives no  reasons  to  support  this  conclusion.  Mr
        Haywood submitted that if you look at the position at  paragraph  79
        of the decision  onwards  the  first  two  paragraphs  set  out  the
        background and at  the  end  of  page  11  the  judge  outlines  the
        appellant joined the MDC, says he was abducted, taken to their base,
        subjected to harassment, violence etc. There was no criticism by the
        judge or  suggestion  that  there  was  vagueness  or  discrepancies
        regarding the activities. The evidence is  merely  recorded  without
        comment the appellant is left with uncertainty  as  to  whether  the
        evidence is accepted or  unaccepted.  It  was  a  wholly  unreasoned
        finding.

    10. Mr Bramble submitted that Judge Landes in granting permission gave a
        clear indication that the approach  to  the  asylum  claim  was  not
        material. Irrespective of whether the judge has given  full  reasons
        for rejecting the claim the key issue is  paragraph  113  where  the
        judge goes on to consider the appellant's claim at its highest as  a
        general member of the MDC and has given reasons why there is no risk
        on return irrespective of any merit in the first ground.

    11. I consider that the quote from paragraph 91 of the judge's  decision
        has been taken out of context. It must be considered in light of the
        preceding paragraph where the  judge  records  the  much  more  high
        profile role in the MDC that the appellant's 'brother'  was  engaged
        in. The judge records that  no  such  activity  is  claimed  by  the
        appellant apart from general membership. The judge is recording that
        as a 'general' member he did not find it credible that  the  ZANU-PF
        would maintain such an interest.

    12. However, I do accept Mr Haywood's  submission  that  the  background
        materials at that time (as set out in  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  GC
        [2008] UKAIT 00083) indicates that even as a 'general' member he may
        well have been targeted in that way.

   Ground 2 - Adverse credibility findings regarding  safe  departure  from
   Zimbabwe

    13. The grounds assert that the judge found at paragraph 97  that,  'The
        appellant was able to leave for the UK using his  own  passport  and
        showing the student visa. It is not therefore, credible that he  was
        the objection [sic] of attention by the ruling party.' This  finding
        is said to be irrational. In RN  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out  the
        position within the country which  was  that  the  violence  is  not
        controlled by the State but by undisciplined militias. It is closely
        aligned but it is not  systemised.  The  interest  does  not  follow
        through to the airport. For the  judge  to  make  a  strong  finding
        regarding  the  lack  of   problems   at   the   airport   shows   a
        misunderstanding of  the  country  guidance  and  the  situation  in
        Zimbabwe.

    14. Mr Bramble submitted that the judge, at paragraphs 77 and  78,  sets
        out that he has given consideration to the totality of the  evidence
        and is aware of the duty of anxious scrutiny. In  setting  that  out
        clearly the judge tells us that everything had been considered. Even
        if there are errors there are not material.

    15. I consider that the judge was entitled  to  take  the  lack  of  any
        problem that the appellant had in leaving the country  into  account
        when  assessing  the  appellant's  claim  overall.  The  finding  in
        paragraph 97 follows from an assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim
        that the ZANU-PF activities intensified against him once they became
        aware of his having secured a student visa to go to the UK.

   Ground Three - Undue weight placed on biodata information

    16. The grounds assert that at paragraph 86 the judge refers to  details
        of a visa application in which the appellant provided the details of
        his biological father and J D as his parents. The judge  found,  'It
        maybe [sic] that the appellant regarded her as  his  mother  but  it
        does not explain why  he  had  to  mention  her  name...I  find  the
        appellant did not declare his biodata accurately  and  that  effects
        [sic] his overall credibility.'

    17. It is not clear that the weight placed on the biodata information by
        the judge has had a determinative effect or 'tipped' the balance  on
        the findings of the judge so as to amount to 'undue' weight.  It  is
        one of many factors that the judge considered affected  the  overall
        credibility of  the  appellant.  The  background  is  relevant.  The
        information on his birth certificate (obtained in 2006) was that his
        father was shown as AC and  his  mother  as  MM.  In  his  screening
        interview he said that his father was PDC and his mother was SS  and
        that his aunt/foster parent was JC. In the student visa  application
        (in 2008) he had recorded JD  as  his  mother.  The  judge  was  not
        satisfied that there was a real explanation given as to why  he  did
        not give his  real  mother's  name.  I  consider  in  light  of  the
        different names given the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
        appellant did not declare his bio data accurately and  was  entitled
        to find that this affected his overall credibility.

   Ground Four - Unlawful Assessment of photographic evidence

    18. The grounds set out that the judge found, at paragraph 93, that 'the
        appellant has torture marks of which he produced photographs but  no
        medical evidence of the claimed torture  marks.  I  therefore  place
        little weight on his claim of injuries.' It is asserted that  in  of
        itself the absence of medical evidence is an insufficient reason for
        placing little  weight  on  the  photographic  evidence.  The  Upper
        Tribunal noted in KV (Scarring-Medical Evidence)  Sri  Lanka  [2014]
        UKUT 230(IAC) that generally  scarring  cannot  be  dated  beyond  6
        months. The appellant's injuries were inflicted nearly  seven  years
        ago. The judge erred in treating the absence of medical evidence  as
        determinative.  The  judge's   point   about   a   requirement   for
        corroboration is an error of law.

    19. I do not consider that the judge was suggesting  that  there  was  a
        requirement  for  corroboration  or  that  the  absence  of  medical
        evidence was determinative. If he had done so he would have rejected
        the evidence. The judge placed little  weight  on  the  photographic
        evidence in the absence of medical evidence when  he  was  assessing
        the evidence in the context of the appellant's claim  which  he  was
        entitled to do.

   Ground Five - Failure to determine whether the appellant would be forced
   to conceal his political beliefs

    20. It is asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  determine  whether  the
        appellant would be forced to  conceal  his  political  beliefs.  The
        judge made no findings  as  to  whether  the  appellant's  political
        beliefs were genuinely held, and if so, whether he would  be  forced
        to conceal those beliefs in order to avoid persecution.  Mr  Haywood
        submitted that there was no finding on  whether  the  appellant  was
        politically active in Zimbabwe and the judge has not found what  his
        stance would be on return.

    21.  I  accept  that  the  judge  did  not  record  findings  about  the
        appellant's beliefs and if genuinely held whether he would  have  to
        conceal those beliefs on return. The judge did record, at paragraphs
        90 and 91, that in contrast to the appellant's brother's  activities
        the appellant did not claim any high level activities and his  claim
        was only as a member of the MDC. However, the  lack  of  a  specific
        finding is not  material  for  the  reasons  set  out  below  in  my
        conclusions on grounds one to five.

   My conclusions on grounds one - five.

    22. With regards to grounds  one-five,  although  the  judge  has  given
        inadequate reasoning in some regards (as discussed  above)  none  of
        these are material. When considering the risk on  return  the  judge
        has,  in  any  event,  considered  the  appellant's  claim  'at  its
        highest'. The judge records at paragraph 113 that  '...His  account,
        taken at the highest is that he was a general member of MDC and  not
        an activist (unlike his cousin GC)'. The judge considered  the  case
        of EM & Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  (IAC)  and
        concluded that in that case the view of the Upper Tribunal was  that
        a failed asylum seeker returning from the UK with no significant MDC
        profile would not result in that person facing a real risk of having
        to demonstrate real loyalty to the  ZANU-PF.  Further,  that  it  is
        possible for  returnees  to  return  to  less  hostile  environments
        elsewhere in the country and that  a  person  can  return  to  rural
        Matabeeland North or South or  Bulawayo  and  be  unlikely  to  face
        adverse attention. The judge also notes that the decision  indicates
        that a returnee could locate in a  non-urban  area  of  Harare.  The
        judge    also    considered    the    case    of    NN    (Teachers:
        Matabeleland/Bulawayo: risk) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT  00918  (IAC)
        referring to the headnote in which it is  recorded  that  a  teacher
        will not face a heightened risk if he returns to rural  Matabeleland
        North or South even if he is a MDC member or to Bulawayo even if  he
        has a significant MDC profile.

    23. No substantive challenge was made to the judge's findings in respect
        of the appellant's risk on return other than a challenge to  a  lack
        of finding on his political beliefs and whether he would  be  forced
        to conceal them. Also there was  no  suggestion  that  it  would  be
        unduly harsh to expect him to relocate if that were necessary. Given
        the judge's findings and the case law cited it  is  clear  that  the
        appellant does not face a risk of persecution on return  even  as  a
        member of the MDC. There was therefore not a material error  of  law
        in the judge's decision on the asylum claim.

   Ground Six - Flawed assessment of proportionality

    24. The  grounds  assert  that  although  the  judge  accepts  that  the
        appellant is in a  genuine  relationship  with  Miss  H,  a  British
        Citizen, and that Miss H is pregnant with their child, he found that
        it would be proportionate for the family to relocate to Zimbabwe. At
        paragraph 102 the judge  found  'I  also  note  from  the  objective
        evidence that Zimbabwe has white people as its  citizens  and  [Miss
        H], as a white woman, would have no more difficulty that other white
        citizens in Zimbabwe'.  The  judge  gives  no  indication  on  which
        objective evidence  he  has  relied  on,  in  the  absence  of  such
        indication this  finding  is  irrational.  A  migrant  is  bound  to
        experience more socio-economic  difficulties  than  a  citizen.  The
        correct test is whether, in light of her particular characteristics,
        it would be proportionate for Miss H to relocate to Zimbabwe.

    25. Mr Haywood submitted that the judge is plainly wrong to say  he  was
        not presented with any evidence showing  difficulties  that  Miss  H
        would face in Zimbabwe. He failed to have regard  to  the  'Zimbabwe
        2013 Human Rights Report' contained within the  appellant's  bundle.
        The judge also failed to have regard to the Foreign and Commonwealth
        Office's report 'Zimbabwe-Country of Concern'.  There  was  evidence
        that there would be difficulty on return. In response to my question
        where I asked for a reference to that evidence Mr  Haywood  referred
        to  the  objective  evidence  that  in  Zimbabwe  there  is   gender
        inequality and for example the State Department Report at B49 of the
        bundle records that the ZANU-PF are seldom arrested or charged  when
        abusing property rights against the white minority. The judge simply
        doesn't consider Article 8 in respect of Miss H and  whether  it  is
        reasonable for her to follow the appellant to Zimbabwe. At paragraph
        107 the judge was wrong to conclude that he had no evidence to  show
        the appellant's partner would  have  any  difficulties  settling  in
        Zimbabwe.

    26. Mr Haywood submitted that from Miss H's detailed  witness  statement
        it is clear that she has never lived in another country and she  has
        a good relationship with her immediate and  large  extended  family.
        Further, Miss H was expecting the birth of her child. The judge does
        not assess proportionality of the proposed interference to Miss  H's
        private life. Her relocation to Zimbabwe would leave her  facing  an
        alien cultural environment, she would  be  unable  to  complete  her
        degree, and would be separated from her own family.  The  rights  of
        the family unit must be considered as a  whole  when  assessing  the
        proportionality of removal under Article 8. The flawed assessment of
        the circumstances facing Miss H in Zimbabwe and  failure  to  assess
        the interference  to  her  own  private  life  renders  his  overall
        conclusion regarding Article 8 unsustainable.

    27. Mr Haywood submitted that there  were  two  strands  to  the  claim,
        because there is  family  life  it  is  accepted  that  there  is  a
        relationship and she was expecting a child  in  judging  materiality
        the protection claim has to be less emphatically put.  There  is  an
        interaction between the two, risk on return is relevant  to  Article
        8. If the conditions fall short of risk on  return  they  are  still
        relevant to Article 8.  The judge took  an  erroneous  approach  and
        adopted a cavalier attitude  to  the  assessment  of  the  upsetting
        effect on Miss H's life, relying on the comments of Sedley LJ in  AB
        (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA
        Civ 1302; [2008] 1 WLR 1893.

    28. Mr Bramble submitted that regarding Article 8 the key ground is that
        the judge has incorrectly dealt with insurmountable obstacles.  With
        regard to the bundle at B43 there is reference to three quarters  of
        households being headed up  by  a  woman.  However  the  appellant's
        partner is not returning as a lone female, they would  be  returning
        as a family unit, this passage is therefore not relevant. The  judge
        has considered insurmountable obstacles and has taken  into  account
        the difficulties of white people in Zimbabwe and has considered  the
        individual circumstances of the partner.

    29. Although I have set out fully the grounds of appeal and  submissions
        on the Article 8 issue I consider that even if there were errors  of
        law in the judge's  assessment  of  proportionality  these  are  not
        likely to be material and would not have made a material  difference
        to the outcome of this case.

    30. This is because, even if it were unreasonable for Miss H to relocate
        to Zimbabwe, little weight is to be accorded to that relationship as
        it was established at a time when the appellant  was  unlawfully  in
        the UK. In assessing the proportionality of the appellant's removal,
        on the facts of this case, the balance clearly fell in favour of the
        appellant's removal as found by the judge and the appeal  was  bound
        to fail.

    31. The judge at paragraph 103 sets out that he has  considered  section
        117B of the 2002 Act  finding  that  the  appellant's  private  life
        requires little weight. At paragraphs 106 to 110 the judge considers
        factors weighing in the balance when considering the proportionality
        of the appellant's removal. It is not an  extensively  well-reasoned
        approach but it does consider the relevant factors.  When  assessing
        the proportionality and  weighing  the  factors  in  favour  of  and
        against removal section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act requires a judge  to
        weigh in the balance the  criteria  that  maintenance  of  effective
        immigration controls is in the public interest. This weighed heavily
        against the appellant given his immigration history. He entered  the
        UK in July 2008 as a student.  He ceased his studies at the  end  of
        the second year. From that point he had no valid leave to remain. He
        started working unlawfully in the UK. He obtained, in what can  only
        be described benignly as the most  dubious  circumstances,  a  false
        visa. He was arrested in June 2013 and was served with  form  IS151a
        on 3 June 2013 informing him of his immigration status and liability
        to detention and removal. He was detained on 8  September  2014  and
        released on 22 September 2014. On 29 September 2014,  over  6  years
        after he entered the UK, he claimed asylum.

    32. Factors weighing against removal, as set out by the judge,  are  the
        appellant's relationship with Miss H and his private life in the UK.
        However those factors must be accorded little weight. The  appellant
        entered into a relationship with Miss H at a time that he was in the
        UK unlawfully. In accordance with section 117B (4) of the 2002 Act a
        judge must accord little weight to  the  relationship  with  Miss  H
        given the circumstances in which it was formed and to accord  little
        weight to his private life.

    33. The judge concluded that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  in
        accordance with the law and necessary in  a  democratic  society  in
        order to maintain an effective immigration policy.

    34. There were no material errors of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        decision.

    35. Evidence was submitted to the  Upper  Tribunal  shortly  before  the
        hearing in the form of the birth certificate of Miss Hs's child.  Mr
        Haywood accepted that this was only relevant if I  were  to  find  a
        material error of law. As I have not found a material error of law I
        have not taken this evidence or this fact into account.

Decision

    36. There was no error of law such that the decision of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal is set aside.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
