
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2016            |On 27 September 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    N. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn. Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  claimed
         asylum on 1 July 2011. That application  was  refused  on  25  July
         2011, and a decision to remove him was made in consequence.
      2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions was first heard and dismissed on  22  September  2011  by
         decision  of  Judge  Hands.  The  Appellant's  appeal  rights  were
         exhausted on 17 October 2011.
      3. The Appellant has since made a series of further submissions, which
         were rejected. On 6 August 2015 a  further  decision  was  made  to
         refuse leave to remain in the UK and to remove him. A  s120  notice
         was served with that decision, and the Appellant's  appeal  against
         that decision was then heard, and dismissed by  decision  of  First
         Tier Tribunal Judge Bircher promulgated on 25 February 2016.
      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to  appeal  was  refused  on  22  March  2016  by  Judge
         Chambers. The Appellant's renewed application to the Upper Tribunal
         was granted, on only one ground, by Judge Kopieczek on 26 May 2016.
         He was satisfied that it was arguable that the Judge's decision did
         not engage adequately with the expert evidence of Dr Joffe in terms
         of the assessment of the risk to the Appellant  upon  return  as  a
         Kurd and as a failed asylum seeker.
      5. Thus the matter comes before me.


    Error of Law?
      6. The central dispute before  the  Tribunal  in  2011  was  over  the
         Appellant's true nationality. The Respondent did not accept that he
         was Iranian, because as an adult male who claimed to have grown  to
         adulthood  within  Iran,  he  did  not  demonstrate  the  level  of
         knowledge of that country that was expected of  him.  Whilst  Judge
         Hands rejected as fabricated aspects of his evidence  (his  claimed
         religion and his claim  that  his  father  had  killed  a  Pasdaran
         officer), she did accept that he was an Iranian  citizen,  who  was
         ethnically Kurdish.
      7. In the course  of  her  decision  Judge  Hands  recorded  that  the
         Appellant did not claim to have experienced any persecution  within
         Iran on account of his Kurdish ethnicity. She noted the Appellant's
         claim to have lived  peacefully  within  his  village  with  little
         contact with the external world, and she  was  therefore  satisfied
         that upon return he would not  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution
         solely because of his ethnicity [25].
      8. The Appellant's case that he faced persecution as a result  of  his
         religion, and as a result of his father having killed an officer of
         the  Pasdaran,  was  rejected  as  untrue  by  Judge  Bircher,  who
         correctly followed the authority of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702.
      9. At the hearing before  Judge  Bircher  the  Appellant  accepted  in
         evidence that he had not engaged in any political activity  against
         the regime either within Iran, or, since he had left.  He  accepted
         that he did not identify any problems arising as a  result  of  his
         Kurdish ethnicity when he first claimed asylum,  or,  before  Judge
         Hands [21]. His case was however  that  upon  return  he  would  be
         (correctly) perceived to be  an  ethnic  Kurd  who  had  left  Iran
         illegally, and a failed  asylum  seeker.  (Although  this  was  not
         raised expressly, it was implicit that he was also without identity
         documents). The Appellant relied upon the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
         Khaki and Dr Joffe, the latter consisting of a report from Dr Joffe
         dated 30 September 2012 and a supplemental letter dated 16 November
         2014.
     10. Ms Cleghorn accepted before me that  the  Appellant  had  only  the
         benefit of a limited  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.  She  also
         accepted that Judge Bircher did deal with the expert evidence of Dr
         Joffe in the course of her decision [3, 31-35].  Her  argument  was
         however that the evidence of Dr Joffe was inadequately analysed and
         rehearsed within the decision, and, that no  adequate  reasons  had
         been advanced for why the Judge had given no weight to it.
     11. There is, as Mr Diwnycz pointed out a very simple riposte  to  that
         argument. It is inappropriate to suggest that Judge Bircher gave no
         weight to Dr Joffe's evidence, when she  made  no  suggestion  that
         this was her approach to it. Nor could the Judge be  said  to  have
         overlooked Dr Joffe's evidence given her references to it. She  was
         not required to quote at length from Dr Joffe's evidence.  Nor  was
         she required to treat it as conclusive, but rather she was  obliged
         to consider it within both the context of the  history  of  country
         guidance decisions issued by the Upper Tribunal,  and,  the  rather
         more recent January 2016 County Information report  "Illegal  Exit"
         v3.0.  In my judgement that is precisely what Judge Bircher did.
     12. The grant of permission to appeal pre-dated the promulgation by the
         Upper Tribunal of the decision in SSH & HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
         asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308. Indeed I rather doubt  that
         permission  would  have  been  granted  in  this  appeal  had   the
         application for permission been considered in  the  light  of  SSH,
         which did not depart from the guidance to be found in  the  earlier
         decision of SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT
         53.
     13. Although Ms Cleghorn argued that the decision in SSH did  not  deal
         with the position upon return  of  those  perceived  to  ethnically
         Kurdish failed asylum seekers, I am satisfied that her approach  to
         that decision did it a dis-service. Her arguments ignored the  fact
         that SSH was ethnically Kurdish and had argued that upon return  as
         an undocumented failed asylum seeker who would be perceived to have
         left illegally he faced a real risk of persecution. His appeal  was
         dismissed after the Upper Tribunal heard evidence  from  Dr  Khaki.
         The Upper Tribunal were not satisfied that there had been a  change
         of any significance since  the  assessment  of  evidence  that  was
         conducted in the course of the decision in SB [32] upon the  manner
         in which the Iranian authorities would react to those  returned  in
         such circumstances. Moreover it was not suggested by Dr Khaki  that
         an individual faced a risk upon return on the  sole  basis  of  his
         Kurdish ethnicity, and it was concluded that there was no  risk  of
         ill treatment of returnees with no relevant  adverse  risk  factors
         other than their ethnicity. [34]. That is precisely the Appellant's
         position, as it was the position of both SSH  and  HR.  Since  they
         faced no real risk of harm either when questioned at  the  airport,
         or subsequently if convicted of an offence of  illegal  exit,  then
         neither would he. Prosecution for illegal  exit  is  not  generally
         instigated for returnees, and when it does occur, the  most  likely
         sentence is a fine. There  is  no  real  risk  of  prosecution  for
         propaganda against the state, arising out of having  made  a  false
         asylum claim.
     14. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any material  error  of
         law in his decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.  The
         Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


    DECISION

    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  25
    February 2016 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision to decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that  decision
    to be set aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 26 September 2016



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 26 September 2016

