
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11660/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 January 2017                     |On 10 January 2017              |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                               MOTJABA AHMADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms E Mottershaw counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer
For the Respondent: Mr Bates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 1 April 1985 and is a national of Iran.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This was an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Hindson promulgated on 23 March 2016 which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  remove  the
   Appellant from the UK following the decision to  refuse  the  Appellant's
   claim for asylum.
5. After an error of law hearing on 31 October  2016  I  set  that  decision
   aside in so far it related to the Appellants risk on return as a Kurd  as
   the reference in paragraph 22 was inadequate as the Judge failed to  make
   any findings in respect of the expert report of Dr Joffe that was  before
   her. I preserved all other findings and that included the Judges  finding
   that the Appellant had not  exited  Iran  illegally  or  that  he  exited
   without a passport. The case was adjourned on the application of Ms  Mair
   in order for the Appellant to obtain an  updated  report  from  Dr  Joffe
   which I directed should be served  on  all  parties  5  days  before  the
   resumed hearing. A report  dated  26  August  2016  was  served  at  this
   hearing.  Mr Bates did not object to the report not having been served in
   accordance with the directions. Given its importance to the central issue
   in this case I allowed the report to be relied on.
6. Ms Mottershaw indicated that  she  was  content  to  proceed  by  way  of
   submissions only.
7. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Bates  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

8. He relied on SSH and HR (illegal exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
   [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). He noted that although it would be suggested  by
   Ms Mottershaw that there was no proper assessment of the risk  on  return
   as a Kurd in the new CG case that  both  Appellants  in  that  case  were
   Kurds.

9. He argued that the CG case took into account reports from an  expert,  Dr
   Kakhki and he did not suggest that Kurdish ethnicity without more put  an
   Appellant at risk. While  he  accepted  that  there  was  harassment  and
   discrimination this was not at the threshold of persecution. It was  only
   Kurdish  ethnicity  combined  with  a  background  of  interest  to   the
   authorities that created such a risk.

10. The report of Dr Joffe does not address the key problem that  the  panel
   identified with Dr Kakhki evidence: they found that  if  being  a  failed
   asylum seeker alone led to persecution there would be evidence of this in
   the public domain given the number of failed asylum seekers  returned  by
   the UK and other countries. Some of those returned would have been Kurds.
   The headnote therefore stated that there was no evidence to  support  the
   assertion made by Dr Kakhki for risk on return as a failed asylum  seeker
   or one who has left illegally.

11. He argued that similarly Dr Joffe had provided no  evidence  to  support
   his assertion that there was a risk on return on the basis  of  ethnicity
   alone.

12. The case of SSH addressed the risk on return for Iranian males,  and  in
   the case the Appellants were Kurdish Iranians, and found that  there  was
   no risk on return if there had been no previous adverse interest.

13. While Dr Joffes report attempted to go behind the report  of  Dr  Kakhki
   there was no evidential basis for doing so and his conclusions were based
   on assumptions, on the fact that prosecution of Kurds was increasing.  Dr
   Joffes report was generic and did not overcome the issues  taken  by  the
   panel in SSH with Dr Kakhkis report.

14. The CG case is good law in demonstrating that there was no  risk  to  an
   Iranian  on  return  unless  there  was  pre  existing  interest  by  the
   authorities.

15. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Mottershaw submitted that:

16. She relied on the reports of Dr E Joffe dated October 15 2014,  March  2
   2016 and August 26 2016.

17. The Appellant would return to Iran as a failed asylum seeking Kurd.

18. She summarised her two arguments were that the Appellants case could  be
   distinguished from the CG case and that the Appellant faced a risk  based
   on the objective evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

19. She argued that headnote by identified the three triggers of  risk:  (a)
   previous adverse interest, (b) illegal exit and (c) being a failed asylum
   seeker. At paragraph 23 it found that (b) and (c) alone did not create  a
   risk only if combined with (a).

20. In reaching their conclusion the panel did not have the evidence  of  Dr
   Joffe before them which included the more up to date report.

21. Paragraph 34 when addressing the risk to Kurds does not  conclude  there
   was no risk but simply states that there was no evidence to show  such  a
   risk.

22. She suggested that the placing of paragraph 34 was significant,  it  was
   a postscript, was obiter. It nevertheless stated that being  a  Kurd  was
   relevant to how they would be treated on return.

23. Ethnicity was not a substantial feature  of  the  reasoning  in  the  CG
   case.

24. In relation to whether the evidence now showed that  being  a  Kurd  was
   sufficient to put the Appellant at risk without more she  submitted  that
   there were 4 factors:

   a) The overall background of discrimination and targeting

   b) Recent events referred to by Dr Joffe

   c) The risk generally arising out of this background.

   d) The specific risk on arrival.

25.  She  referred  to  the  brutal  human  rights  record   generally   and
   specifically against Kurds. The August 2016 report of Dr Joffe  sets  out
   findings against this background and concluded that  all  Kurds  were  at
   risk on return. Dr Joffe was widely recognised as  a  leading  expert  on
   Kurds but his evidence had not been relied on in SSH

26.  Recent  events  demonstrated  that  the  Iranian  regime  responded  to
   problems with repression.

27. Dr Joffe addresses the risk on arrival and  the  particular  risk  as  a
   returning failed asylum seeker who is a Kurd.at paragraph 30.

28. Ms Mottershaw also suggested that  the  level  of  the  Appellants  risk
   would be enhanced by the length of time that the Appellant had  spent  in
   the UK although she was unable to draw  my  attention  to  an  evidential
   basis for this argument.

29. In reply Mr Bates on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

30. Paragraph 34 of SSH was not obiter: the panel at  paragraph  33  applied
   the facts of the case to their findings and set  out  their  conclusions.
   The Appellants in this case were Kurds.

31. In relation to the August report of Dr  Joffe  he  argued  that  if  the
   situation had deteriorated there would be examples  of  such  persecution
   where there had not been previously. No such case studies were relied on.
   Dr Joffee did not address the evidential lacuna found  by  the  panel  in
   SSH.

Legal Framework

32. In relation to the approach I should take to Country  Guidance  cases  I
   remind myself of TM, KM and LZ (Zimbabwe) (2010) EWCA Civ 916  where  the
   Court of Appeal said that the Tribunal "must treat as binding any country
   guidance authority relevant to the issues in dispute unless there is good
   reason for not doing so, such as fresh evidence which  casts  doubt  upon
   its conclusions." In SG (Iraq) v SSHD; OR (Iraq) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ
   940 the Court of Appeal said that the CG procedure was aimed at  arriving
   at a reliable and accurate determination and it was for those reasons, as
   well  as  the  desirability  of  consistency,  that  decision-makers  and
   tribunal judges were required to  take  country  guidance  determinations
   into account, and to follow them unless very strong grounds supported  by
   cogent evidence, were adduced justifying their not doing so (paras  43  -
   50).

33. The headnote of the case of SSH and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
   seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) was referred to by bothparties:
   a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return  to  Iran,  who  does  not
      possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez passer,  which  he
      can  obtain  from  the  Iranian  Embassy  on  proof  of  identity  and
      nationality.
   b) An Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has  previously
      been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecution/breach of his Article  3  rights  on  return  to  Iran  on
      account of having left Iran illegally and/or  being  a  failed  asylum
      seeker.  No such risk exists at the time of questioning on  return  to
      Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of illegal  exit  and  being  a  failed
      asylum seeker) have been established.  In particular, there is  not  a
      real risk of prosecution leading to imprisonment."

Findings

34. The starting point for my assessment of the Appellants  risk  on  return
   are the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier  Judge  who  heard  the
   Appellants appeal against the refusal of asylum. The Judge found no basis
   to go behind the findings of a previous Judge who  heard  the  Appellants
   appeal on 8 March 2010. He rejected the Appellants  claim  to  have  fled
   Iran after attending a pro-Kurdish demonstration. He did not accept  that
   the Appellant had left Iran illegally or without a passport.

35. Ms Mottershaw argues that the most recent CG case on Iran  gave  country
   guidance on the issue of risk on return to Iran for  a  person  who  left
   that country illegally, is a failed asylum seeker and is undocumented and
   did not address the issue of risk on the basis of Kurdish ethnicity alone
   and therefore I am not bound by it. Nevertheless I note that the headnote
   summary at (b) refers to there being no risk to an ''Iranian male  failed
   asylum seeker in respect of whom there was no previous adverse  interest.
   The Appellant is an Iranian  male  and  there  was  no  previous  adverse
   interest in him.

36. I accept that none of those counsel representing the Kurdish  Appellants
   in SSH sought to argue that their ethnicity alone put  them  at  risk  on
   return but I am also satisfied that this was an acknowledgement that  the
   background material and indeed the report of  Dr  Kakhi  could  not  have
   sustained such an argument. I nevertheless  note  that  the  Tribunal  in
   their summary of Dr Kahkhis report at paragraph 45 of Appendix  1,  while
   acknowledging that "the position of the Appellants as ethnic Kurds is not
   the central focus of the  Appellants'  case.   They  rely  on  it  as  an
   additional risk factor." (my bold) This summary  had  been  reflected  in
   paragraph 34 of the main decision:

   "It was not suggested to us that an individual faces risk  on  return  on
   the sole basis of being  Kurdish.   It  was  however  agreed  that  being
   Kurdish  was  relevant  to  how  a  returnee  would  be  treated  by  the
   authorities.  For  example,  the  Operational  Guidance  Note  refers  at
   3.12.14 to the government disproportionally  targeting  minority  groups,
   including Kurds, for arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention  and  physical
   abuse.  No examples  however  have  been  provided  of  ill-treatment  of
   returnees with no relevant adverse  interest  factors  other  than  their
   Kurdish ethnicity, and we conclude that the evidence does not  show  risk
   of ill-treatment to such returnees, though we accept that it might be  an
   exacerbating factor for a returnee otherwise of interest."

37. Therefore I am satisfied that it cannot be argued  that  the  court  did
   not address the issue of risk on the basis of ethnicity  simply  that  in
   this case it was acknowledged that  it  was  an  additional  risk  factor
   rather than a basis for a claim.

38. I take into account all of the reports of Dr Joffe, all generic  but  it
   is the report of August 2016 that Ms Mottershaw focused on as  it  relies
   on the previous reports and  post-dated  and  purported  to  address  the
   conclusions reached in SSH and disagree with them.  I have accepted  that
   on the basis of the material before them the Court in SSH found  no  risk
   on return on the basis of Kurdish ethnicity alone at paragraph 34. I note
   that Dr Joffes reports are all generic and they do not address the  facts
   of this Appellants case which must limit to some degree the weight I  can
   attach to his findings. In setting out what he has been asked to consider
   it is clear that he has not been asked to address the risk on  return  of
   someone returning with a passport who has not exited illegally and had no
   political profile in Iran or in the UK as a Kurdish activist or  for  any
   other reason. I note that at paragraph (5) of his report  he  states  the
   issues that he intends to address and his focus is  on  'Kurds  who  have
   returned to Iran, having  left  illegally  and  having  no  documents  to
   establish their nationality' and this is inevitably the focus of much  of
   the report. Again this is not the factual basis of this  Appellants  case
   and must limit the weight I can attach to the report.

39. The court in SSH found at paragraph 29 that in relation to  Dr  Kahkhi's
   claim that being a failed asylum seeker who had left Iran  illegally  was
   enough to create a risk was that they were not satisfied that  there  was
   sufficient evidence based on documented case studies  of  this  occurring
   inspite of the number of returns to Iran.

40. While Dr Joffe disagrees with  this  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  the
   deterioration in the treatment of Kurds he too does  not  adduce  in  his
   report any examples of such  treatment  of  a  returning  failed  Kurdish
   asylum seeker and Ms Mottershaw was unable  to  direct  me  to  any  such
   evidence in the bundle. This was the lacuna referred to by the  court  in
   SSH that led to them rejecting Dr Kahkhi's conclusions and it seems to me
   Dr Joffe is in the same position in relation to  failed  asylum  seekers,
   Kurds and undocumented returnees. I remind myself that to go behind a  CG
   case I require strong grounds supported by  cogent  evidence.  I  am  not
   satisfied that such evidence exists.

41. I am not satisfied that the Appellant has shown that as someone who  has
   no political profile in Iran or in the UK and who did not leave illegally
   or without a passport could be at risk if Kurds  who  were  undocumented,
   failed asylum seekers were found in SSH not to be at risk.

DECISION

42. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
8.1.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

