
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11568/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th January 2016                 |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Amanda Walker, Counsel, for S Satha & Co
                    Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.   However
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 13th  April  1990.   He
    appealed the Respondent's decision of 10th December 2014  refusing  him
    asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  refusing  his   application   on
    humanitarian protection  issues  and  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    application was also refused under the Immigration Rules.   His  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian on 16th  October
    2015.  He allowed the asylum appeal in a decision promulgated  on  27th
    October 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Heynes  on  12th  November
    2015.  The permission refers to the grounds of application which  state
    that the judge mis-applied paragraph  356(9)  of  GJ  and  Others  (Sri
    Lanka) [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  The permission states  that  the  First-
    tier Judge may have failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that
    the Appellant would be considered a threat  to  the  integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka and may have erred when he  gave  minimum  weight  to  Section  8
    issues.   Reference  is  made  in  the  grounds   to   a   computerised
    intelligence led "watch list" and the grounds state that  there  is  no
    reason to conclude that the Appellant would be at risk for simply being
    on the "watch list".  The grounds state that in any case the First-tier
    Judge has failed to identify why he believes the Appellant would be  on
    the "watch list" in the first instance and has then failed  to  explain
    why; even if he is on the "watch list",  any  checks  would  bring  the
    Appellant to the adverse interest  of  the  authorities.   The  grounds
    refer to the judge finding that the Appellant will be  perceived  as  a
    threat to the integrity of his country as a single state but  there  is
    no evidence of his  involvement  in  any  diaspora  activities  and  no
    evidence that he has played any part in the renewal of  hostilities  in
    Sri Lanka.  The grounds state that the judge failed to explain  why  he
    found that the time the Appellant spent in France before travelling  to
    the United Kingdom should be accorded little weight and why he attached
    minimum weight to section 8.  The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  the  day
    after he arrived in the United Kingdom.  No explanation was given as to
    why he did not do this in France.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response which  states  that  the  grounds  fail  to
    identify any material errors of law in the decision.   It  states  that
    the judge has set out adequate reasons for his findings of fact and has
    properly identified why the Appellant would be at risk on return.  With
    regard to his Section 8 findings, the response states that at paragraph
    8 the First-tier Judge gives his reasons for attaching little weight to
    Section 8 in his  overall  assessment  of  credibility.   The  response
    refers to SM (Iran) [2005] UKAIT 00116 and states that  the  First-tier
    Judge attached weight to the fact that the Appellant made  the  journey
    with an agent and claimed asylum immediately on arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The response then deals with the assessment of risk on return
    and the application of paragraph 356  of  GJ  and  Others.   The  judge
    states that the Appellant comes under paragraph 356(7)(a) and would  be
    at risk on return as someone who would be perceived as a threat to  the
    integrity of his country.  The response states that the judge  accepted
    as credible the material  facts  of  the  claim  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant's profile was that of someone who had been,
    prior to his departure, perceived as a threat to the integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka as a single state.  The response goes on to state that a lack  of
    consideration of diaspora activities does  not  render  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision as unlawful.  Each case has  to  be  assessed  in  its
    individual facts.

 5. A skeleton argument was produced by Counsel for the Appellant.

The Hearing

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge's approach to the  said
    case of GJ and Others is wrong.  He submitted that at paragraph  16  of
    the decision the judge states:-

         "It is my view that the Appellant would be  perceived  as  being  a
         threat to the integrity of his country as a single state or will be
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities in Sri Lanka."

    The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no  explanation  of  how
    the judge reaches this decision.  This Appellant has  had  no  part  in
    post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora.  There is no reason
    given of why he would be of  continuing  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

 7. He submitted that not only  is  there  a  lack  of  reasoning  on  this
    finding, the judge has not properly considered Section 8 of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.  The  Appellant
    was in France for 11 days on his way to the United Kingdom and did  not
    seek asylum but the judge has found this to be unimportant.

 8. The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  forcibly
    recruited by the LTTE in 2008 which was a  very  common  occurrence  at
    this time and does not set the Appellant apart from other  young  Tamil
    men.  He was not at the attention of the authorities at this time.

 9. The Presenting Officer referred to the Appellant's mental  health.   He
    submitted that his mental health issues may have  nothing  to  do  with
    what happened to him in Sri Lanka.  He submitted that the judge did not
    deal with  this  properly  anywhere  in  his  decision.   There  is  no
    reasoning in the First-tier Judge's decision and  he  has  not  engaged
    with the evidence before him.  I  was  asked  to  consider  the  asylum
    interview at C9 of the Respondent's  bundle.   He  submitted  that  the
    questions and  answers  in  this  interview  make  it  clear  that  the
    Appellant would be of no interest to the authorities on return.

10. I was asked to find that these points, when taken together, amount to a
    material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

11. Counsel for the Appellant made her submissions submitting that  one  of
    the adverse credibility issue relates to Section 8.  She submitted that
    the Appellant was in France for  eleven  days  but  he  was  under  the
    control of an agent and the judge dealt with this in his decision, gave
    proper reasons for giving minimal weight to Section 8  and  also  noted
    that the Appellant claimed asylum as soon as he arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion he did about this.  The decision  makes  it  clear  that  he
    knows the Appellant has spent time in France (paragraph 2) and  clearly
    took this into account when dealing with Section 8.  She submitted that
    in his decision the judge states that he considered all matters  before
    him and she submitted that he did  not  require  to  set  out  specific
    details of why he has given minimum weight to Section 8.  This  is  not
    an error.

12. Counsel submitted that the judge finds that the Appellant's account  is
    consistent with the objective evidence.  The judge refers  to  this  at
    paragraphs 10 and 11 of the decision.

13.  Counsel  then  referred  to  the  strong  medical  evidence  and   the
    psychiatric report on file.  She submitted that when risk on return  is
    considered this has to be taken into account.  She submitted  that  the
    judge's reasoning is adequate and he was entitled to reach the decision
    he did.  She submitted that if I find there to be a material  error  in
    the decision I should preserve the credibility findings.

14. I asked Counsel why this Appellant would be perceived as  a  threat  to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka on return.  I was referred to  the  skeleton
    argument on file under the heading "Risk  on  Return".   She  submitted
    that when GJ and Others is taken into account the Appellant only has to
    be "perceived" to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single
    state and only has to be "perceived" to  have  a  significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism  within  the  diaspora.   He
    does not have to have carried out diaspora activities.  She referred me
    to the case of MP and NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and emphasised that it  is
    perception which is the issue.  She submitted that if  the  Appellant's
    account is credible, which the judge found it was, he will be  at  risk
    on return, as someone who is perceived to be a threat to the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state.  This Appellant was an LTTE fighter who
    at the end of the war surrendered to the authorities and  was  detained
    for two years.  She submitted that as he was only released because of a
    bribe he will be of significant adverse interest and as he was still in
    detention two and a half years after the end of  the  war,  this  shows
    that he was seen to be a threat.

15. She submitted that this Appellant, because of his mental health issues,
    would be unable to withstand any questioning on return.  I was asked to
    give considerable  weight  to  the  psychiatric  expert  report  of  Dr
    Lawrence supported by the observations of Dr Lomond.

16. Counsel submitted that the judge did not say that the  Appellant  would
    be on a "watch list" but he may be and if he is he will  be  questioned
    on return and because of his  mental  health  issues  that  will  be  a
    problem.  I was referred to the said case of GJ  and  Others  paragraph
    125 which states that every detention in Sri Lanka results in a  record
    being raised with a government list on the computer.  I  was  asked  to
    consider the decision in the round.

17. I was asked to uphold the judge's findings on risk on return  and  find
    that there is no material error of law in the decision.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that the grounds of application should
    be given weight.  He submitted that the skeleton argument  produced  is
    necessary for the judge's findings in his decision to  make  sense,  as
    the risk findings are not clear from the decision.  He  submitted  that
    when the Appellant was young he was recruited by the LTTE as were  many
    Tamils.  He was detained  post-conflict  but  he  submitted,  there  is
    nothing to show that he would now be of interest to the authorities and
    he submitted that the decision is inadequately reasoned  by  the  judge
    and I was asked to set it aside.

Decision and Reasons

19. I have to decide if there is a material error of law in the  First-tier
    Judge's decision.  The grounds refer to the judge's mis-application  of
    paragraph 356(9) of the said case of GJ and Others  and  refer  to  him
    failing to give adequate reasons for finding that the  Appellant  would
    be considered a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.  They also  refer
    to the judge's statement that he is giving minimum weight to Section  8
    issues.

20. I shall deal with Section 8 first of all.  The judge  correctly  states
    that the Appellant claimed asylum the  day  after  he  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This does not mean that Section 8 does not apply.   It
    is clear that the judge knows that the appellant spent eleven  days  in
    France before coming to the United Kingdom (paragraph 2)  and  that  he
    was with an agent.  The judge has  not  made  reference  to  this  when
    considering Section 8.  Counsel states  that  the  Appellant  could  do
    nothing because he was with an agent but Section 8 has to be considered
    when credibility is assessed  and  to  state,  as  the  judge  does  at
    paragraph 7, that he was asked to attach minimum weight to any  Section
    8 findings when assessing the credibility of the claim and he  does  so
    accordingly, must be an error of law.  It is necessary in all cases  to
    consider Section 8. Although it in itself is not determinative it  must
    be taken into account when credibility is assessed.

21. The judge states that he accepts the Appellant's evidence that  he  was
    forcibly recruited into the LTTE in 2008 and  when  the  war  ended  he
    surrendered to the Sri Lankan Army.  This is a very common story.  This
    does not single out the Appellant.  His evidence is that he started  to
    attend LTTE meetings in 2002 and his father started to help  the  LTTE.
    When the appellant surrendered in 2009 at the end of the  war,  he  was
    detained until he was set free on a bribe.  Based  on  this  the  judge
    found that on return to Sri Lanka "It is more  than  reasonably  likely
    that the Appellant's name would be on a "watch list"  so  he  would  be
    closely monitored and checks would be made on him on return."  He  then
    found the Appellant "would be  perceived  as  being  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of his country as a single state or  would  be  perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora and in connection with the renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka."  The judge has made these  statements  but  has  not
    reasoned them.  Based on the evidence before him he was not entitled to
    come to these conclusions.  The war in Sri Lanka ended in 2009 and this
    Appellant's history is the history of many young Tamil men in Sri Lanka
    and is consistent with the objective evidence but  these  men  are  not
    perceived as being a threat to Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state.   This
    Appellant does not fall into one of the risk categories.

22.  I  accept  that  the  judge  has  given  considerable  weight  to  the
    appellant's mental health issues but the case of GJ and Others had  not
    been followed.

23. The judge has not considered the claim on human rights issues, based on
    the appellant's mental health problems.

24. There are errors of law in the judge's decision.   Based  on  what  was
    before him he was not entitled to  reach  his  decision.   He  has  not
    considered adequately,  Section  8  or  the  country  guidance  or  the
    background evidence relating to Sri Lanka.

Notice of Decision

      1. There are material errors of law in the First-tier Judge's decision
         and the decision promulgated on  27th  October  2015  must  be  set
         aside.

      2. No findings of the First-tier Tribunal can stand.  Under  s.12  (2)
         (b) (i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
         extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the  decision  to  be
         remade is such that it is appropriate to  remit  the  case  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal.  The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Andonian.

      3. Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

