
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11895/2015
                                                               PA/10965/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2018                          |On 29th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                            sk (FIRST appellant)
                            kg (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Toal instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant (SK) and the second Appellant (KG) are married  and
    both are nationals of Sri Lanka. The first Appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated
    13th March 2015 and the second Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  10th  October
    2017.  Both appeals were heard together in the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    12th January 2018.  In a decision promulgated on 17th April 2018 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I A Ross dismissed the two appeals.  The Appellants
    now appeal to this Tribunal with permission granted by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam on 18th September 2018.

 2. The background to these appeals is that the Appellants  both  claim  to
    have a history of involvement with the LTTE in Sri Lanka.   The  second
    Appellant claims that he was arrested, detained and tortured  and  that
    he left Sri Lanka on 23rd November 2010 and, after travelling through a
    number of countries, he arrived in the UK on  12th  January  2010.   He
    applied  for  asylum  and  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  that
    application  was  dismissed  on  2nd  June  2010.   He  lodged  further
    submissions which were rejected and,  following  judicial  review,  his
    further submissions were reconsidered.  The first Appellant,  who  also
    claims to have had a background of involvement with  the  LTTE,  claims
    that she was arrested and detained in November 2009 and again in  2013.
    She claims that she was released from  detention  and  left  Sri  Lanka
    along with her children, arriving in the UK on 3rd  January  2014  when
    she claimed asylum.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  both   appeals   in   the
    determination promulgated on 17th April 2018.  He found the Appellants'
    claims were not credible and that their sur place  activities  did  not
    put them at risk upon return to Sri Lanka.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Toal submitted that there  were  errors  in
    relation to the judge's general approach which led to  the  errors  set
    out in the Grounds of Appeal.  The thrust of his submissions were  that
    the judge erred at paragraph 31 of the decision where he found that the
    first Appellant's claim to have been arrested, detained and tortured on
    two occasions in 2009 and  2013  "is  dependent  substantially  on  the
    credibility of her husband's claim".

 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  findings  made  by
    Immigration Judge Rimington in 2010 in the second Appellant's  previous
    appeal were central to credibility.  At paragraph 33  of  the  decision
    the judge had regard to the guidance in Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702
    and  concluded  at  paragraph  34  that,  based  on  Judge  Rimingtons'
    findings, his starting point was that the Appellant's husband  was  not
    an LTTE member. The judge concluded that the evidence  put  forward  by
    the  second  Appellant  now  had  to  be  treated  with  the   greatest
    circumspection.  In Mr Toal's contention this  reflected  an  error  of
    approach which undermined the rest of the decision.

 6. Mr Toal made a number of submissions in relation to specific errors, in
    particular he submitted that the judge erred in  his  approach  to  the
    medical report from Dr Martin in relation to the first Appellant;  that
    the judge erred in the assessment of the evidence of Francis  Harrison,
    founder of the International Truth and Justice  Project  -  Sri  Lanka;
    that the judge ignored and failed to deal with a number  of  pieces  of
    evidence including letters and statements in bundle A; that  the  judge
    erred in his approach to the medical evidence in relation to the second
    Appellant; and that the judge erred in his assessment of the sur  place
    claim contrary to the decision in UB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 85.

 7. Dealing with the medical evidence, Mr Toal highlighted that  the  judge
    made a mistake of fact at paragraph 49 of the decision.  At  paragraphs
    48 and 49 the  judge  dealt  with  Dr  Martin's  report  on  the  first
    Appellant.  Dr  Martin  found  scarring  which  in   his   opinion   is
    consistent/highly consistent with injuries caused  by  a  third  party,
    and, as acknowledged by Judge Ross, the scars in  Dr  Martin's  opinion
    "are highly consistent with her account of torture and  assault".   The
    judge assessed the report of  Dr  Martin  along  with  the  psychiatric
    report from Dr Dhumad at paragraph 49 where he said  that  the  medical
    reports could not be considered in isolation but had to  be  considered
    along with the evidence given in the 2010 appeal;

         "... in particular that both the Appellant  and  her  husband  were
         part of a group of Tamils who were shelled by  the  army  and  that
         their family members were killed.  Dr Martin does not seem to  have
         been made aware that the Appellant had suffered deliberate injuries
         as a result of shelling and not as a result of being  detained  and
         tortured".

 8. The judge also made reference to the first Appellant being caught up in
    a shelling attack at paragraph 52 in his analysis of  the  evidence  of
    Francis Harrison where he said "Mrs Harrison was also  unaware  of  the
    Appellant being caught up in a shelling attack and injured there".   It
    is apparent that the weight  attached  by  the  judge  to  the  medical
    evidence and the evidence of Francis Harrison in relation to the  first
    Appellant was significantly reduced  by  his  finding  that  both  were
    undermined by the fact that they were unaware that the first  Appellant
    had been injured in a shelling attack.

 9. However, as accepted by Mr Kandola, this is a mistake of fact. In Judge
    Rimington's decision promulgated on 7th June 2010  it  is  recorded  at
    paragraph 18 that the second Appellant said that he and his father  and
    two brothers-in-law were caught in heavy shelling on  2nd  April  2009,
    that some people were killed and  that  he  was  injured.   Mr  Kandola
    accepted that there did not appear to be any reference in the papers to
    the first Appellant  having  been  involved  in  that  incident.   This
    appears to be consistent with the Appellant's account as put  to  Judge
    Ross where it stated at paragraph 6 that the Appellant did not see  her
    husband after he failed to return home in 2006 and that, when  the  war
    ended in 2009, she discovered that her father, brother and  brother-in-
    law had been killed.

10. I accept that this is a mistake of fact which had a material impact  on
    the judge's assessment of the evidence as a whole.  It is this  mistake
    of fact which led the judge to attach  little  weight  to  the  medical
    evidence as and to that of Ms Harrison.  Mr Kandola accepted that those
    findings were unsafe in light of the mistake.  He  also  accepted  that
    those findings were inextricably linked to the decision in relation  to
    the second Appellant given that the  first  Appellant's  account  could
    lend credence to that of the second Appellant and vice versa.

11. I agree with this assessment.  It is clear that  this  mistake  on  its
    own, regardless of the  other  errors  alleged  by  the  Appellant,  is
    capable  of  rendering  the  entirety  of  the  findings  unsafe.   The
    credibility of both Appellants is a central aspect of this decision and
    this mistake and the subsequent treatment of the  medical  evidence  in
    particular renders the findings unsafe.  For this reason  I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

12. Mr Kandola contended that in light of these errors that credibility  is
    still at large.  He contended that this was particularly  the  case  in
    light of the previous determination of 2010 and the potential conflicts
    within that decision and the  treatment  of  that  decision  under  the
    guidelines in Devaseelan.

13.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  it  was  appropriate   in   these
    circumstances to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard.

14. In light of the Presidential Practice Statements the nature  or  extent
    of the judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the
    appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error  and
I set it aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  to  be  made
afresh.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 24th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal the  issue  of  a
fee award is to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge remaking  the
decision.


Signed                              Date: 24th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
