
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11797/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13 August 2015                            |On 4 September 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 20 June 2014 refusing her asylum and  human
    rights claims and to remove her to Sri Lanka.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26 October 1989.

 4. The appellant claims  that  she  was  detained  in  February  2011  and
    detained for 8 days. She was interrogated about her  relationship  with
    NS (a fellow female student who  claimed  to  be  a  LTTE  member)  and
    subjected to torture including sexual torture).  She  was  released  on
    payment of a bribe and was required to sign something. Her father  told
    her that she had been released subject to conditions that she continued
    to reside at her aunt's address and made herself available for  further
    enquiries. She arrived in the UK on 10 March 2011 with entry  clearance
    as a student. Since then, she has been told that the  authorities  went
    to her parent's house and her aunt's house and  asked  questions  about
    her.

 5. The appellant claimed asylum in July 2013 but her claim was refused  on
    11 December 2014. The respondent accepted identity and nationality  and
    that the reason for claiming asylum (imputed political opinion) engages
    the Refugee Convention. However, her account was otherwise rejected.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 8 April 2015.  The  First-tier  judge  found
    that her account was credible but she did not fall into any of the risk
    categories identified in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319.  She  was  not  at  risk  of  further  ill
    treatment upon return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 13  May  2015.  The  judge
    erred in law because  the  reality  is  that  the  appellant  has  been
    identified  as  having  connections  with  the  LTTE  through  NS.  The
    perception of the authorities about the appellant is  what  will  cause
    her problems on return, especially as the very same profile has already
    caused her to be detained and ill-treated. The judge failed to consider
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  There  were  no
    proper findings in relation to the arrest warrant.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 10
    June 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to
    adequately address risk on return against  the  country  guidance,  the
    objective evidence and paragraph 339K of the Rules.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated  2015, the respondent sought to uphold  the
    judge's decision on the basis that the it was open to the judge to find
    that the appellant was not at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.



Discussion

11. Ms Iqbal relied upon the grounds of appeal and submitted that the judge
    forgot that the purpose of the appellant  being  targeted  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities was because of NS.

12. Mr Nath conceded that if the appellant  was  credible  then  there  was
    scope for difficulty for the respondent. He agreed  that  there  was  a
    material error of law.

13. I find that the judge has largely accepted the appellant's claim at its
    highest. The judge made the following positive findings of  fact  (from
    paragraphs 42, 46, 47, 48, 50 and 55 of the decision) ;

                 1. The appellant started studying at Jaffna  University  in
                    September 2009  when  she  met  NS.  They  became  close
                    friends. In November 2009, NS told  the  appellant  that
                    she was an LTTE member. The appellant started supporting
                    NS financially by, for  example,  buying  her  food  and
                    letting her use the appellant's telephone. In June 2010,
                    she helped NS find accommodation in Colombo  because  NS
                    had said that she wished to flee Sri Lanka and needed to
                    go to Colombo to make some arrangements.  The  appellant
                    last spoke to NS in August 2010.

                 2. On 9 February 2011, three people in civil  uniform  came
                    to the appellant's aunt's house (where the appellant was
                    then staying) and took the appellant  away  to  a  place
                    that looked like a police station. She was  interrogated
                    about her relationship with NS, and she admitted that NS
                    had told her that she used to be  an  LTTE  member.  The
                    appellant was accused of being an LTTE member.  She  was
                    detained for 8 days and subjected to torture,  including
                    of a sexual nature, and beatings. She was released on 17
                    February  2011  through  payment  of  a  bribe  and  was
                    required to sign two Sinhalese documents without knowing
                    what they said.

                 3. The appellant's father told her she was released subject
                    to conditions that she make herself  available  if  they
                    needed to see her (including for future  enquiries)  and
                    that she continued to reside at her aunt's address.  The
                    appellant resided there during the period of less than a
                    month between her release from detention and leaving for
                    the UK. The authorities did not  come  looking  for  her
                    during  that  period.  The  appellant  has   no   actual
                    knowledge of an arrest warrant or charge against her.

                 4. The appellant travelled from Sri Lanka to the UK  on  10
                    March 2011 on her own passport with her UK student  visa
                    which was originally valid  until  September  2013.  Her
                    agent had told her which counter to go to at the airport
                    in Sri Lanka and how to exit. She had no  difficulty  in
                    getting through the airport. That is not probative of  a
                    lack of adverse interest in her.

                 5. Two people visited  the  appellant's  former  university
                    hostel in around February 2011, making  enquiries  about
                    NS and the appellant. The appellant was told  about  the
                    visit in June 2011. The authorities visited her parent's
                    house on 16 November 2012 and her  aunt's  house  on  17
                    November 2012. They asked questions about the  appellant
                    and the appellant then faxed information to Sri Lanka to
                    prove  that  she  was  abroad.  The  appellant's  father
                    attended the police station the next day and the  police
                    shouted at him, telling him that the appellant's release
                    had been  subject  to  her  being  available  to  attend
                    further enquiries.

                 6. The appellant suffers from depression and  chronic  PTSD
                    and she would benefit from antidepressant medication and
                    would be  helped  by  psychological  treatment  such  as
                    cognitive behavioural therapy.

                 7. The appellant does not claim to be an  LTTE  member  but
                    she has attended the Heroes Day.




14. I have regard to paragraph 339K of the Rules which states that the fact
    that a person has already been subject to persecution or serious  harm,
    will be regarded as a serious indication  of  a  person's  well-founded
    fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm unless there
    are good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will
    not be repeated. I accept the submissions made by both sides that there
    is a material error of law in the decision. The  judge  has  failed  to
    properly assess risk on return in accordance with GJ and paragraph 339K
    of the Rules.

15. I indicated at the oral hearing that I would consider whether to remake
    the decision. I  have  decided  to  remake  the  decision  because  the
    appellant's case has effectively been accepted at its  highest  by  the
    judge. I find that the appellant has provided some support  to  NS  who
    claimed  to  be  a  LTTE  member.  The  authorities  were  sufficiently
    interested in the appellant to detain her for 8  days  and  to  torture
    her. She confessed her activities and  was  accused  of  being  a  LTTE
    member. She was released on a bribe but it  was  made  clear  that  she
    should be available for further enquiries. The appellant  made  herself
    unavailable  for  further  enquiries  by  leaving  for  the   UK.   The
    authorities have asked  about  the  appellant's  whereabouts  at  three
    different locations. Police shouted at her father and told him that her
    release was subject to her being available for further enquiries.

16. Taking all of those findings into account, I find that it is reasonably
    likely that the authorities perceive the appellant to be  a  threat  to
    the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  because  she  is  perceived  to  have  a
    significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict   Tamil   separatism
    (paragraph 356 of GJ).  Her  perceived  activities  are  plainly  post-
    conflict. It is reasonably likely that the  appellant  is  on  a  local
    watch list. It is reasonably likely that she will be subject to further
    detention if she is returned to Sri Lanka. Following GJ,  detention  in
    Sri Lanka always gives rise to a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  of
    torture. If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
    there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  serious  harm  requiring
    international protection. I find that the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent must therefore succeed.

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

18. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision as follows,

      i) I allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

     ii) I allow the appeal under Articles 2  and  3  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention.






Signed   [pic]                      Date 1 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


