
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 10 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Bonavero, Counsel, instructed by Trott & Gentry
                    LLP Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who appealed against the  decision
    of the respondent on 27 November  2014  to  refuse  his  asylum  claim.
    Following a hearing on 26 March 2015, his appeal was allowed  by  Judge
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Freestone  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 April 2015.

 2. I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier  Tribunal  though
    the Secretary of State is appealing in these proceedings.

 3. An anonymity direction was not made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but,
    given the references to the appellant's personal circumstances,  he  is
    entitled to anonymity in these  proceedings  and  I  make  a  direction
    accordingly.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that,  whilst
    the FTTJ had noted the appellant's risk profile, she had not taken into
    account the appellant's father, the source of the Turkish  authorities'
    hostility to the appellant, was sponsoring the appellant's mother for a
    visit visa application made in October 2014. The FTTJ had not borne  in
    mind the country guidance in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA)  Turkey  CG
    [2004] UIKAIT 00312.  Further, the FTTJ  had  considered  the  risk  on
    return at the airport first.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Macdonald on 24 April 2015 because it was arguable that  the  reasoning
    as to why the appellant would  face  persecution  at  the  airport  was
    slender and not made out by the findings in paragraph 22.  Furthermore,
    the starting point for risk on  return  should  normally  be,  not  the
    airport, but the risk in the appellant's home area.

The Submissions

 6. Mr Avery submitted that the FTTJ's credibility  findings  were  flawed:
    the FTTJ should  have  taken  the  background  situation  and  IK  into
    account; nor had she referred to the appellant's mother's visit in  her
    findings.  He accepted that  it  was  not  clear  from  the  presenting
    officer's notes made on the hearing that the appellant had been  cross-
    examined on the latter issue.   The  FTTJ  had  failed  to  follow  the
    country guidance and had given no  reason  for  that.  He  referred  to
    paragraph 133 which contained a summary of generic conclusions  It  was
    accepted by the  respondent  that  the  appellant's  brother  had  been
    questioned on return but the appellant's brother had been questioned as
    a result of having a British passport and this was not relevant to  the
    appellant. He submitted that the issue was whether the appellant  would
    be identified at the airport  on  return;  if  so,  would  it  lead  to
    questioning which could amount to persecution?  The  FTTJ  should  have
    addressed this. It was accepted by the  respondent  that,  if  she  had
    appropriately concluded he was at risk at the  airport,  there  was  no
    need to go on to consider internal relocation.  That said, according to
    IK, there was more likely to be a problem in a  claimant's  home  area,
    where local records existed and there was known PKK activity,  than  in
    an area without records and where the PKK were not active.  These  were
    matters the FTTJ had failed to address.

 7. Mr Bonavero,  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the  challenge  to
    credibility was a challenge to the FTTJ's fact finding. There needed to
    be perversity in the decision for the challenge to succeed,  i.e.  that
    no reasonable Judge would make it or it was so unreasoned that it could
    not  be  understood.   The  FTTJ's  findings  were  clear  and  neither
    challenge could be made out.

 8. He submitted that the respondent's challenge was on the basis that  the
    FTTJ had failed to mention the presenting officer's submissions in  her
    fact finding. This had no legal foundation. The FTTJ had understood she
    had no obligation to note every point meticulously.

 9. With regard to IK, Mr Bonavero said there had been no submission on the
    issue of materiality.  The appellant had been tortured over a period of
    three days, released as an informer and  escaped.  It  was  obvious  he
    would be at risk according to IK in his home area. Whether or  not  the
    FTTJ had started with that  assessment,  it  made  no  difference;  the
    thrust of her determination was that he would be at risk, according  to
    IK, in his home area.  With regard to relocation,  the  respondent  had
    been right to say that this was irrelevant if the appellant were  found
    to be at risk at the airport. The FTTJ had stated at paragraph 22  that
    he was so at risk; therefore there had been no need for her to  address
    internal relocation.

Discussion

10. The FTTJ based her findings on credibility on several  factors  as  set
    out at paragraphs 18-21. She noted his  answers  in  a  lengthy  asylum
    interview (without legal support) were full and  consistent;  she  also
    noted there had been "little challenge"  to  that  evidence.  The  FTTJ
    referred  to  two  matters  which  the  respondent  had  identified  as
    inconsistencies and, in the case of the  first,  decided  that  it  not
    undermine his credibility and, in the case of the  second,  that  there
    was no  inconsistency  at  all.   She  found  there  was  a  reasonable
    explanation for  the  lack  of  documentary  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim. Her observation that  the  appellant's  "lack  of  a
    political  profile  would  not  have  prevented  the  authorities  from
    detaining him" is a reasonable one, given that he was arrested  because
    he was at home with his father who was the target  of  the  authorities
    and with whom  he  had  attended  the  demonstration;  the  appellant's
    political profile, and/or the lack of it, was immaterial to the reasons
    for his arrest.

11. There is no reference in the judge's  findings  to  her  rejecting  the
    respondent's  position  that  it  was  reasonable  to  infer  that  the
    appellant's father  would  have  provided  evidence  of  his  property,
    occupation and salary in support of his wife's application for a  visit
    visa in October 2014.  However, from the fact that  this  is  noted  in
    paragraph 15 as being the respondent's case, it is  implicit  that  the
    FTTJ took this into account.  Even if she had not, little weight  could
    have been given to this  matter,  given  the  consistency  and  limited
    challenge to the appellant's evidence on the salient issues, namely his
    detention, confession, mistreatment and  escape.   In  any  event,  the
    ability of the appellant's father to sponsor  his  wife  is  consistent
    with the evidence given by the appellant  in  his  screening  interview
    that his father had a livestock business.  The failure of the  FTTJ  to
    refer to this issue does not have a material bearing on the outcome  of
    the factual analysis.

12. Whilst Mr Avery submitted that the FTTJ had failed to  take  background
    material into account in assessing the appellant's  credibility,  I  do
    not consider this was unreasonable. The FTTJ was entitled  to  conclude
    that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  sufficient  of  itself,  without
    reference to background material, for a finding  of  credibility  given
    its detail, consistency and the limited challenge to it. In effect, she
    adopts the claim of the appellant which she summarised at paragraph 11-
    14. This is that he had been attending  political  demonstrations  with
    his father since the age of 13 and that on 2  April  2012  he  and  his
    father were arrested by the police and handed  over  to  the  Gaziantep
    anti-terror branch; the appellant was severely ill-treated and released
    after three days. He was asked to become an informer and  was  told  to
    report to a police station. He  did  not  do  either.  His  father  was
    released a few days later and arrangements were made for the  appellant
    to leave Turkey which he did in May 2012. Thus it can be inferred  that
    the FTTJ has accepted that the appellant would be at risk on return  to
    his home area, having fled without acting as an informer (the basis  of
    his release) or complying with reporting restrictions.   There  was  no
    need for the FTTJ to address further the issue of risk on return to the
    appellant's home area, having found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
    credible, before turning to the issue of risk at the airport.

13. It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant's brother had been
    questioned at the airport on return. However, according  to  Mr  Avery,
    this questioning was an irrelevance because it had been  based  on  the
    appellant's brother's possession of a British  passport.   Whilst  that
    may have been the case,  there  was  no  evidence  as  to  whether  the
    questioning was caused by the mere existence of a British  passport  or
    whether there was some other (unspecified) reason  for  it.   The  FTTJ
    makes no finding on the cause of the questioning but  merely  takes  it
    into account.  It was reasonable for her to do so, given  that  it  was
    uncontested. She does not give undue weight to it.

14. Mr Avery submitted that the FTTJ had given insufficient reasons for the
    conclusion at paragraph 22 that  "there  will  be  sufficient  interest
    shown in him to detain him for questioning in much  the  same  way  his
    brother was when he returned to Turkey in 2013.  I  am  also  satisfied
    that when enquires are made in his home areas his detention  will  come
    to light particularly as he was released with a condition of  reporting
    but failed to do so". He criticises the FTTJ's failure to refer  to  IK
    (albeit she has cited the presenting officer's submissions in  relation
    to IK).

15. The FTTJ concluded that the appellant would be returning to Turkey as a
    failed asylum seeker.  It is implicit that he would be returning on  an
    emergency travel document (having entered the UK illegally in a lorry).
     Paragraph 133, sub-paragraph 6 of IK states: "If there is  a  material
    entry in the GBTS or  in  the  border  control  information,  or  if  a
    returnee is travelling on a one-way  emergency  travel  document,  then
    there is a reasonable likelihood that he  will  be  identifiable  as  a
    failed asylum seeker and could be sent to the  airport  police  station
    for  further  investigation."   This  situation  would  apply  to   the
    appellant.

16. Sub-paragraph 1 of the same paragraph notes that the computerised  GBTS
    system, which is available to the border police in booths  at  Istanbul
    airport and elsewhere in  Turkey  to  the  security  forces,  comprises
    previous arrests. Whilst "arrests"  in  the  GBTS  system  were  to  be
    distinguished from "detentions" by  the  security  forces  followed  by
    release without charge, in the present case the appellant was  told  to
    report and failed  to  do  so.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to  conclude
    therefore that his reporting restrictions would be on record.

17. Furthermore, sub-paragraph 5 states that  "If  a  person  is  held  for
    questioning either in the  airport  police  station  after  arrival  or
    subsequently elsewhere in Turkey and the situation justifies  it,  then
    some additional inquiry could be made of the authorities in  his  local
    area about him,  where  more  extensive  records  may  be  kept  either
    manually or on computer. Also, if  the  circumstances  so  justify,  an
    enquiry could be made of the anti terror police or MIT  to  see  if  an
    individual is of material interest to them."

18. It was not unreasonable for the FTTJ to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant's brother had been questioned on arrival in  Turkey,  in  her
    consideration of the appellant's status as a failed asylum  seeker  and
    to find that he would be questioned  on  return,  particularly  in  the
    light of the presenting officer's concession on  this  point.  However,
    the FTTJ failed to take into account the terms of  sub-paragraph  7  of
    paragraph 133 of IK which require the  "Adjudicator  in  each  case  to
    assess what questions are likely to be asked during such  investigation
    and how a returnee would respond without being  required  to  lie.  The
    ambit of the likely questioning depends upon the circumstances of  each
    case."  The terms of paragraph 125 of IK are helpful in  this  respect:
    "it will be apparent from his emergency travel documents and  from  the
    fact he left Turkey illegally, that he is likely to be a failed  asylum
    seeker. There is therefore likely to be some further questioning  about
    his history. The issues arising are what will emerge from this and what
    risk will attach to him as a consequence. ..."

19. Whilst it was an error  of  law  for  the  FTTJ  not  to  identify  the
    questions likely to be asked of the appellant at the  airport,  if  she
    had followed the guidance at paragraph 125 and taken into  account  the
    appellant had left Turkey illegally  and  was  returning  as  a  failed
    asylum-seeker, she would have found such questioning  would  relate  to
    his reasons for leaving Turkey. The appellant could not be expected  to
    lie about this; he would give an account of being  arrested,  detained,
    mistreated, released as an informant and  his  reporting  restrictions.
    The consequences of such information being given to the authorities are
    obvious: further investigations in his home area would be conducted and
    this would lead to his identification as a person who had confessed  to
    being PKK, had been seen  at  demonstrations,  had  been  arrested  and
    detained, failed to comply with both  a  request  to  inform  and  with
    reporting restrictions. He would be  at  risk  as  a  result  of  those
    enquiries.

20. For these reasons, although the FTTJ failed to address all  the  issues
    identified at paragraph 133 of IK, that failure,  albeit  an  error  of
    law, has had no material impact on the decision-making process  or  the
    outcome.  In other respects, the FTTJ's  reasoning,  though  spare,  is
    adequate and does not contain an error of law

21. There is no material error of law in the FTTJ's findings and decision.

Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

23. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed      A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date

