
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11669/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 31 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AJ
                           (ANONYMITY Order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. In a decision promulgated on 29th April 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant him asylum or humanitarian protection and the consequent decision
    to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in July 1990 who  arrived
    in UK in April 2012 and claimed asylum in May 2012.  The  core  of  his
    claim is  that  in  2009  he  was  detained  and  tortured  because  of
    involvement with the LTTE; that he escaped in 2012  before  making  his
    way to the UK, via France; and that since coming to the UK he has  been
    politically active and the Sri Lankan  authorities  have  maintained  a
    continuing adverse interest in him.

 3. On 26 November 2014 the respondent refused the appellant's  claim.  The
    respondent did not believe the appellant and therefore did  not  accept
    he would, on return to Sri Lanka,  be  subject  to  any  of  the  risks
    identified in GJ and Others (post-civil war returnees)  Sri  Lanka,  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). Further, the respondent  took  the  view  that
    even if the respondent's account was accepted, neither his role in  the
    LTTE nor his sur place activity in the UK were not  sufficient  to  put
    him at real risk of persecution or serious harm.

 4. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M R Oliver ("the judge") on 1 April 2015  at  Hatton  Cross.  The
    judge, having identified what he described as "clear discrepancies"  in
    the appellant's account, concluded that he did "not accept his  account
    in its entirety" and found that the appellant would not be at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka.

 5. In support of his appeal, the appellant submitted a report prepared  by
    Professor S. Lingham dated 30 March  2015.  In  his  report,  Professor
    Lingham states that he had a three hour consultation with the appellant
    and that, having examined the appellant's four  scars,  he  formed  the
    view that the clinical features of the scars  could  not  be  from  any
    other means than burning with heated metal. He  found  that  the  scars
    were inflicted at the same time by the same instrument  and  that  they
    were at least two years old. He ruled out  the  possibility  that  they
    were self inflicted due to their location. He was unable to comment  on
    whether they were caused deliberately to mislead but  thought  it  very
    unlikely the wounds could be from  any  ritual,  medical  condition  or
    accident. In his concluding remarks, Professor Lingham stated:

         "I found no reason to dispute the history provided by  the  patient
         and this was after I  had  clinically  assessed  the  scars,  their
         location, distribution and appearance and after I had examined  the
         melanocytes and pigmentation of the scarring."

 6. The judge, at paragraphs 27 and 28 of his decision, made the  following
    comments about Professor Lingham's report:

         "27. The one incontrovertible fact of the appellant's case is  that
         he has received 4 scars.  These were relied upon by Mr Paramjorthy,
         who told me that Professor Lingam had been accepted in the case  of
         KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT  230  (IAC).
         In fact criticism was levelled at him  at  paragraph  310,  and  at
         paragraph 341 it was stated:

             "Of the medical witnesses, we prefer the evidence given by  Dr
             Odili and Dr Aapata-Bravo as to the technical circumstances in
             which the scarring may have come about.  Unlike Dr Arnold  and
             Professor Katona,  both  examined  the  appellant.   As  noted
             above, Professor Lingam's finding was limited to one  of  mere
             consistency and such a finding does not  entail  more  than  a
             conclusion that torture was one among other  possible  causes.
             Whilst we have commented  favourably  on  certain  aspects  of
             Professor Lingam's methodology, we find little  assistance  in
             his application of this to the appellant's case in relation to
             other possible causes,  as  he  appears  to  have  decided  to
             eliminate some possible causes simply because  they  were  not
             consistent with the appellant's narrative."

         28. This was very much the tenor of short report on the  appellant.
         Causation of the appellant's scars has never been in issue but  the
         circumstances in which they occurred has.  What is really in  issue
         is his credibility and the viability of his account.  Before coming
         to any conclusion on the medical evidence, I must consider  all  of
         the evidence in the round (Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  367;  MN
         (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1601)."

 7. In his application for permission to appeal, the  appellant  contended,
    firstly, that the judge made his findings on credibility without having
    proper regard to Professor Lingham's report. Secondly, it was submitted
    that several of the discrepancies in the appellant's evidence that were
    highlighted by the judge as  undermining  the  appellant's  credibility
    were not in fact discrepancies and could be reconciled by the evidence.
    Thirdly, it was contended that the judge had not properly explained why
    the appellant's sur place activity was not sufficient to result in  the
    risks identified in GJ and Others.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 22 May 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fisher on all grounds.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Submissions for the Appellant

 9. For the appellant, Ms Iqbal submitted that the judge had  rejected  the
    entirety of the claim without considering the  expert  medical  report,
    even though  this  should  have  been  central  to  the  assessment  of
    credibility given the extent  to  which  it  was  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account. She noted that at paragraph 28 of his decision the
    judge had correctly identified the Court of Appeal authority which sets
    out how medical evidence should be approached but had not then followed
    the authority.  At paragraph 28 the judge  appeared  to  be  saying  he
    would return to, and make a conclusion with  respect  to,  the  medical
    evidence later in the decision but he clearly failed to do  this.   She
    also commented that the judge was incorrect to  characterise  Professor
    Lingham's report as short.

10. Ms Iqbal also argued that the judge's overall credibility finding could
    not be sustained as it was in large part based on events  that  he  was
    mistaken in treating as not being supported by consistent and  credible
    accounts.  Ms Iqbal identified  several  of  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraph 29 of the decision where she argued the judge was mistaken in
    describing the appellant's account as having discrepancies, being vague
    or not being plausible. Specifically, she took  issue  with  the  judge
    finding discrepancies in the appellant's account of whether his brother
    worked at the medical centre; that the appellant was unable to say  how
    many doctors and helpers worked at the  medical  centre;  that  he  was
    unable to say how long he had known the man who helped him escape;  and
    the failure to explain the men on motorbikes outside his  family  home.
    She also argued that the judge had not had proper regard to the  extent
    to which the appellant's sur place activity put him at risk  given  the
    sophisticated intelligence gathering by the Sri Lankan  authorities  in
    the UK and that he had not had proper regard to relevant  parts  of  GJ
    and Others.

Submissions for the Respondent

11. For the respondent, Mr Bramble acknowledged that after referring to the
    medical evidence in paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge did  not  return  to
    it. However, this did not necessarily mean the judge had  not  had  due
    regard to the medical evidence or that it had been overlooked. The fact
    that there were scars was not disputed and Professor Lingham was unable
    to  differentiate  between  deliberately  inflicted  wounds  and  those
    inflicted by the authorities. The judge made a wide range  of  findings
    that were damaging to the appellant's credibility  which  lead  him  to
    conclude that  the  appellant  was  not  tortured  notwithstanding  the
    medical report.

12. With regard to the credibility findings, Mr Bramble's position was that
    even if the  judge  was  mistaken  in  relation  to  the  discrepancies
    identified by Ms Iqbal, these were peripheral to the core  findings  on
    credibility which had  not  been  challenged  and  were  sufficient  to
    substantiate the judge's overall conclusion on credibility. Mr  Bramble
    further argued that the judge's findings on  the  significance  of  the
    appellant's sur plus activities were clearly  open  to  him  given  the
    limited  evidence  the  appellant  had  provided  in  support  of   his
    activities and that his account of his experience in Sri Lanka was  not
    accepted. Accordingly, it was Mr Bramble's position  that  the  judge's
    decision should stand as there had not been a material error of law.

Findings and Consideration

13. We gave our decision at the hearing and gave a  brief  summary  of  our
    reasons.

14. For the reasons set out below, we find that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains a material error of law such that it must be set
    aside in its entirety and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing.

15. It is well established that medical evidence should not be artificially
    separated from the rest of the evidence in an appeal in order to  reach
    a conclusion about  credibility  without  reference  to  it.  This  was
    considered by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367  where
    Wilson J made the following observation: "what the fact-finder does  at
    his peril is to reach a conclusion by reference only to the appellant's
    evidence and then, if it be negative, to  ask  whether  the  conclusion
    should be shifted  by  the  expert  evidence."   He  then  quoted  with
    approval paragraph 22 of the Tribunal decision HE (DRC-Credibility  and
    Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321:

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which  does  not  undermine  the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
         otherwise come"

16. The First-tier  Tribunal  must  also  consider  medical  evidence  with
    appropriate care.  As noted by the Court of Appeal in  SS  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 155:

         "... a judge's decision not to  accept  expert  evidence  does  not
         involve an error of law on his part, provided  he  approaches  that
         evidence with appropriate care  and  gives  good  reasons  for  his
         decision"

17. This is an appeal in which the judge had before him expert evidence  on
    the appellant's scars based on a thorough in person examination of  the
    appellant in which the expert set out in clear  terms  his  conclusions
    about the scarring, finding them to be clinically diagnostic  of  burns
    and that they could not be from  any  other  means  than  burning  with
    heated hot metal. The  expert,  Professor  Lingam,  is  an  experienced
    practitioner who explicitly recognised in his report his  duty  to  the
    Court and confirmed he had followed the United Nations  Manual  on  the
    Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and  Other  Cruel,
    Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,  known  as  the  Istanbul
    Protocol.

18. Professor Lingam's report is important evidence which  is  relevant  to
    the core of the appellant's claim. As such, it  was  incumbent  on  the
    judge  to  approach  it  with  appropriate  care  and   give   properly
    articulated  and  understandable  reasons  to  explain  the  weight  he
    attached to it. Consideration of  the  report  also  needed  to  be  an
    integral  part  of  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility,
    particularly as there is such a striking difference between the judge's
    credibility findings based on his identification  of  discrepancies  in
    the appellant's account and  the  medical  evidence  where  the  expert
    concluded that he found no reason to dispute the  history  provided  by
    the appellant having clinically assessed  the  scars,  their  location,
    distribution and appearance.

19. Professor Lingam's report does not  appear  to  play  any  part  -  and
    certainly not an integral part -  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's  credibility.  The  judge  has  treated   the   appellant's
    credibility - and the viability of his account - as something  distinct
    and separate from the evidence in the report. The judge has not set out
    any analysis of the report or explained how the report plays a part  in
    his overall assessment.  Nor has he given any reasons to explain why he
    has given the  report  such  cursory  treatment  other  than  to  quote
    criticism of the report's  author  in  another  case  without  properly
    explaining how this criticism is relevant or explaining the context  of
    the criticism.

20. These matters are sufficient to amount to a material error of law  such
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  must  be  set  aside.  As  the
    medical evidence needs to be considered in the  round  as  an  integral
    part of any assessment of the appellant's credibility, there will  need
    to be a  complete  rehearing  and  accordingly  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
such that it should be set aside  in  its  entirety  and  the  appeal  heard
afresh.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  before
a judge other than Judge M R Oliver.

Anonymity order made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
