

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11129/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 19th December 2014                        |On 17th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Priscilla Bediako
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:            Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr Binafeiga, Binas Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Ghana  date  of  birth  17th  September
    1973. On the  23rd January 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Davies)
    allowed her appeal against a decision to refuse to vary  her  leave  to
    enter and to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Secretary  of  State
    now has permission to appeal against that decision[1].








    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Respondent claims to have been in the UK since 1998. In April  2002
    she made an application for leave outside the rules as the spouse of  a
    person present and settled here.   That application was not dealt  with
    until the 3rd August 2006 when the Secretary  of  State  granted  three
    years discretionary leave.   Prior to that leave expiring she  made  an
    application to vary that leave so as to extend it. That application was
    rejected on the basis that she had used the wrong form;  the  Secretary
    of State subsequently conceded that she had in fact used the right form
    and in January 2010 further discretionary leave was granted  until  the
    7th January 2013.   On the 9th January  2013  the  Respondent  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  that  she  had
    accrued six years of discretionary leave.


 3. The Secretary of State refused this application by way of letter  dated
    the 21st November 2013.  She treated the application of the 9th January
    2013 as having been in time.  The letter stated:

         "A person may be eligible for a grant of indefinite leave to remain
         when  they  have  completed  a  continual  period  of   six   years
         discretionary leave in the UK and where the circumstances that  led
         to the grants of discretionary leave are subsisting or at the  very
         least  where  the  applicant's  circumstances  at   the   time   of
         application  for  settlement  would  have  led  to   a   grant   of
         discretionary leave". (Emphasis added)

 4. The letter went on to note that each of the previous  grants  of  leave
    had been  on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent  was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with a settled person.  At the time of  this  application,
    that relationship had broken down. It could not therefore be said  that
    the circumstances which led to the previous grants were subsisting  and
    the application was refused.


 5. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies heard  oral  evidence
    from the Respondent and found her to be a credible witness. He accepted
    that she had been here since 1998 as  she  claimed.    He  goes  on  to
    briefly address the questions set out in Razgar pertaining  to  Article
    8. He finds the Article engaged and takes into account  the  fact  that
    she has been living in the UK for a long time with valid leave. He then
    sets out the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8(2)   which  might
    justify an interference with Article 8(1) rights. He  finds  "there  is
    not one scrap of evidence put forward  by  the  [then]  Respondent"  to
    indicate that the decision is necessary in  pursuit  of  any  of  those
    aims. He concludes "in my view the  evidence  indicates  overwhelmingly
    that  the  [then]  Respondent's  decision  is  not  proportionate   and
    therefore he cannot discharge the  burden  of  proof  upon  him".   The
    appeal is allowed.

 6. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  made  the
    following errors of law:

   i) There are no reasons given as to why the Tribunal found the Respondent
      to be credible or accepted her claim that she came to the UK in 1998;
  ii)  The  Tribunal  failed  to  give  "adequate  reasons"  in  his  Razgar
      consideration;
 iii) The decision is unsustainable.


    Error of Law


 7. It is not an error for a Judge to believe a witness.  It  would  appear
    from the refusal letter that this lady's credibility was never  put  in
    issue.  The Record of Proceedings is brief and there is  no  indication
    that the Secretary of State challenged credibility  on  the  day.    It
    cannot therefore be said to be an error for Judge Davies to have  found
    her to be a credible and his finding that she has been in this  country
    since 1998 is upheld.


 8. Simply describing a decision  as  "unsustainable"  is  not  actually  a
    ground of appeal.

 9. The decision is however, not adequately reasoned in respect of  Article
    8. The proportionality balancing exercise is limited to the observation
    that the Secretary of State has produced no evidence to establish  that
    decision is necessary in pursuit of one of the legitimate aims set  out
    in Article 8(2). This lady did not qualify for leave  to  remain  under
    the Rules and as such it can be assumed that  the  decision  to  refuse
    further leave was taken in pursuit of the legitimate aim of  protecting
    the economy.  The determination identifies no  particular  reasons  why
    the consequences for the Respondent would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  or
    otherwise disproportionate. The decision is set aside.




    The Re-Made Decision

      The Facts

10. As set out above Ms Bediako has been living in the UK since 1998.    It
    is her evidence that  she  entered  the  country  illegally,  with  the
    assistance of an agent.  She worked illegally, first as a cleaner, then
    as a carer.  In 1989 she met a Mr Christian Ibokwe,  a  person  present
    and settled in the UK. They were married in 2001 and in 2002  she  made
    an application 'outside of the Rules' to be permitted to  remain  here:
    as far as she is aware the  basis  of  the  application  was  that  her
    relationship was protected by Article 8. That  was  her  first  contact
    with the Home Office. So for the first four years that she was  in  the
    UK she had no leave to be here, was working illegally and had no  valid
    claim under the Immigration Rules.


11. The Home Office did not deal with Ms Bediako's application for  another
    four years. During the time that she was waiting for her application to
    be processed she found work as a care assistant in Beach  Nursing  Home
    in Manchester. She continued to live with Mr Ibokwe.  So for that  four
    years she had no status but was known to the Home Office  and  was,  as
    she was entitled to do, waiting for the outcome of her application.

12. Her application was successful. On the 3rd August 2006 she was  granted
    three years Discretionary Leave. She carried on  working  as  a  carer,
    paying tax and living with Mr Ibokwe.  As I  mention  above  there  was
    some confusion in 2009 when she tried to extend that leave: it  is  now
    acknowledged that the Appellant was not at fault,  that  she  submitted
    the right form in time. The upshot was that on the 7th January 2010 she
    was granted a further three years DL.

13. That leave expired on the 7th January  2013  and  two  days  later  the
    present application was made. By this time  her  relationship  with  Mr
    Ibokwe had broken down. The Home Office  dealt  with  the  matter  with
    relative efficiency and she had her answer by the 21st  November  2013.
    It would appear that the Home Office applied a grace period and treated
    the application as being in-time. To summarise, Ms Bediako has to  date
    spent:

    . Four years living and working in the UK illegally
    . Four years waiting for the  Home  Office  to  deal  with  her  initial
      application
    . Six years and five months with DL
    . Two years waiting for the outcome of this appeal

    That is a total of 16 years.  Apart from the initial  period  when  she
    was working as a cleaner in London, Ms Bediako has been  working  as  a
    carer the whole time.  It is agreed that she has never  claimed  public
    funds. I accept, as does Mr Harrison, that during that time Ms  Bediako
    has established a substantial private life. She has many close  friends
    and two in particular are "like family" to her. Ms Bediako told me that
    she has maintained a relationship with Mr Ibokwe, although they are not
    'together' any more. He is suffering from serious depression and she is
    looking after him.  She is currently working in Manchester  in  a  unit
    with 99 beds that specialises in caring for patients with dementia. She
    says she enjoys her work and is close to her patients:  I  accept  that
    the difficult nature of that disease requires a particular bond between
    patient and carer.

14. Ms Bediako's parents are dead.  She had two brothers but they have both
    died. She has a step-sister who is living in Ghana. She  also  has  two
    children of her own, two boys that she left behind aged two and  seven.
    Like many other women she took the very difficult decision to hand  the
    care of her children over to a relative in order that she could come to
    Europe to work to support them. In all the years that she has  been  in
    the UK she has been sending money home to  her  sons.  She  has  funded
    their educations, and it has  paid  off:  the  elder  took  science  in
    further education and now has a  job  working  for  'Volvic'  water  in
    Ghana. Ms Bediako is clearly very proud of that, but the cost  for  her
    has been her relationship with her boys. They look to  her  step-sister
    as their mother. They have only seen  Ms  Bediako  twice  in  the  past
    sixteen years, once in 2006 and once in 2009 when  she  made  trips  to
    Ghana.




    The Rules

15. Mr Binafeiga did not advance his case under Appendix FM,  since  it  is
    acknowledged that although Ms Bediako remains close to Mr Ibokwe,  they
    are no longer in a subsisting marriage.


16. His central submission was that Ms Bediako qualifies  for  leave  under
    paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  at  the  date  of
    decision read:
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,
         cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to go
         if required to leave the UK
17. It is accepted that Ms Bediako cannot qualify under (iii) since she has
    not reached the 20 year mark.  Her age disqualifies her from  (iv)  and
    (v). The only potential for success lies in (iv). That  provision  has,
    since the date of the refusal, been amended to read:
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK
    It is the Respondent's view that the new wording  better  reflects  the
    intention of the drafters of the original.  "No ties" is  therefore  to
    be read in light of the new test  of  "very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration".

18. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) (Nigeria) v SSHD  (approved  in  YM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292) and Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE;  suitability;  ties)  [2015]  UKUT
    00042 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  this  requires  a  rounded,  holistic
    evaluation of the applicant's circumstances.


19. Ms Bediako is currently aged 41. She was 25 when she  left  Ghana.  She
    had therefore an understanding of that country as an adult. She  speaks
    the language and understands the culture.  Whilst  I  accept  that  her
    relationship with her two sons and step-sister has over the long  years
    become distant, they are familial  links  that  could  be  strengthened
    should she return to Ghana today: Balogun v UK app. no. 60266/09 [2012]
    ECHR 614. It cannot be said that she has "no ties" to Ghana. Nor can it
    be said that she faces substantial obstacles to  re-integration  there,
    since on her own evidence she has two adult sons whom she has supported
    all their lives. One is working and  I  presume  would  not  refuse  to
    assist his mother should she come back to live with the  family  again.
    She cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).



    Article 8


20. Ms Bediako cannot meet the requirements of  the  Rules.   She  has  not
    accrued sufficiently long residence to meet the '20 year rule' and as I
    set out above, her circumstances in Ghana are not such that it  can  be
    said that her ties to that country have diminished to the point of non-
    existence. It might be said - although not by Mr Harrison -  that  this
    would be the end of the matter. I am not satisfied that this is so. The
    exclusive  focus  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  is  the  situation   an
    applicant will  face  when  she  returns  "home":  this  overlooks  the
    strength or otherwise of the individual's life in the UK. It would be a
    nonsense to suggest that a person who has lived in the UK for  over  16
    years has no private life to speak of. She plainly  has  a  substantial
    private life and interference with it would have  serious  consequences
    for her.  I am not therefore satisfied that this  provision  is  not  a
    'complete code' for the purpose of assessing Article 8 and I will go on
    to consider the matter 'outside of the Rules'.


21. It is accepted that Ms Bediako does have a private life, and  that  the
    decision to remove her would amount to an interference with it.  As  Mr
    Harrison acknowledged  in  his  submissions:  we  can  go  straight  to
    proportionality. I agree, save to note  that  the  decision  to  remove
    persons with  no  leave  to  remain  is  rationally  connected  to  the
    legitimate aim of protection of the economy and that the  Secretary  of
    State has the power in law to make the decision that she has.

22. In assessing proportionality I am bound to have regard  to  the  public
    interest  factors  set  out  in  paragraph  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014):


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

23. I have had regard  to  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest. The provisions  in  the
    Rules are where the Secretary of State believes the balance  is  to  be
    struck between the rights of the  individual  and  the  rights  of  the
    state. I have reminded myself that it  is  only  where  a  case  raises
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognized by the Rules  that
    a breach of Article 8 should be found:  Singh and  Khaled  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74.  I have weighed in the balance the fact that Ms Bediako entered
    the country illegally and made no attempt to  regularize  her  position
    for approximately four years.   These factors weigh in the Secretary of
    State's favour.


24. I have had regard to the fact that it is in the public interest, and in
    particular in the interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United
    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
    are able to speak English, because persons who can  speak  English  are
    less of a burden on taxpayers, and are better able  to  integrate  into
    society.   There is no dispute that Ms Bediako speaks  fluent  English,
    or that this weighs in her favour.

25. There is no evidence  at  all  that  the  Appellant  has  ever  claimed
    benefits, or that she has been a  drain  on  the  resources  of  public
    funds. She has worked for care homes for  approximately  15  years  and
    confirmed in response to Mr Harrison's questions that  she  has  always
    paid tax and national insurance. I accept and find as fact that she  is
    financially self-sufficient and this weighs in her favour.

26. Sub-clause (4) mandates that I must attach little weight to  a  private
    life that was established in the UK when the Appellant was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully. In applying this provision I draw a distinction between the
    periods of time that the Appellant has spent with, and  without,  valid
    leave. I therefore attach little weight to  the  first  four  years  of
    residence without leave.  Sub-clause (5) mandates that  I  must  attach
    little weight to a private life established when the person's status in
    the UK is "precarious". That means anything short of ILR.  That impacts
    upon the 12+ years that follow.

27. I have weighed all of those matters in the balance.  I  have  also  had
    regard to the following additional factors.

28. The Secretary of State made no attempt to remove  Ms  Bediako  in  2002
    when she revealed herself as being an illegal entrant. The Home  Office
    instead spent four years deciding  on  her  application.  That  was  an
    unreasonable delay by any standards, and the grant of DL which followed
    no doubt recognised that she could hardly be blamed for getting on with
    her life, building her marriage and  strengthening  her  private  life,
    during that period: see EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.  Ms  Bediako
    then had DL for just short of six and half years. Her leave during that
    period was "precarious", but as Mr Harrison conceded, had been  granted
    on the basis that to remove her at that time would have been to  breach
    her Article 8 rights.

29. I have given substantial weight to the fact that Ms Bediako has  worked
    as a carer for approximately 15 years. Her current work  with  dementia
    patients is remunerated at �6.31 per hour: surely the most  emotionally
    challenging, physically demanding and socially  necessary  jobs  to  be
    paid at the minimum wage. It is hard, unforgiving  work.  Unlike  other
    areas of nursing care, these patients are never going  to  get  better.
    The care workers who undertake this role are performing a vital service
    for our society, and Mr Harrison agreed with  my  suggestion  that  the
    care system would collapse  were  it  not  for  their  commitment.   Ms
    Bediako spoke movingly of her relationships with her patients, which  I
    accept to be warm and no doubt of great value to these most  vulnerable
    of people.

30. Ms Bediako has no family to speak of in the UK but she does have  close
    friends, and she remains very close to Mr Ibokwe.  She told me that  he
    is suffering from severe depression and cannot really leave his  house.
    She checks up on him, brings him food and makes sure he has someone  to
    talk to. Again, she is providing a service that someone else would have
    to do if she were not here.  Sixteen years is  a  long  time  to  spend
    anywhere. She came to this country in order to work  and  pay  for  her
    sons' educations and has therefore sacrificed her own  family  life  in
    order to provide them with financial security. Her youngest son has not
    yet finished tertiary education and she would like the  opportunity  to
    continue to fund him until he has. I accept that it would be  a  severe
    blow to Ms Bediako to be removed from her friends, work and life in the
    UK.

31.  The statute requires that I attach "little weight" to the private life
    that Ms Bediako has established and I have done  so.  I  remind  myself
    however that it is for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  show  that  this
    decision is, in all the circumstances, proportionate.  In doing so  the
    Secretary of State must show this lady's removal to  be  necessary  for
    the protection of the economy.  I have set the decision of Judge Davies
    aside for lack of reasons, but could not agree more with his assessment
    that the facts "indicate overwhelmingly that the [Secretary of State's]
    decision is not proportionate". The Secretary of  State  has  taken  no
    action to remove Ms Bediako for the sixteen years that she has spent in
    the UK. During the first eight  she  had  no  leave  at  all,  and  was
    thereafter granted leave to remain , albeit on the  "precarious"  basis
    of DL. During virtually that entire time she  has  worked  in  a  vital
    role, serving society as well as contributing to the economy. I find it
    wholly likely that she will continue to do so. In  those  circumstances
    the Secretary of State cannot reasonably claim that her  removal  today
    is necessary or proportionate.




      Decisions


32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.


33. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds."

34. I make no direction as to anonymity. No such  direction  was  requested
    and I see no reason to make one.


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              7th March 2015




      Fees


      No fee was paid in this appeal.
-----------------------
[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta on the 12th February 2014

