
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11787/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     NG
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr Mynott (instructed by IAS, Manchester)
For the SSHD:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya born on 29 November 1983.   She
         claimed asylum in the United Kingdom  on  10  August  2014.    This
         claim was refused by the SSHD on 8 December 2014  for  reasons  set
         out in a detailed letter of that same date.  I have anonymised this
         decision because it refers to the appellant's asylum claim.

      2. The  appellant  contends  that  she  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for reasons relating to her membership of a  particular
         social group: Libyan women.  She claims that she faces a real  risk
         of serious harm from her father and brother because  she  disobeyed
         them and stands accused of various offences  against  her  and  the
         family's honour.

      3. This is a matter that has previously been considered by the  First-
         tier Tribunal.  In a decision dated 11 May 2015 I decided that  the
         decision contains errors of law such that it should  be  set  aside
         and remade by me.  The full procedural history and reasons  for  my
         decision are set out in my earlier decision.

Hearing

Issues in dispute

      4. At the beginning of the hearing both  representatives  agreed  that
         the only real issue in dispute is the  credibility  of  the  asylum
         claim.  Mr Harrison accepted that if credible, the appellant  faces
         a real risk of persecution for reasons relating to  her  membership
         of a particular social group and the appeal should be allowed.

Evidence

      5. The appellant's solicitors submitted a very  helpful  comprehensive
         bundle containing detailed evidence supporting the asylum claim  as
         well as background evidence.  This included two important items  of
         evidence  not  available  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    First,
         statements provided to the Home Office confirming  the  appellant's
         claim that she explained her fears whilst in Libya to a  member  of
         staff in the UK Embassy.  Second, a statement from Mr  McAndrew,  a
         former long-serving member  of  the  British  Army,  who  knew  the
         appellant whilst in Libya.

      6. Mr Harrison explained that he had not been provided with a copy  of
         the updated bundle (although it was served on  the  SSHD).   Having
         considered its contents for the first time on the  morning  of  the
         hearing Mr Harrison was content to proceed with the hearing and did
         not request an adjournment. Mr Harrison indicated that in light  of
         the further information provided by the appellant cross-examination
         was unlikely to be lengthy.

      7. Dr Mynott submitted two additional documents.  First, an email from
         the team  from  the  Home  Office  who  interviewed  the  appellant
         regarding her claim to have told a member of the staff  at  the  UK
         Embassy about her difficulties.  They indicated that the matter had
         been closed by their team.  Second, a letter from  Manchester  Rape
         Crisis dated 10 September  2015  confirming  their  view  that  the
         appellant was a victim of rape.

      8. The appellant then confirmed her witness statements.  These set out
         a very detailed and lengthy account of harm and threats of harm  by
         family members over a number of years  when  she  was  residing  in
         Libya.  The appellant was cross-examined briefly by Mr Harrison.  I
         then heard evidence from Mr McAndrew.  He knew the  appellant  when
         he resided in Libya.  She confided in him and told  her  about  the
         difficulties she was facing.   He confirmed his statement  and  was
         cross-examined very briefly by Mr Harrison.  He  clearly  indicated
         that he entirely believed the appellant's account.  Mr Harrison did
         not press Mr McAndrew further on this.

Submissions

      9. Mr Harrison asked me to note the reasons for  refusal  letter.   He
         however acknowledged that there was now cogent supporting  evidence
         to support the credibility of the appellant's asylum claim.

     10. Dr Mynott relied upon a  carefully  drafted  and  helpful  skeleton
         argument.  Having read that skeleton argument together with all the
         detailed  evidence  submitted  and  in  light  of   Mr   Harrison's
         submissions, I indicated that I did not need to hear from Dr Mynott
         because I accepted the appellant's account and  would  be  allowing
         her appeal, for reasons which I set out below.

Legal framework

     11. It is not in dispute that if the appellant's account is a  credible
         one, she succeeds in showing a well-founded fear  of  serious  harm
         for a Convention reason in Libya.  I therefore do not need  to  set
         out the well-established legal framework when determining  a  claim
         for  asylum  or  humanitarian   protection.    In   assessing   the
         appellant's credibility I must apply the lower  standard  of  proof
         i.e.  I must consider whether it is reasonably likely that the core
         aspects of his account are true.  Credibility findings must be made
         in the round and in light of  all  the  evidence  available.   This
         includes background evidence on the country of  origin,  which  may
         support (or not support) the plausibility of a claim.

     12. AT and others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG  [2014]  UKUT
         00318 (IAC) addresses the position of women in Libya. This decision
         refers to reports prepared by the SSHD such as  the  COI  and  OGN,
         which describe the problems faced by women  in  terms  of  domestic
         violence and discrimination.  They also describe the prevalence  of
         sexual  violence  and  restriction   on   women's   movements   and
         accommodation.  Other reports describe  Libyan  society  as  having
         become more socially conservative  and  male  dominated  since  the
         revolution.

Credibility findings

     13.  The  SSHD's  refusal  letter  sets  out  in  considerable  detail,
         discrepancies and implausiblities in the appellant's  evidence.   I
         have read these all with care.  I accept that there are some  minor
         discrepancies in the appellant's account.   However  I  accept  the
         central and important aspects of her account are reasonably  likely
         to be true.  The appellant's evidence is detailed,  consistent  and
         supported  by  the  documentary  and  background  evidence.    This
         includes evidence from Manchester Rape Crisis  that  the  appellant
         has demonstrated signs of being the victim  of  ill  treatment  and
         rape and considerable documentary evidence from Libya regarding her
         identity and supportive of her claim that she has  been  harmed  in
         the past.

     14. The central theme in the appellant's claim  relates  to  her  fears
         regarding her father and brother for breaching social mores and not
         following their demands as to how she should behave.  She  confided
         in a number of individuals about this whilst in  Libya.   I  accept
         this included Mr McAndrew and a member of staff at the  UK  Embassy
         in Libya.

     15. I now set out my specific findings regarding the central aspects of
         the appellant's account.

     16. I accept the appellant is well educated and a qualified dentist.  I
         accept that the appellant's father and  brothers  have  adopted  an
         extremely conservative view toward her and what she is permitted to
         do  as  a  woman.   The  appellant  is  however  a  determined  and
         intelligent woman, and  notwithstanding  the  opposition  from  her
         family members managed to qualify as a dentist.  This  is  entirely
         consistent with the background evidence on how many men  behave  in
         Libya.   The  chronology  of  events  is  also  supported  by   the
         background evidence to the effect that Libyan  society  has  become
         more male-dominated and conservative and the  situation  for  women
         worsened significantly following the revolution.  I note  that  the
         SSHD is concerned that the appellant's description of the  father's
         attitudes reveals very inconsistent attitudes on his part.  At some
         points he was prepared for her to make her own choices and at other
         times he was more dogmatic.  I however accept that in  the  context
         of Libya a father's role will generally be less intrusive when  his
         daughter is married and 'under the protection of a  man'  and  this
         helps explain the different attitudes exhibited by the  appellant's
         father at different times.

     17. I accept the appellant's description of  her  three  marriages.   I
         accept that the appellant was  extremely  unhappy  in  all  of  her
         marriages because she was treated badly by her husbands.  I  accept
         that the appellant had two children with her first husband and they
         now reside with him.  I accept that when the appellant was divorced
         by her first husband in 2010 she initially had the children but her
         father and brother considered it was more  consistent  with  Libyan
         custom for the father  to  have  the  children  and  they  forcibly
         returned the children to their father's care and  this  has  caused
         the appellant extreme angst and upset.

     18. I accept that the appellant was so deeply  unhappy  in  her  second
         marriage that she attempted suicide in 2011.  She returned  to  the
         family home around the time of the revolution.  I accept  that  her
         father was distracted by the events of  the  revolution  given  his
         role in the Gadhafi regime.  I accept that the  appellant  went  to
         live with  her  uncle  in  August  2011  and  started  to  practice
         dentistry shortly after this but that her father found  about  this
         and made her return home and stop working.

     19. I accept that the appellant married for a third  time  in  2012  in
         order to try to get away from her father and to be  nearer  to  her
         children in Tripoli.  I accept the appellant's  third  husband  was
         violent toward her and wanted to divorce her.  I  accept  that  the
         appellant remained living on her own in her flat in Tripoli in 2013
         but she was being regularly threatened by her father because of the
         shame he believed she had  brought  on  them  and  because  of  her
         refusal to return home now that she was no longer living  with  her
         husband, yet had discovered she was pregnant.

     20. I accept that the appellant's father  and  brother  coaxed  her  to
         return home for a short period on 28 August 2013  and  once  there,
         they beat her, tied her hands and legs and were threatening to kill
         her.  I accept that the appellant genuinely believed that they were
         preparing a grave for her and this motivated  her  to  escape  from
         them.  The appellant has set out in  considerable  detail  how  she
         managed to escape in her statement.  I accept this account  on  the
         lower standard of proof.  I accept that the appellant  had  medical
         treatment but lost her baby. This is supported  by  a  letter  from
         Zlitan Hospital referring to the incident but dated 15 May 2014.  I
         accept the appellant attempted to report  her  brother's  continued
         threats to the police.  This is also supported by a  police  report
         dated 13 May 2014 recording a complaint made on 8 September 2013 by
         the appellant that her brother had threatened her with  murder.   I
         accept that the police were unable to assist the  appellant.   This
         is entirely consistent with  the  Home  Office's  own  guidance  on
         Libya: Violence Against Women dated 8 October 2014 at 2.2.11

     21. I accept that the appellant returned to live with her third husband
         and was tricked into travelling to Turkey where she was raped by  a
         neighbour.  I accept the appellant believed that  her  husband  was
         entirely unsympathetic and may have been involved in  this  scheme.
         I accept the appellant divorced her husband on  7  April  2014  and
         felt compelled to leave Libya for her safety.

     22. I accept that the appellant sought the assistance  of  the  British
         Embassy in Libya in December 2013 as explained  in  the  statements
         she has provided to the Home  Office  investigating  team.    These
         statements are consistent with the appellant's previous claims.   I
         accept the submissions in the appellant's  skeleton  argument  that
         the  SSHD  plainly  regarded  the   appellant's   account   to   be
         sufficiently credible to  pursue  an  investigation  and  take  two
         statements from her.  The fact that the appellant took a number  of
         steps to protect herself from harm including confiding in a  member
         of the British Embassy staff lends support to  the  credibility  of
         the central aspects of her claim.  I accept that the appellant also
         told Mr McAndrew about her treatment from her father  and  brother.
         Mr Harrison accepted that  it  was  significant  that  Mr  McAndrew
         believed this account and  was  prepared  to  attend  the  Tribunal
         hearing having travelled from Grimsby in order to be cross-examined
         about it.  Mr Harrison accepts, as do I, that Mr McAndrew   has  an
         unblemished record working in the British Army and is  well  placed
         to make judgments on credibility in the context of Libya, given his
         experience there.  I do not of course have to accept  his  judgment
         but it is an additional factor in my view  supporting  the  central
         aspects of the appellant's account.

     23. I accept the appellant left Libya on 10 August 2014 because of  the
         continued threats made by her brother  and  because  she  feared  a
         repetition of serious harm at the hands of her father  and  brother
         in light of her third divorce.

     24. I accept that since being in the UK the  appellant  has  discovered
         from another neighbour in Tripoli that her brother has attended her
         flat with his militia and has now taken over the flat, and that the
         militia have provided an order for her arrest.  This  is  supported
         by arrest orders provided  by  the  appellant.   I  note  that  the
         current state of lawlessness in Libya is such that these  documents
         could be easily manufactured.  However I am prepared to  accept  on
         the lower standard of proof that the appellant's brother  has  made
         it known that he is aware the appellant is in the UK and  he  shall
         be following her up with the  assistance  of  his  militia  if  she
         returns to Libya.

Risk upon return

     25. I note that the appellant did not see her father  after  28  August
         2013.  The refusal letter submits  that  this  indicates  that  her
         father was no longer adversely interested in  her.   I  accept  the
         appellant's detailed explanation for her father not  targeting  her
         after 28 August 2013 in paragraph 99 of her witness  statement.   I
         accept that having  now  found  out  about  the  appellant's  third
         divorce, the appellant is at real risk of a repetition  of  serious
         harm at the hands of her father and brother if returned to Libya.

     26. The appellant has already suffered sexual violence, ill  treatment,
         serious harm and threats of serious harm.  Much of this  has  taken
         place because she has been accused of or is suspected  of  offences
         against family honour.  She therefore comes within  a  category  of
         women at heightened risk in Libya - see the headnote of AT  (supra)
         at (10c)).  I am satisfied that  having  already  been  subject  to
         serious harm in the past, there are no  good  reasons  to  consider
         that such harm will not be repeated and there is a real  risk  that
         it will be repeated (see para 339K of the Immigration Rules).

     27. For the avoidance of doubt the appellant remains at risk throughout
         Libya and internal relocation is not available to  her  -  see  the
         headnote of AT (supra) at  (22).   The  state  of  uncertainty  and
         dangerousness caused by the continuing conflict is such that  as  a
         lone woman she would need some form of  'protection'  in  order  to
         survive and would be compelled to reach out to family members,  and
         sooner or later her father and brother would  find  out  about  her
         return.  It is noteworthy that the appellant shall be  returned  to
         Tripoli airport as a lone woman without a 'male protector'.   There
         is a real risk, given the prevailing attitudes  toward  lone  women
         without 'male protectors' that the militia controlling the  airport
         or the checkpoints from the airport will ensure that she has family
         members to escort her to a home, and this is another way  in  which
         she is reasonably likely to come to the attention of her father and
         brother.

Conclusion

     28. I accept the credibility of the central aspects of the  appellant's
         account as to what happened to her in Libya.   As  accepted  by  Mr
         Harrison it follows  that  the  appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
         persecution for reasons relating to her membership of a  particular
         social group (women in Libya).

Decision

     29. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

     30. The appeal is allowed under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
17 September 2015
