
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11634/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On: 4 November 2015                  |On: 26 November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     DS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 2. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Troup in which he  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a
    citizen of Kuwait, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    asylum.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 August 2011  with  her
    husband and their son. The Appellant's husband claimed asylum with  the
    Appellant and their son as his dependents. This application was refused
    on 15 March 2013 and his appeal against that refusal was dismissed at a
    hearing on 1 May 2013. The Appellant claimed  asylum  on  26  September
    2013. Her claim was refused on 5 December 2014. The Appellant exercised
    her right of appeal and this is the  appeal  which  came  before  Judge
    Troup on 15 April 2015 and was dismissed.  The  Appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Her  application  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Heynes  on  8  May  2015  but  on
    renewal to the Upper Tribunal  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia on 9 July 2015  in  the  following
    terms

         "It is arguable, and I put it no higher than this, that in reaching
         the conclusion that the appellants physical scars are traceable  to
         the trauma suffered as a teenager, the judge relied upon  a  matter
         that was not raised during the course of the hearing and  that  the
         physical scars cannot be explained by  the  trauma  suffered  as  a
         teenager. It seems to me therefore that  the  matters  set  out  in
         paragraphs 6(iii) to (vi) of the grounds of appeal warrant  further
         consideration by the Upper Tribunal and are capable of amounting to
         an error of law, affecting the outcome."

 4. The Respondent submitted  a  rule  24  response  dated  5  August  2015
    opposing the appeal and submitting  that  the  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately and in particular that it was open to the Judge  to  find
    that the injuries described in the two medical reports stemmed  from  a
    trauma suffered as a teenager.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Bayoumi appeared on behalf of the Appellant
    and Mr Richards represented the  Respondent.  Ms  Bayoumi  submitted  a
    written skeleton argument.

Background

 6.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant left Kuwait with her family in  2009
    and travelled to Sweden where they claimed  asylum.  Their  application
    was refused and they returned to Kuwait  after  about  3  months.  They
    remained in Kuwait until August 2011 when they travelled to the  United
    Kingdom and claimed asylum.

 7. The basis of the Appellant's claim  is  that  she  is  an  undocumented
    Bidoon and as such subject to persecution in Kuwait.  She  claims  that
    she suffered serious harm in Kuwait  on  two  specific  occasions.  The
    first event took place in 1990 when she was 15 years old and  when  the
    Appellant claims that she was raped by soldiers from the invading Iraqi
    army. The second event took place in February 2011 when  the  Appellant
    claims that she was detained by the Kuwait authorities and that  during
    her detention she was beaten,  raped  and  burnt  with  cigarettes  and
    cigarette lighters.

 8. In refusing the Appellant's claim for asylum the Respondent  noted  her
    physical scars but suggested that they could have been caused in a  way
    other than that described by her. In dismissing her appeal  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found  that  it  was  "incontrovertible"  that  the
    Appellant had both the physical and mental scars "vividly described  in
    the reports" but that the "symptoms" were "not confined to the  claimed
    events of 18 February 2011 but, in addition or in the  alternative  ...
    traceable to the trauma suffered  as  a  teenager  and/or  her  present
    circumstances in as a  refugee  in  the  UK".  The  Judge  went  on  at
    paragraph 48 to say

         "I accept entirely the evidence of  Dr  Nelki  and  Dr  Griggs  but
         conclude that (the  Appellant's)  symptoms  stem  from  the  trauma
         suffered as a teenager and or her  current  circumstances  and  not
         from claimed events in 2011".

Submissions

 9. For the Appellant Ms Bayoumi referred to the grounds of appeal and  her
    skeleton argument pointing out that the author of one  of  the  medical
    reports, Dr Griggs, had given oral evidence at the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing and if there was any doubt about whether the  symptoms  stemmed
    from events taking place in 1990 or 2011 these could have  been  raised
    with Dr Griggs at the hearing. So  far  as  the  physical  evidence  is
    concerned the Judge  accepts  the  incontrovertible  evidence  from  Dr
    Nelki's report about the physical and mental scars. This  report  gives
    rise to no suggestion that there injuries could have been suffered as a
    result of the attack in 1990. There was never any suggestion  that  she
    suffered burns from cigarettes or lighters in 1990. The report conforms
    with the Istanbul Protocol and specifically refers to the scars  caused
    by burning and finds  these  highly  consistent  with  the  Appellant's
    account.

10.  For  the  Respondent  Mr  Richards  said  that  he  was  not  entirely
    comfortable with the way in which the  Judge  dealt  with  the  medical
    evidence but there was nothing wrong with the way that the Judge  dealt
    with the issue of  the  Appellant's  husband  and  the  effect  of  his
    dismissed appeal. In effect Mr Richards said it was a matter of whether
    the Judge was entitled to reach the findings that he did  in  light  of
    the medical evidence.

11. I said that it was clear that the Judge has materially erred in law  in
    his treatment of the medical evidence and reserved my written  reasons.
    Both representatives agreed that this matter was suitable for  remittal
    to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Error of law

12. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  taken  together  with  the
    grant of permission and Ms Bayoumi's submissions  are  straightforward.
    It is asserted that the Judge failed to  take  proper  account  of  the
    medical evidence when assessing credibility. The rule 24  response  and
    Mr Richards submissions are equally clear in their rejection  of  these
    grounds on the basis that it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  reach  his
    conclusions.

13. There is in my judgement no doubt that the Judge  has  failed  to  take
    proper account of the medical evidence that was before him  and  indeed
    that the conclusions reached appear to fly in the face of that  medical
    evidence. It is, as noted in the grant of permission  a  narrow  issue.
    The Appellant claimed to have been beaten and raped on  two  occasions.
    The first in 1990 and the second in 2011. On the second  occasion  only
    she claimed to have been tortured by being burned with  cigarettes  and
    cigarette lighters. Medical evidence from two experts, Dr Nelki and  Dr
    Griggs, was before the First-tier Tribunal. One of  these  experts,  Dr
    Griggs, gave oral evidence. Both experts noted the Appellant's account,
    noted her injuries and came to the conclusion that her  injuries,  both
    physical and mental were highly consistent with her account. The  Judge
    refers to and considers this  evidence  finding  it  "incontrovertible"
    that the Appellant has both the  physical  and  mental  scars  "vividly
    described in the reports" and accepts  "entirely  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Nelki and Dr Griggs".

14. Nevertheless the Judge goes on to conclude that the "symptoms stem from
    the trauma suffered as a teenager and or her current circumstances  and
    not from the claimed events in 2011". It must, in my judgment, be  very
    unlikely that a medical expert  whose  expertise  and  conclusions  are
    otherwise could wrongly attribute physical scars said to have been  the
    result of injuries inflicted in 2011 to injuries that had in fact  been
    inflicted some 21 years earlier. It  is  also  open  to  doubt  that  a
    medical expert accepted would wrongly attribute ongoing  mental  trauma
    to events taking place 25 years ago rather than events occurring only 4
    years ago. These are certainly not conclusions  that  the  Judge  could
    have rationally reached  without  first  raising  the  issue  with  the
    medical expert giving oral evidence.

15. My conclusion from all of the above  is  that  the  findings  made  are
    unsafe. There is in my judgement a material error of law and the nature
    of the error of law goes to the root of the adverse credibility finding
    and is such that the determination falls to be set aside. The only fair
    and proper course is a full rehearing of this appeal with  no  findings
    preserved. As this is a full  rehearing  and  in  accordance  with  the
    President's direction  this  matter  is  suitable  for  and  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Summary

16. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set aside that decision and remit  the  matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
