
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11666/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                  |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 20 October 2015                     |             On 12 November 2015    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                        mr. SAMSON OJIYOVWI EMEKARHE
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ruth promulgated on 10 April 2015 in which he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to grant him leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life
    under Article 8 ECHR.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the ground  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge erred in the manner in  which  he  directed  himself  in
    relation to section 117B of the 2002 Act and EB (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 41.   Although  there  were  other  grounds  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant, his representative  acknowledged  that  this  was  the  only
    ground on which permission to appeal had been granted, and was the only
    ground on which he sought to rely.


Submissions

 3. Mr. Turner submitted that there  was  nothing  in  section  117B  which
    indicated that, where the fault for the delay lay with the  Respondent,
    EB (Kosovo) was "trumped".  He submitted that the judge found that  the
    Appellant was "about to get" to a period of 20 years residence.  I  was
    referred to Chapter 53 of the Respondent's guidance, which  dealt  with
    the discretion  under  paragraph  353B.   It  was  accepted  that  this
    discretion was not justiciable in the Tribunal, but that  the  exercise
    of discretion lay with the Respondent.  Chapter 53 was  a  last  chance
    for those who could  not  succeed  in  an  application.   The  guidance
    acknowledged that six years delay on the part of the  Respondent  could
    lead to a grant of leave to remain.  This was a highly relevant factor.
     It was not possible to infer that section 117B "trumped" EB  (Kosovo),
    or made EB (Kosovo) bad law.  I was referred to the case of Jaku [2014]
    EWHC 605 (Admin) for a discussion of six years delay.


 4. It was submitted by Mr.  Turner  that  the  judge  had  found  that  EB
    (Kosovo) was not  good  law  [72]  and  [73].   Section  117B  did  not
    distinguish between the two types of delay, that which was the fault of
    the Respondent and that which was  the  fault  of  the  Appellant.   EB
    (Kosovo) provides that where the Respondent has delayed, this of itself
    can lead to a grant of leave.  The Respondent was wrong in the  reasons
    for refusal letter where she stated that the delay was four years [60].


 5. He submitted that the judge had erred in failing to distinguish between
    the periods of delay.  Nothing in section 117B said that administrative
    errors and mishandling of an application should be overlooked.  On  the
    judge's reading of section 117B, if the Respondent lost an application,
    or failed to deal with it, this would be irrelevant.  Had the judge not
    erred in failing to distinguish between the types of delay, it was  not
    possible to say that the decision would be the same.  The Appellant had
    been in the United Kingdom for 19 years.


 6. For the Respondent, Ms Savage relied on the Rule 24 response  dated  18
    August 2014.  There was no error of law but, even if there was, it  was
    not material.  I was referred to  the  case  of  Dube  (ss.  117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 90.  In paragraph [74] of the  decision,  where  the  judge
    found that the law had "markedly changed", by reference to  Dube,  this
    was not an error.  The law had altered since 117B came into  force  and
    there was now a statutory duty on the  Tribunal.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 1(a) of  the  headnote  to  Dube.   The  Upper  Tribunal  had
    considered the issue of delay and EB (Kosovo) in Dube.  The majority of
    the delay in Dube had been caused by the appellant, which was the  same
    here.  The Appellant had been here for 12 years unlawfully prior to the
    application being made.


 7. It was submitted that  the  judge  had  not  found  that  section  117B
    "trumped" EB (Kosovo).  He had given limited weight to the  Appellant's
    private life as required under section 117B [74].  In [76] he had found
    that private life could not weigh heavily.  He did not say that  either
    the delay, or the Appellant's private life could not be considered, but
    the  weight  to  be  given  to  his  private  life  was  limited.   The
    Appellant's circumstances were considered in the light of section 117B.


 8. Even if there was an error of law, it was not material.  I was referred
    to the refusal of permission to appeal from First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly.  This states at paragraph 2:


    "Much of the argument  in  this  application  is  predicated  upon  the
    premise that the respondent's delay in removing the appellant  was  the
    cause of him establishing a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom [see paragraph 18 of the application] whereas the true position
    is that it was the result of  the  appellant's  failure  to  return  to
    Nigeria voluntarily once he had exhausted  his  appeal  rights  against
    refusal to grant him asylum in November 1996."


    In EB (Kosovo) there had been an immediate delay of  some  four  and  a
    half years.  Here the circumstances  were  materially  different.   The
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom unlawfully for 12  years.   He
    put forward an asylum claim which was found to  lack  credibility,  and
    which he is not now pursuing.  He was well aware  that  he  was  living
    here illegally.  His wife had precarious leave when he met her, and  is
    now  here  unlawfully.   Irrespective  of  the  delay,  there  was   no
    expectation that leave to remain  would  be  granted.   The  judge  was
    correct to find that private life could not weigh heavily  against  the
    public interest [77].


 9. The policy document provided was of little relevance.  The judge  could
    not be criticised for failing to consider a policy document  which  was
    not before him.  The case of Jaku pre-dated the Immigration Act 2014.


10. In response, Mr. Turner referred to paragraphs [33] and [34]  of  Dube.
    EB (Kosovo) was still relevant in the context of section 117B.  At [25]
    Dube found that section 117B was not a "radical departure".  The  facts
    were different in Dube.  In summary,  the  judge  had  failed  to  have
    regard to the difference in the delay caused by the  Appellant  and  by
    the  Respondent.   Where  delay  was  exceptional,  as  the  Respondent
    acknowledged six years was, delay did carry weight.

Error of law decision

11. At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.


12. Paragraphs [72] to [76] of the decision state as follows:


    "72. There is certainly the question of the very significant  delay  by
    the respondent in reaching a decision on the application made in  2008.
    Counsel for the appellant is quite right to rely upon the  case  of  EB
    (Kosovo) which establishes that delay can lead to  a  strengthening  of
    private and family life connections to the UK  and  lessen  the  public
    interest in removal.


    73.  Before the passing of the 2014 Immigration Act it  may  very  well
    have been that this long  delay  by  the  respondent,  including  twice
    withdrawing the decision, would have  represented  a  very  significant
    element in this case and would have led to a reduction  in  the  public
    interest in removal of this appellant and particularly an  increase  in
    the weight to be given to his established private life in the six years
    of delay by the respondent.


    74. In my view, however, the situation has markedly changed as a result
    of the passing of the  2014  Immigration  Act.   The  interest  of  the
    respondent in immigration control is now set out clearly in the statute
    and, of much more significance, so  is  the  requirement  that  I  give
    limited weight to a private life established when a person is in the UK
    without leave.


    75.  Since there is no question of  an  interference  with  established
    family life, I am unable to give significant weight to the private life
    the appellant developed  during  the  period  of  six  years  when  the
    respondent delayed making a decision in his case.  That is  because  of
    the statutory requirements set  out  above  and  is  not  a  matter  of
    discretion.


    76.  In those circumstances, despite  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    private life and that of his family members came about and was deepened
    and strengthened during the six years after his application in 2008 and
    before the decision in late  2014,  it  cannot  weigh  in  the  balance
    heavily against the interests of the respondent."

13. I find that the judge has not said that EB (Kosovo) is "bad  law".   In
    paragraph [72] he states "Counsel for the Appellant is quite  right  to
    rely upon the case of EB (Kosovo)".  The judge acknowledges that  delay
    on the part of the Respondent "can" lead to a strengthening of  private
    life connections to the UK.


14. The judge then goes on to state that before the  passing  of  the  2014
    Act, this "long delay" would  have  represented  a  "very"  significant
    element in this case and would have led to a reduction  in  the  public
    interest in removal.


15. The judge then proceeds rightly to consider section 117B.  He correctly
    states that "the interest of the respondent in immigration  control  is
    now clearly set out in statute, and of much more  significance,  so  is
    the  requirement  that  I  give  limited  weight  to  a  private   life
    established when a person is in the UK without leave" [74].


16. The judge correctly states what he is  required  to  do  under  section
    117B.  In [75] he states that he is unable to give "significant" weight
    to the private life the Appellant has developed in the six year  period
    of delay.  He does not say that he attaches no weight to it,  but  that
    he cannot give "significant" weight to it,  which  is  right.   Section
    117B(iv) and (v) provide as follows:


    "(4)     Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious."




17. In [77] he acknowledges that the Appellant's private life was  deepened
    and strengthened during the six years,  but  states  that  this  cannot
    weigh in the balance "heavily" against the interests of the Respondent.
     He does not say that it cannot be given any weight at all, but that it
    cannot weigh "heavily".   The  judge  then  goes  on  to  consider  the
    interests of the Respondent [77],  finding  them  to  be  "particularly
    strong" for reasons which he sets out.  These include the asylum  claim
    which was not found to be credible, and which grounds were not  pursued
    before the judge, and importantly, the fact that  the  Appellant  "must
    have known that he was living in the UK illegally and had no  right  to
    be here."  These are relevant considerations.   In  paragraph  [80]  he
    finds that the "interests of the Respondent in this case are strong and
    those of the Appellant limited".  He does not say that there are  none,
    but that they are limited.


18. I have considered carefully the case of Dube.  It is  relevant  to  set
    out paragraph 34 in full.  This states:


         "We need not decide whether he is  right  about  the  ratio  of  EB
         (Kosovo) being unaffected by ss. 117A-117D  because even  if  delay
         remains as relevant to an Article 8 proportionality  assessment  in
         the three ways identified by Lord Bingham, it can only do so if the
         judge's assessment also  takes into account s.117B  considerations.
         That is so for two reasons, one being the basic verity that  if  EB
         (Kosovo) stands  for  any  proposition  of  law  inconsistent  with
         statute, the latter must prevail; the other being that Lord Bingham
         clearly saw the proportionality assessment as one that  had  to  be
         made in light of any changes in government policy: "....the  facts,
         and with them government policy, may change over a period, as  they
         did here; and the duty of the decision-maker is to have  regard  to
         the facts, and any policy in force,  when  the  decision  is  made"
         [13]. It follows that  if  the  government  has  enacted  statutory
         provisions governing Article  8  proportionality  assessment,  that
         change must be taken into account. Renvoi to  EB  (Kosovo)  is  not
         enough."


19. It is clear that the judge was aware  of  the  difference  between  the
    delay caused by the Respondent and that by the  Appellant.   He  refers
    specifically in paragraphs [72] to [76] to the  six  year  period.   He
    does not bunch this all together with the 12 years delay caused by  the
    Appellant.  It is clear that he is  considering  the  extent  to  which
    weight can be given to the six year period in paragraphs [72] to  [77].
    He correctly applies the provisions of section 117B.


20. I find that the Appellant had already been in the UK unlawfully for  12
    years when he made his application, over which the  Respondent  delayed
    for six years.  The majority of the time that the Appellant has been in
    the United Kingdom was when he had no leave to be here and had made  no
    application for leave to remain.  His asylum appeal had been dismissed.
     He knew he had no right to be here.  His wife has no right to be here,
    and his children have never  had  leave  to  be  here.   They  are  all
    citizens of Nigeria.  The judge took all of these circumstances of  the
    Appellant and his family into account when coming to his decision.   He
    gave reasons for his findings.  He took  into  account  the  period  of
    delay as a result of  the  Respondent's  inaction  on  the  Appellant's
    application, but quite correctly found that the weight  that  could  be
    attached to this was limited.


21. It is now submitted that a period of delay of six years  is  considered
    "exceptional" by the Respondent by reference to her policy.   There  is
    no evidence that this was before the judge,  and  Mr.  Turner  did  not
    contend that it was, and he represented the Appellant in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge cannot be criticised  for  failing  to  take  into
    account a policy which was not before him.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and I do not set aside the decision.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 11 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


