
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/11130/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 10th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     V A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Pinder (Counsel, instructed by A&P
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, arrived in the UK in  May  2011
    and claimed asylum. The application was refused for the  reasons  given
    in the Refusal Letter of the 3rd  of  December  2013.  The  Appellant's
    appeal was previously the subject  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    following which the Upper Tribunal remitted the case to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing.  The  appeal  was  then  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro at Hatton Cross on the 12th of January 2015  and
    dismissed in a decision of the 4th of February 2015.

 2. The case proceeded on the basis of agreed facts which  were  summarised
    in paragraph 38: the Appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil; he worked for the
    LTTE; he was arrested by  the  army  in  February  2009,  detained  and
    tortured and he escaped on the 23rd of May 2009.  Other  parts  of  the
    Appellant's claim were in dispute as set  out  in  the  Refusal  Letter
    essentially  turning  on  whether  the  authorities  had  a  continuing
    interest in the Appellant such that he would be at risk  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka.

 3. The Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  of  interest  to  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka for the reasons given in paragraphs 43  to  56
    of the decision. In paragraphs 44  and  45  the  Judge  considered  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's escape and the lack of interest  shown
    in the Appellant's family including his brother, also an LTTE member.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the Judge erred in a number of respects.  It  was  submitted
    that as the Appellant had escaped the objective  evidence  relating  to
    those who had been released was not relevant to his  circumstances  and
    that other aspects of objective evidence had not been  considered  such
    as the harassment of some who had been released. It was submitted  that
    the Judge had sought to go behind the agreed facts  of  the  case,  the
    only issue in dispute being whether his home had been  visited  by  the
    authorities after his escape.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on the 26th of February 2015. She did so  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the Judge had erred in  placing  weight
    on the letter from the British High Commission of the 1st of  September
    2010 given the preserved findings of fact that had been  made.  It  was
    also arguable that paragraph 4.15 of the COIS had not been  considered.
    The submissions of the Appellant's representative and the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer are set out in the Record of Proceedings.

 6. It is clear from the country guidance case of GJ and others (post civil-
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and  MP  (Sri  Lanka)
    and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829  that  the  authorities  in  Sri
    Lanka operate a sophisticated intelligence  system  and  are  concerned
    with those perceived to be a threat to the future territorial integrity
    of the unitary state of Sri Lanka.

 7. It is clear from paragraph 42 of the decision that the  Judge  focussed
    on the outstanding issue in dispute and the  consequences  which  would
    follow from the findings made. The Judge had referred to  the  evidence
    of security forces visits to the homes of  those  who  had  escaped  at
    paragraph 40/41 and so clearly had that in mind in  the  findings  that
    followed. The reasons for the Judge rejecting the  Appellant's  account
    are summarised in paragraph 44 of the decision and  reinforced  by  the
    reasons given in paragraph 45.

 8. The decision has to be read as a whole and in doing so it is clear that
    the Judge did have  regard  to  the  contents  of  the  COIS  including
    paragraph 4.15 and in that context the letter  from  the  British  High
    Commission appeared. Aspects of paragraph 4.15 were  supported  by  the
    British High Commission letter, such as the fact that some released did
    not received proper papers supporting a lack of planning.

 9. The circumstances of the  Appellant's  family  were  clearly  relevant,
    along with their own history, to the assessment of  the  situation  the
    Appellant would face in Sri Lanka. The apparent lack of interest in the
    Appellant's family was considered but I do not see how it could be said
    that reliance could not  be  placed  on  their  circumstances  or  that
    excessive regard was had to their situation and the  apparent  lack  of
    interest in them.

10. Read overall I am satisfied that the decision shows that the Judge  had
    regard to all the relevant evidence in assessing whether  there  was  a
    real risk that the Appellant would be of interest to the authorities in
    Sri Lanka having regard to the  Appellant's  history  and  the  country
    guidance case. The decision was open to the Judge and for  the  reasons
    given, the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro stands as  the
    decision in this appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 4th August 2015
