

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12480/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|on 23 September 2013                          |On 15 October 2013           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                            WAHEED GUL JABARKHEIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms King, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 July 1994.


     2. The appellant maintains that he is a refugee and also  entitled  to
        leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.




   Background to the Appeal


     3. The appellant claimed asylum on 13 April 2010. That application was
        refused on 25 August 2010. The appellant was granted  discretionary
        leave to remain on the same date as it was accepted that he was  an
        unaccompanied minor born  on  1  January  1994  for  whom  adequate
        reception arrangements had not been made.

     4. On 2 June 2011 the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain.
        That application was refused on 2 November 2011.

     5. The appellant appealed the refusal and  his  appeal  was  heard  by
        First-tier Tribunal  Judge Simpson on 12 December 2011. She allowed
        the appeal as not in accordance with the law as the respondent  had
        not complied with the tracing duty contained in Regulation 6 (1) of
        the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception   Conditions)   Regulations   2005
        (Regulation 6).

     6. On 17  January  2012  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the
        appellant on the  basis  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
        should have determined the appellant's substantive asylum and human
        rights claims.

     7.  On 21 March 2012 the Upper Tribunal found an error of law in  line
        with the grant of permission to appeal and set aside  the  decision
        of the First-tier Tribunal in order for the appeal to be remade.

     8. The appeal was remade by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman following  a
        hearing on 24 April 2012. Judge Macleman found  the  appellant  had
        been  born  on  1  July  1994.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  without
        addressing the fact of the appellant's minority at the date of  the
        hearing.

     9. On 12 March 2013 the appellant obtained permission to appeal to the
        Court of Appeal against the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal.  A
        Consent Order dated 17 July 2013 followed together with a Statement
        of Reasons which stated at paragraph 13:

                  "The Respondent accepts  that  since  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  assessed the Appellant to be a minor at the  date  of  his
                  hearing on 30 April 2012, it is a relevant factor for  the
                  Upper Tribunal to consider. It is therefore expedient  for
                  this matter to be remitted back to the Upper Tribunal  for
                  consideration of the Appellant's asylum and  human  rights
                  grounds according to law."

    10. The appeal thus came before me  to  be  remade  in  line  with  the
        indication in paragraph 13 of the Statement of Reasons.


    11. The parties were in agreement that, in particular, the  appellant's
        young age at the date of the hearing before me and the respondent's
        failure to comply with her duties  under  Regulation  6  should  be
        taken into account by me when determining whether the appellant  is
        a refugee or should  be  allowed  further  leave  to  remain  under
        Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Hearing

    12. I heard oral evidence from the appellant through an interpreter  in
        the Pushtu language and submissions from the legal representatives.


    13. I was provided with two bundles of evidence from the appellant, one
        comprising 169 pages and the other comprising 563 pages of  country
        evidence. In addition, I was provided with  a  statement  from  the
        appellant dated 9 September 2013 and a letter dated 13  March  2013
        from the British Red Cross.

   Accepted Facts


    14. The following facts are not in dispute.


    15. The appellant is an only child. His father was a Taliban commander.
        In mid-2009 the appellant's father was killed in battle. After  his
        father's death, the Taliban,  including  the  appellant's  paternal
        cousin, tried to recruit him to fight for them.  He  was  taken  by
        force to join them but managed to escape. He returned to  his  home
        and found that his mother was not there and went to the home of his
        maternal cousin. His cousin took him to Jalalabad and arranged  for
        an agent to take the appellant  to  the  United  Kingdom.  He  left
        Afghanistan in approximately July or August 2009 and arrived in the
        UK on 13 April 2010.

    16. I also accepted the contents of the letter dated 13 March 2013 from
        the British Red Cross. The British Red Cross  are  an  organisation
        with expertise in tracing family members and nothing was put before
        me to suggest that anything in their letter was not  reliable.  The
        letter was not challenged by Ms Holmes. I accept that the Red Cross
        have been informed that the appellant's mother  died  in  2011  and
        that they have been  unable  to  locate  the  appellant's  maternal
        cousin.

Submissions

    17. Ms Holmes submitted that, irrespective of the respondent's  failure
        to comply with her tracing duty, this appellant could  not  show  a
        real risk of mistreatment on return; EU (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013]
        EWCA Civ 32 cited.

    18. She accepted the principle set out in EU  and  preceding  case  law
        that there is no "bright line"  regarding  risk  and  vulnerability
        when an individual becomes 18 years old and that  there  is  not  a
        definitive cut-off point at the age of 18 as regards returnability.



    19. It remained the case, argued Ms Holmes, that this  appellant  could
        not show a real risk of mistreatment from the Taliban or any  other
        source if returned to Kabul now, even taking into account his age.

    20. The appellant had not shown a degree of vulnerability such that  he
        could not be  expected  to  relocate  to  Kabul.  The  main  factor
        weighing for the appellant when assessing risk of  return  was  his
        young age as he was 19 years old as of the date of the hearing. His
        history showed him to be someone of some competence.  He  had  been
        able to adapt to life in the UK and studied successfully here. When
        still younger he had been sufficiently robust to manage the journey
        from Afghanistan to the UK and claim asylum on arrival.

    21. Ms Holmes also referred to paragraphs 224 to 226 of AK (Article  15
        (c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC). The appellant would be
        returning with a reintegration package which would place him in  an
        advantageous position as regards further  education,  training  and
        maintenance. There was little evidence of  significant  numbers  of
        the  internally  displaced  population  suffering  destitution   or
        inability to survive at subsistence levels albeit the situation was
        recognised in  AK  as  very  difficult.  The  areas  in  which  the
        appellant  could  expect  to  live  would  be  less   affected   by
        indiscriminate violence in other parts of the city.

    22. Paragraph 243 of AK set down that conditions in Kabul did not  make
        relocation there unreasonable. This  appellant  was  in  a  similar
        position to the appellant considered at paragraph 253 of  AK  where
        the Upper Tribunal had found as follows:

                  "Even considered as a single young male returning  on  his
                  own without any family support, it is our finding that  he
                  would be able to live in Kabul in safety and without undue
                  hardship. In particular,  we  do  not  think  that  rising
                  prices for accommodation would prevent him finding  shared
                  accommodation and in this regard (as in regard to  finding
                  work) he would start from  the  advantageous  position  of
                  being able to benefit from the returns package"

    23. Where no risk on return had been demonstrated, Ms Holmes maintained
        that the failure of the respondent to trace the appellant's  family
        could not make the appellant a refugee. She referred to paragraph 6
        of EU (Afghanistan) which states:

                  "But to grant leave to remain to someone who has  no  risk
                  on return, whose Convention rights will not  be  infringed
                  by his return, and who has no other independent  claim  to
                  remain here (such as the claim to be a  skilled  migrant),
                  is to use the power to grant leave to remain for a purpose
                  other than that to which it is conferred. In effect, it is
                  to accede to  a  claim  to  remain  here  as  an  economic
                  migrant. The principle in Rashid has been referred  to  as
                  "the protective principle", but this is  a  misnomer:  the
                  person seeking to rely on this principle needs  to  do  so
                  only because  he's  been  found  not  to  be  in  need  of
                  protection. I do not think that the Court  should  require
                  or encourage the Secretary of State to grant leave in such
                  circumstances  either  in  order  to   mark   the   Courts
                  displeasure at her  conduct,  or  as  a  sanction  further
                  misconduct."

    24. Ms Holmes also submitted that although it  was  accepted  that  the
        appellant had established a private life in the  UK,  he  had  been
        here for only a relatively short period of  time,  only  just  over
        three years, and there was nothing about his private life that made
        it particularly serious  or  significant.  He  could  rely  on  the
        education he had received in the UK to assist him on return and use
        the reintegration package to seek further education or training  or
        some form of  employment  in  Afghanistan.  Removal  would  not  be
        disproportionate.

    25. Ms King submitted that EU and the preceding case law set  down  the
        principle that the respondent's failure to comply with the  tracing
        duty is a relevant factor when addressing  the  Refugee  Convention
        and Article 8 of the ECHR. That case and others also set down  that
        there is no "bright line" regarding risk to the  appellant  ceasing
        on his 18th birthday although she conceded that the risk  must,  to
        some extent, reduce as an individual matures.

    26. She accepted that AK indicated that conditions in Kabul in  general
        did not amount to a general risk on return but highlighted that the
        Tribunal in the same case did accept  that  conditions  there  were
        very difficult.  Paragraph  243  of  AK  also  indicated  that  the
        particular circumstances of an appellant must  still  be  assessed,
        even where there was no general risk.

    27. This appellant is still only 19 years old. He  does  not  have  any
        family to support him on return, his mother has died and his cousin
        is untraceable. He has no trade or skill by which he might  earn  a
        living so would have to seek work as an  unskilled  labourer,  work
        sought by many.

    28. Ms King also submitted that the respondent's failure to  carry  out
        her tracing duty whilst the appellant was still a minor had led  to
        him being denied a grant of  refugee  status  and  the  concomitant
        grant of five years' discretionary leave to remain. The letter from
        the Red Cross showed that the respondent would have  been  able  to
        establish that the appellant was an orphan with no wider family  to
        assist him. It was accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
        witness. Ms King submitted  that  he  should  now  be  put  in  the
        position in which he would have  been  but  for  the  Secretary  of
        State's unlawful conduct in failing to undertake any  endeavour  to
        trace the appellant's family.

    29. In any event, continued Ms King, the respondent's failure to  trace
        was  also  a  factor  relevant  to  the  proportionality   of   the
        interference to the appellant's private life;  paragraph  7  of  EU
        cited.

    30. In particular, Ms King submitted  that  the  respondent's  unlawful
        action in failing to trace should reduce the weight of afforded  to
        the public interest in the proportionality assessment. The ratio of
        EU was not that the failure to trace was relevant only in the cases
        of  a  particularly  vulnerable  appellant  or  someone   who   had
        established a particularly strong  private  life  in  the  UK.  The
        respondent's failure and detriment  arising  therefrom  was  not  a
        factor which should be negated by an appellant, such as  this  one,
        who had done relatively well in the UK without establishing a  very
        strong private life  and  was  without  significant  vulnerability.
        Regardless of  the  other  aspects  of  his  profile,  he  remained
        entitled  to  recognition  in  the  Article  8  assessment  of  the
        detriment arising  from  the  respondent's  failure  to  trace  his
        family.

    31. In this case, the appellant should be granted leave to remain under
        Article 8 of the ECHR as a  result  of  his  young  age,  the  very
        difficult life he would face in Kabul and the reduced weight to  be
        afforded the public  interest  as  a  result  of  the  respondent's
        failure to trace.

Discussion


    32. It was not my judgement that the appellant has shown that he is  at
        risk of mistreatment on return to Kabul.


    33. It was not argued that he will face a risk there from  the  Taliban
        of forced recruitment.

    34. The other aspects of his profile, considered  against  the  country
        evidence and case law on risk on return to Kabul, is not sufficient
        to show a real risk of mistreatment on return.


    35. That is so even taking into account at the highest  his  relatively
        young age, his having not lived independently thus far, lack  of  a
        profession and absence of any family support on return. He has some
        education from the  UK  which  can  assist  him.  He  will  have  a
        reintegration grant to support himself with and provide him with an
        advantage if he wishes to study further or train for a  profession.
        Set against the situation in general in Kabul as found in AK,  this
        appellant's profile  is not sufficient to show that return to Kabul
        would given rise to a real risk  of  mistreatment  or  that  it  is
        unreasonable for him to relocate there.


    36. The  respondent's  failure  to  trace  the  appellant's  family  is
        undisputed. The detriment to the appellant arising therefrom cannot
        show him to  be  at  a  real  risk  of  mistreatment  however;  EU,
        paragraph 7 applied.


    37. The failure to trace the appellant's  family  is  relevant  to  the
        proportionality assessment of the interference to  the  appellant's
        private life, however. It appeared to  me  that  Ms  King  must  be
        right, that the failure to trace, even following EU, has  to  be  a
        factor of relevance in that regard if,  but  for  the  respondent's
        failure to trace, would have been recognised as a refugee.

    38. Ms King argued that the effect on the Article 8 assessment was that
        the weight to be afforded to public interest in the operation of an
        effective immigration policy  and  therefore  the  removal  of  the
        appellant, should be reduced. It did not appear  to  me,  accepting
        her submission for the sake of argument, that it  made  a  material
        difference to the proportionality assessment  whether  this  factor
        reduced the weight on the respondent's side of the balance or added
        to that on the appellant's side. This factor can  only  be  weighed
        once on one side or  the  other.  Whichever  route  is  taken,  the
        appellant obtains redress in  the  Article  8  assessment  for  the
        detriment arising from the respondent's failure to trace.

    39. In any  event,  even  following  Ms  King's  argument  that  weight
        detracted from the public interest as a result of the  respondent's
        failure to trace, it was not my view that this  was  sufficient  to
        assist this appellant.

    40. There are matters clearly weighing in the appellant's  favour  when
        assessing whether it is proportionate for him to return  to  Kabul.
        AK concedes that even if it does not give rise to  a  general  need
        for protection, the situation in Kabul is hard.  The  appellant  is
        still a very young man. He has lost both of his parents and has  no
        other relatives to turn to  in  Afghanistan.  He  has  not  had  to
        support himself and live independently thus far.

    41. It remains the case that he will be returning with  some  education
        gained in the UK. He will also have a reintegration grant that will
        give him some assistance in obtaining further education or training
        or simply supporting himself by  way  of  accommodation  and  basic
        provisions. Afghanistan is not alien to him; he has been in the  UK
        for only just over 3 years and spent the majority of his  formative
        years in Afghanistan.

    42. It was therefore my view, even after  lowering  the  weight  to  be
        placed  on  the  public  interest  to  reflect   the   respondent's
        illegality in  failing  to  trace  and  the  detriment  that  arose
        therefrom for the appellant, that his removal would not  amount  to
        the "sufficiently serious" circumstances identified in Huang [2007]
        UKHL 11 as necessary for a decision to be found to  breach  Article
        8.

   Decision


    43. I re-make the appeal, dismissing it on all grounds.



Signed:                                 Dated:

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt










