
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12416/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 August 2017                      |On 21 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     G Y
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his protection appeal, which is based both  on
    his father's domestic violence towards the appellant before he came  to
    the United Kingdom, and on the  risk  of  harm  to  him  from  criminal
    creditors of his father, seeking to put  pressure  on  the  appellant's
    father for payment of the father's gambling debts.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge treated the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    person and applied the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010:
    Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant   guidance.    The
    appellant was born in March 1999 and at the date of promulgation of the
    First-tier Tribunal decision he had already attained his  majority.  He
    did so between the hearing and promulgation, and there is in the First-
    tier Tribunal decision consideration of the appellant's section 55 best
    interests, which are  not  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  an  adult
    appellant's circumstances.

 3. The First-tier Judge accepted that the abuse by the appellant's  father
    had occurred, that the appellant was subjectively  and  objectively  in
    fear of his father and that no protection existed for him in  the  home
    area.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept that  there  was  a
    risk from criminal gangs in respect of the appellant's father's alleged
    debts:  that part of the  account  was  rejected,  although  the  Judge
    accepted that the appellant's belief in the risk, and his fear  of  the
    gangs, was real.

 4. This appeal therefore turns on the availability of internal  relocation
    to protect the appellant from his father's  violence.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted at [82] that if the appellant did not return to
    his home area, he would find employment and accommodation difficult  to
    obtain elsewhere in Albania, and that there were  very  low  employment
    rates. However, the Judge approached his decision on the express  basis
    that the appellant's uncle would be easy to trace, and would be willing
    to support him, if he were living elsewhere in Albania.

 5. The Judge also found that the appellant's  local  authority  (Kingston-
    upon-Thames and London  Borough  of  Richmond)  could  be  expected  to
    continue to support the appellant after his return to Albania.  That is
    a factually incorrect assertion which was put in issue in the Secretary
    of State's Rule 24 Reply: neither the Secretary of State nor the  local
    authority has any responsibility for the appellant  once  he  has  been
    returned to Albania.

 6.  The  respondent  takes  no  issue  with  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's social worker, Ms Drammeh at the hearing in February  2017,
    concerning his maturity, which is recorded in  the  decision  at  [64]-
    [67]:

         "64. ... [Ms Drammeh] describes the Appellant living  in  supported
             lodgings, attending college  and  making  very  good  progress
             there.  She refers to him having made friends through  college
             and community and using the gym.  She  observes  he  does  not
             have had prior experience of independent or  semi  independent
             living.  The Appellant lives with four others in a  house,  Ms
             Darlington told me that she, as his social worker, would visit
             one a month or more often the Appellant needed she told me  of
             that these would be taking him to appointments  or  assistance
             with engaging with  other  agencies.   She  explained  that  a
             support worker visited not  just  for  the  Appellant  but  to
             undertake a check upon all of  the  residents.   Ms  Drammeh's
             letter states that she would be concerned that  the  Appellant
             would not be able to live independently  without  safe  family
             support, she describes him (in  the  letter)  as  'vulnerable,
             pleasant, personable, polite and  sensible  young  man'.   The
             Appellant told me that he would not be able  to  work  support
             himself or have money to eat if he returned to Albania.

         65.   The  Appellant  told  me  that  he  cooks  for  himself   (an
             improvement, I note, since Mrs Drammeh wrote her  letter),  he
             said that he had help with appointments stating that he  would
             not be able to make appointments himself.  Ms Drammeh told  me
             that the Appellant would need support even in the UK over  the
             next few years.  She explained that  the  Appellant  had  made
             excellent progress with support but described him  as  at  the
             level of a 14 year old  needing  encouragement  and  requested
             help with obtaining and engaging with services.  She said that
             his development  was  possibly  slowed  because  of  his  life
             experiences (which I took to mean the abuse sustained  by  his
             father).  She explained  that  the  Appellant  was  not  in  a
             comparable position to a person who has lived in  the  UK  for
             many years.  She said he has had 'so many  obstacles  that  he
             has not been able to develop the knowledge and  confidence  to
             go out into the  world,  the  UK'.   She  explained  that  the
             support that would be offered to the Appellant in the UK  upon
             him turning 18 years old would be as a care leaver in  the  UK
             to mimic adequate support parents would provide.  She said  in
             this regard 'he would need support higher than a British child
             say going to university'.  I note too the provision of  direct
             financial support to care leavers, and Ms Drammeh referred  me
             to the relevant Local Authority's  statutory  responsibilities
             in this respect.  Ms Drammeh therefore confirmed  to  me  that
             the     Local     Authority     would      have      statutory
             responsibilities/obligations toward the Appellant as  a  child
             and upon turning 18 years as he now has  a  responsibility  to
             the Appellant as a former child in care.  ...

         66.  I find that the Appellant has made developmental  progress  as
             would be expected since  arriving  in  the  UK  and  since  Ms
             Drammeh's first letter.  ...  I find that  the  Appellant  has
             limited practical support on a day to day basis,  I  note  the
             support offered (other  than  accommodation  and  finance)  is
             largely related to  arranging  and  taking  the  Appellant  to
             appointments.

         67.  ... Moreover I conclude the Appellant is able to meet his  own
             daily living  and  care  needs  himself  should  he  have  the
             financial resources to do so, and from my  findings  that  the
             Appellant is an intelligent young person, that  the  Appellant
             would be able to meet his appointments  in  his  home  country
             himself.

         68.  It is not in the Appellant's best interest that he  return  to
             live with his father and mother.  I make this finding, perhaps
             obviously, in light of the past abuse by his father.   I  have
             had regard to Rule 339K in this  respect  and  in  my  overall
             assessment as to the risk to the Appellant upon return."

    The Judge considered that the reason why the appellant needed  so  much
    support in the United Kingdom was largely that  he  had  not  grown  up
    here.  He found the appellant to be intelligent and to be living in the
    United Kingdom in a 'semi-independent manner'.

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

    Grounds of appeal

 8. The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  challenged  the  negative  factual
    findings regarding the appellant's account of risk  from  his  father's
    creditors, and the findings regarding  internal  relocation,  his  best
    interests as a child, and Article 8 ECHR.

 9. Regarding internal relocation, the appellant relied on the evidence  of
    his social worker, Ms Drammeh, and on a letter  from  Sachin  Dev,  his
    support services manager, that he would 'find it very difficult to cope
    if he were returned to Albania'.

10. The appellant contended that there was  no  evidential  basis  for  the
    Judge's  findings  that  the  appellant   would   receive   post-return
    assistance in Albania as a care leaver from his local authority in  the
    United Kingdom.  He relied on a letter from Ms Drammeh's line  manager,
    Shaira Makorie, which confirmed that  the  local  authority  could  not
    provide  any  support  for  the  appellant  in  Albania,  financial  or
    otherwise.  He argued that this error was of the utmost significance.

11. Finally, in relation to internal relocation,  the  appellant  contended
    that it was unreasonable for the Judge to rely on putative support from
    his maternal uncle in Albania.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had found
    that the appellant had been subjected to treatment by his father  which
    met the past persecution threshold in paragraph 339K of the Rules; that
    if he returned to his home area that persecution was reasonably  likely
    to be repeated; and that there was no sufficiency of protection for the
    appellant in his home area.  He reminded the Upper  Tribunal  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had accepted that he had not been in  contact  with
    any family members since leaving Albania over two years  ago  and  that
    for him to seek to trace and rely on  his  maternal  uncle,  who  still
    lived in the home area, would put the appellant at grave risk, even  if
    his uncle was willing to help and had not moved  away,  become  ill  or
    infirm, or died, in the meantime.

12. The appellant  contended  that  on  the  above  basis,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings were perverse and/or Wednesbury unreasonable.

13. I do not  set  out  the  ground  concerning  the  appellant's  father's
    creditors in detail here, as it was not pursued before me.

    Permission to appeal

14. Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal had arguably erred in  its  assessment  of
    internal relocation for the appellant  after  his  return  to  Albania.
    The grant of permission included all grounds in the grounds of  appeal,
    but as stated above, only internal relocation was argued at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.







    Rule 24 Reply

15. The respondent opposed the grant of permission to appeal.   So  far  as
    relevant to the internal relocation issue, the  Rule  24  Reply  is  as
    follows:

         "... 3. It is noted that whilst the Judge states that the appellant
         will receive financial support whether in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         Albania,  the  Judge  acknowledges  that  the   local   authority's
         statutory responsibility will cease should the appellant leave  the
         United  Kingdom.  ...  It  is  submitted  that  this  will  include
         financial  support  as  that  is  part  of  the  local  authority's
         statutory responsibility.  However, it is accepted that  the  Judge
         does refer to this as a  reason  for  finding  internal  relocation
         would be possible.

         ...

         5.   Notwithstanding the above, the Judge has considered  that  the
         appellant's father will not have the means  to  trace  him.   ..The
         [Judge]  also  considered  other  factors  in  terms  of   internal
         relocation and it is submitted those would be  sufficient  to  make
         the finding of internal relocation sustainable. ..."

    Error of law

16. On 9 June 2016, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf found  an  error  of
    law and decided that the appeal would need to be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal including a consideration of the appellant's circumstances  as
    found and a nexus with the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Qualification
    Directive 2004/83/EC and the section 55 best interests of the appellant
    as a child.   That latter finding is erroneous and I treat this  appeal
    as sounding only under the Refugee Convention, Qualification  Directive
    or in human rights considerations.

17. That is the basis on which this appeal came before me for hearing.

    Upper Tribunal hearing

18. I heard submissions from Mr Hoshi for the appellant, and Mr Tarlow  for
    the respondent.   Mr Hoshi produced  a  note  of  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Drammeh, which had not been agreed by the Upper Tribunal  or  with  the
    Home Office.  In view of the undisputed record of her evidence  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision, I did not consider it necessary to  admit
    that document.  I admitted, and had  regard  to,  the  letter  from  Ms
    Makorie mentioned above.

19. For the respondent, Mr Tarlow  did  not  dispute  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  findings  regarding  local  authority  support  in  Albania
    constituted an error of fact at the level of an error of law  and  that
    the appeal decision would need to be remade.

20. The parties' submissions on internal relocation restated the  arguments
    in the pleadings set out above and there is no need to set them out  in
    detail here.







    Discussion

21. The first point to make is that the appellant is not a child,  and  was
    not a child when the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision.
    The section 55 best interests duty has ceased  to  apply.  The  Judge's
    consideration  of  the  appellant's  section  55  best   interests   is
    nevertheless of assistance in considering the safety of returning  this
    appellant.  The Judge accepted that it was not in the appellant's  best
    interests to return to live with his father and mother in his home area
    and that there was insufficient protection for him there.

22. The  accepted  facts  concerning  the  domestic  violence  against  the
    appellant by his father engage paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules
    HC395 (as amended):

         "339K.   The fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be  repeated."
         [Emphasis added]

    I am not satisfied that there are such reasons in the appellant's  home
    area.  The real question is whether at his age and maturity,  he  could
    survive safely by exercising his internal relocation  option  to,  say,
    Tirana or somewhere else in Albania, away from the home area.   Albania
    is a small country and family networks are large.  News travels fast.

23. The social worker's evidence was that the appellant's maturation  while
    in the United Kingdom had been slower than would  be  the  case  for  a
    person of the same age who grew up here.  The Judge  accepted  that  he
    was a vulnerable  person.  I  remind  myself  that  his  social  worker
    considered him to be functioning "at the level of a 14-year-old needing
    encouragement and requesting help  with  obtaining  and  engaging  with
    services".

24. The Judge found that this appellant would have difficulty finding  both
    employment and accommodation outside his home area, and that there were
    very low rates of employment in general in Albania. I consider that the
    appellant cannot be expected to rely on the  support  of  his  mother's
    brother, even if his maternal uncle is still in the home area,  because
    that would disclose the appellant's whereabouts to his parents, and  is
    likely to revive the risk in the home area and to signal to his  father
    where it is that he has relocated, thereby  defeating  the  purpose  of
    internal relocation.

25. I am not satisfied, having regard to the evidence, that this young man,
    given  his  limited  social  skills  and  his  vulnerability,  and  his
    inability to risk accessing his family network, would or could  survive
    successfully in another part of Albania.  He would have no contact with
    his extended family, not any Social Services or other support  and,  as
    the judge found, and a very restricted  possibility  of  employment  as
    employment is difficult to find in Albania.  There would be a real risk
    of destitution on that basis.

26. I therefore substitute a decision allowing the appeal  on  both  asylum
    and human rights grounds, because I consider that there is a real  risk
    to this appellant of further domestic abuse from his father, should  he
    seek to access any assistance from his extended family and  that  as  a
    vulnerable young man with the limited social skills he has he  is  also
    at risk of persecution or serious harm, alternatively  that  to  expect
    him to relocate elsewhere in Albania where he would  have  a  very  low
    chance of employment or accommodation, and would  lack  the  skills  to
    deal with any problems which arose, raises a real risk of an Article  8
    ECHR breach.

Conclusions

The First-tier Tribunal did make a material error of law in its decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake the  decision
by allowing the appeal.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        21 August 2017
          Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

