
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12961/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 May 2017                       |On 24 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     k a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms F Alan, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake for clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent"  and  K  A  as  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who appealed against a decision
    of the Respondent granting him asylum and to remove him from the United
    Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 of the
    Immigration Act  1971.  The  Appellant  also  relied  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Fletcher-Hill who  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  23  December  2016
    dismissed it  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer on 6 April 2017. His reasons  for  so
    doing were:-

       "1.    The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fletcher-Hill  promulgated  on  23
           December 2016 whereby the appeal against the decision to  refuse
           to grant asylum or ancillary protection was allowed.

        2. I am satisfied that  the  application  is  in  time  as  it  was
           received on 6 January 2017.

        3.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  did  not  engage  with  the
           Respondent's credibility attack when  considering  the  account.
           This arguably also undermines the  findings  regarding  risk  on
           return. All grounds may be argued."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. In making his submissions Mr Whitwell relied upon the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal. He also relied on the authority of Mibanga [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367 and submitted that in the appeal before me the Judge erred
    in considering the medical evidence and then  immediately  finding  the
    Appellant to  be  politically  active  in  Sri  Lanka.  Thereafter,  he
    explained that his strongest argument was in  relation  to  the  second
    ground. The Judge has failed to engage with all of the evidence and  in
    particular  issues  raised  in  the  refusal  letter  relating  to  the
    Appellant's credibility at paragraphs 22 to  28  thereof.  Finally  the
    Judge has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  holding  that  the
    Appellant is a refugee sur place.

 7. Ms Alan resisted these grounds. She urged me  to  accept  that  it  was
    necessary to look at the totality  of  the  decision.  The  Judge  had,
    contrary to  the  grounds,  connected  with  Respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  This  is  referred  to  in  the  Judge's  decision  at
    paragraph 2.1 where the Judge details the documentation she  has  taken
    into account prior to making her decision and at  paragraph  5.1  where
    she records the representations of both advocates as to the issues that
    were in play. Further references were made to  the  refusal  letter  at
    paragraph 7.1 and again the representations of the  advocates  at  7.2.
    The decision sets out fully the issues raised by the Respondent and  at
    paragraphs 9.2 to 9.9  there  is  a  credibility  assessment  including
    consideration of Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
    Claimants etc) Act 2004. Paragraph 25 of  the  refusal  letter  asserts
    that the Appellant has provided no independent evidence of his  alleged
    arrest, torture and detention or his claim to have been severely beaten
    or of any  injuries.  This  was  met  by  the  expert  medical  reports
    submitted at the hearing which the Judge  properly  took  into  account
    when carrying out her credibility assessment. Beyond that the Judge has
    taken into account the Appellant's own evidence including at  paragraph
    9.11 of the decision that in relation to his sur place activities.

 8. I accept the totality of the submissions made by Ms Alan.  Mr  Whitwell
    indicated that ground (b) was his strongest.  On  any  reading  of  the
    decision the Judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusions that she did and has fully taken into account the  totality
    of the arguments raised in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  credibility
    contained within the Respondent's refusal letter. Further ground (a) is
    simply  factually  incorrect.  The  Judge  has   not   leapt   from   a
    consideration of the medical evidence to  reach  an  immediate  finding
    that the Appellant was politically active in Sri Lanka. Paragraph  9.10
    of the Judge's decision is nothing more than  a  recital  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the Judge to take into account the authority of  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  and  other
    background material.

 9. This is a careful decision where the Judge has taken into  account  the
    totality of the evidence that was before her before coming to  findings
    that were open to be made on that  evidence.  She  has  not  materially
    erred as asserted by the Respondent. She was entitled to find that  the
    Appellant was a credible witness and taking into account  the  evidence
    not only from him but also contained within the medical report.  In  so
    doing she has engaged with the totality of  the  Respondent's  concerns
    regarding the Appellant's credibility. Those concerns were met not only
    by the Appellant's own evidence but  also  by  that  from  the  medical
    expert. The Judge has not  simply  relied  upon  the  medical  evidence
    before coming to  her  conclusions.  This  is  an  adequately  reasoned
    decision dealing with all issues in the appeal  and  does  not  contain
    material errors as asserted by the Respondent.

Conclusions

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

11. I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable as the Appellant was fee exempt.


Signed                              Date 23 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

