
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
aa/12953/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 June 2017                            |  On 15 June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                   mr q h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is an Albanian national born on 19 May 1948.
     The respondent refused the appellant's application for  asylum  on  14
    October  2015.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  that  refusal   was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal G A Jones QC on 22  March
    2016.  That decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in a  decision
    promulgated on 24 June 2016.  No findings of fact  were  preserved  and
    the appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell on 4 January 2017.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 18  January  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Kimnell dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 2. It was not disputed before me that the only live issue was  the  appeal
    on protection grounds and the appellant had not sought to challenge the
    dismissal of his appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal  with  permission  on  the
    following grounds:

      a) Ground 1: failure to assess credibility  in  the  round/failure  to
         make reasoned findings;

      b) Ground 2: reliance on inherent plausibility;

      c)  Ground  3:  flaws  in  assessing  the  availability  of   internal
         relocation.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. Mr Bonavero submitted in relation to Ground 1 that there were key parts
    of the evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  daughter  that  were  not
    properly considered by the judge.  In particular the judge had rejected
    the threats to the appellant and the claimed damage to his property  as
    "complete fiction" and that "whatever the attitude of the X family  may
    be to the appellant's daughter, he is not at risk" [74].   Mr  Bonavero
    submitted  that  the  appellant's  evidence  in   these   matters   was
    corroborated by the evidence of his daughter in the following ways:

      a) With direct, first  hand  evidence  of  her  marital  problems  and
         fleeing from the X family, which was a source of the asserted blood
         feud/dispute;

      b) With direct, first hand evidence that "her  husband  had  told  her
         that if she left him he would kill her and her father";

      c) With second hand evidence that the appellant recounted the  threats
         he had received by telephone, whilst she was in Belgium (between 15
         November 2012 and 5 January 2013) i.e. at least two  months  before
         he made an asylum claim.

 5. It was submitted that all these aspects of the  appellant's  daughter's
    evidence were corroborative of the appellant's  account  and  that  the
    appellant's daughter and son had been found to be credible witnesses by
    the Upper Tribunal.

 6. However, Judge Kimnell acknowledged at [56] that  the  outcome  of  the
    appellant's daughter's appeal was a starting point for  Judge  Kimnell.
    Specifically the judge found that:

         "Importantly it is also necessary  when  assessing  credibility  to
         take as a starting point the findings made by Deputy Upper Tribunal
         Judge Lindsley in the appeal of the appellant's daughter."

 7. It was submitted that the judge had made adverse  credibility  findings
    against the appellant without considering the evidence in the round and
    had not considered the direct evidence of the appellant's daughter; nor
    had there been any consideration  of  the  value  of  the  second  hand
    evidence, namely that the appellant described the threats  received  to
    his daughter months before he made  the  asylum  claim.   It  was  also
    submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  reach  a  finding  as  to  the
    credibility of the  appellant's  daughter's  evidence  on  the  central
    matters.  Mr Bonavero submitted that the judge,  in  order  to  dismiss
    this evidence, would need to give reasons for not finding it credible.

 8. However, Mr Bonavero accepted  that  at  [65]  the  judge  specifically
    stated that "the evidence from the witnesses in this case contains many
    inconsistencies."  Although Mr Bonavero suggested that this was  mainly
    in relation to the appellant, that is not the case, as the  judge  went
    on, at [65], to find that the marriage certificate in  respect  of  the
    appellant's daughter showed that it was issued on 27 December 2010  and
    the judge specifically rejected  the  evidence  "from  the  appellant's
    daughter that the document simply marks  her  engagement".   The  judge
    also noted that the appellant at interview said that his  daughter  was
    married in August 2012 whereas, according to the witness statement  and
    oral evidence, it was August 2011.

 9.  It  was  entirely  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that   there   were
    inconsistencies in the evidence of all three witnesses,  including  the
    appellant's daughter.  This included that the judge had  been  provided
    three dates for the appellant's marriage.  The fact that Upper Tribunal
    Judge Lindsley found the appellant's  daughter  credible  in  her  2014
    appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  determinative   of   her
    credibility before Judge Kimnell.  I accept  Mr  Bonavero's  submission
    that although a later Tribunal should not regard  itself  as  bound  to
    follow previous decision, the principles of good administration require
    that decisions should not be needlessly  divergent  and  therefore  the
    earlier decision should be treated  as  starting  point.   However,  it
    cannot be disputed that a Tribunal must not  hesitate  to  depart  from
    that starting point "in every case where the evidence requires it"  (AS
    and AA (Effect of  previous  linked  determination)  [2006]  UKAIT  52)
    applied).

10. I have also considered what the Court of Appeal said in AA & AH  [2007]
    EWCA  Civ  1040.   This  discussed  the  various  principles  including
    (including in Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA 1276 and TK  (Consideration  of
    Prior Determinations) Georgia [2004] UKIAT 00149)) that the  Devaseelan
    [2004] UKIAT 00282 guidelines were not limited  to  cases  between  the
    same parties.  The Court of Appeal confirmed that the first decision is
    not  binding  and  it  is  the  fundamental  obligation  of  the  judge
    independently to decide the second case on its own individual merits:

         "If,  having  considered  the  factual  conclusions  of  the  first
         Tribunal, the second Tribunal rationally reaches different  factual
         conclusions, then it is those conclusions which it must  apply  and
         not those of the first Tribunal." (Paragraph 29 LJ Hooper).

11. Mr Bonavero submitted that in relation to Ground 3 the judge  erred  in
    his approach to the Upper Tribunal's finding  that  it  was  "probable"
    that the X family had connections with authority as the  judge  was  of
    the view that "there appears to be no evidence whatsoever on which that
    conclusion  was  reached  and  it  was  not  expressed   as   a   clear
    finding"([59] of Judge Kimnell's decision.  Mr Bonavero submitted  that
    this was incorrect and that Judge Lindsley had given cogent reasons  as
    to why she accepted that the appellant's daughter could  not  relocate.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley found that the appellant's  daughter  was
    consistent in her evidence that the X family were a big family and  she
    new  they  had  friends  in  "different  positions,  everywhere"   with
    "relationships with those in the police, with  drivers  and  government
    officials".  Judge Lindsley went  on  at  paragraph  43  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision to accept that it was "probable  that  some  of  them
    have  connections  with  authority  (such  as  the  police  and   local
    government)" including  because  she  found  the  appellant's  daughter
    credible and it was clear that they  are  "significantly  more  wealthy
    than her own family, owing a lot of cars, with number plates indicating
    residence from regions around Albania, and speaking in a more  educated
    fashion".  Mr Bonavero submitted therefore  that  the  judge  erred  in
    considering  that  there  was  "no  evidence  whatsoever"   for   Judge
    Lindsley's conclusion and that her conclusions were not "expressed as a
    clear finding".  Mr Bonavero submitted that Judge Kimnell then went  on
    to compound his error at [77] by finding that the X family were  not  a
    rich or powerful family in Albania with influence over the  authorities
    and provided no evidence for this.

12. However, the judge was entitled to reach the findings he did  including
    that   the   evidence   of   the   witnesses   before   him   contained
    inconsistencies.  In  addition  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    returned from France where he fled in 2010 according to  his  interview
    (despite the fact that it was his evidence his daughter  was  not  even
    married at that stage) and remained at  home  "for  more  than  a  year
    indicating that he did not fear  for  his  safety  from  the  X  family
    because of any threat issued in September 2011" [67].  It was  open  to
    the judge was  to  consider  in  the  round  his  negative  credibility
    findings in relation to the claimed threats against  the  appellant  in
    September 2011 and his rejection of that evidence.

13. The judge had in mind both that Judge Lindsley decision was a  starting
    point and that this  included  the  positive  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's daughter.  However it was incumbent on  the
    judge to take into account all the evidence including the oral evidence
    from the appellant and the appellant's  daughter  and  the  appellant's
    son, which was set out in some detail at [11] through to  [52]  of  the
    decision, including the submissions of both parties.

14. The judge took great care in his reasons and  fully  explored  all  the
    evidence, giving adequate reasons for not finding that  this  appellant
    was at risk in relation to the blood feud "whatever the attitude of the
    X family may be to the appellant's daughter".  It  was  submitted  that
    the judge gave no reasons for finding that the family are not rich  and
    powerful/have no influence over the authorities.  However, reading  the
    decision and reasons as a whole, the judge was relying on his  findings
    as to the "many inconsistencies" between the parties, the fact that the
    appellant was able to return and live safely from  France  to  Albania,
    the fact (as set out at [70]) that the appellant was able to reside  in
    Shkodra between October 2012 and February 2013 without  coming  to  any
    adverse attention and the fact that there was no evidence  in  the  124
    pages of country information relating to the X family.   Therefore  the
    finding at [77] that the appellant was not at risk and that  they  were
    not a rich and powerful family with influence over the authorities  was
    a finding that was open to Judge Kimnell on the further  evidence  that
    he received and which justified his  departing  from  the  findings  of
    Judge Lindsley on this point in 2014.

15. Any error therefore that the judge made in stating that there  was  "no
    evidence whatsoever"  for  Judge  Lindsley's  conclusion  that  it  was
    'probable' in 2014 that some of the family  had  connections  with  the
    authorities such as the police or local  government,  is  not  material
    given that there were adequate reasons given for the findings  at  [77]
    that the family are not rich  and  powerful  with  influence  over  the
    authorities.

16. In relation to Ground 2 Mr Bonavero submitted that the judge's findings
    were of some concern in that he rejected the appellant's  case  as  not
    plausible which is unsafe given the advice from the Court of Appeal  in
    HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037:

         "Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases,
         can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely  on
         in some asylum cases.  Much of the evidence will  be  referable  to
         societies with customs and circumstances which are  very  different
         from those of which the members of the fact-finding  Tribunal  have
         any (even second hand) experience."

17. It was submitted that the likely behaviour of  assailants  in  a  blood
    feud falls into this category and that it was an error on  the  judge's
    part to find that it was not plausible that the  assailants  would  not
    have lain in wait for the appellant.  However, the judge reached  these
    findings in the context of what he found to be the inconsistency of the
    evidence of the witnesses  as  already  detailed  and  the  appellant's
    answer at interview, when he said that six months after his  daughter's
    marriage the X family came to his home to tell him  that  his  daughter
    did not turn out to be "good" was inconsistent with his  evidence  that
    this occurred in September, the  month  after  the  marriage  and  that
    according to his previous answer at question 26, six months  after  the
    marriage, his  daughter  was  "alright".   The  judge  also  took  into
    consideration that, although he had heard evidence from the appellant's
    daughter and the appellant's son, neither were  eye  witnesses  to  the
    incident:  "Neither can give direct evidence of what occurred"  ([71]).
    In  all  these  circumstances  there  was  no  material  error  in  the
    conclusions reached.

18. The judge had also took into consideration at [2] of the  decision  and
    reasons that the appellant had left Albania in 2010 but was detected in
    France and returned to Albania and had given different  dates  for  his
    date of departure and  that  at  [6]  the  appellant  had  specifically
    confirmed that he was not  present  when  the  claimed  assailants  had
    attacked his property and shot  dead  his  dog  and  that  he  had  not
    returned home.

19. The judge indicated that a concession had been made in  the  daughter's
    appeal before Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsay, but no such concession  had
    been made before Judge Kimnell.  It is not the case, and  Ms  Isherwood
    did not specifically assert, that any such concessions are relevant  to
    the application  of  the  Devaseelan  principles  However  Mr  Bonavero
    accepted that the judge was not wrong to note that  and  to  take  into
    consideration in his findings  that  there  were  no  concessions  made
    before him.  The judge quite properly asked the Presenting  Officer  at
    the appeal  before  him  to  address  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    daughter's appeal was allowed and noted  that  it  was  the  Presenting
    Officer's position that "there is no blood feud with the  X  family  in
    existence in Albania and any incident that might have  occurred  whilst
    the  appellant  was  living  in  Albania  was  isolated.   It  is   the
    respondent's position that he is at no continuing threat of harm".

20. The judge was entitled, having taken Judge  Lindsley's  findings  as  a
    starting point, to  nevertheless  reject  as  a  complete  fiction  the
    evidence of the threats to the appellant in September  2011  given  the
    inconsistent evidence before notwithstanding that Judge  Lindsley  took
    into account that there were threats  made  to  the  appellant  in  the
    course of the appeal by the appellant's daughter.

21. I am satisfied that the  judge  gave  the  appropriate  weight  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's daughter but provided  more  than  adequate
    reasons why,  notwithstanding  that  weight,  and  notwithstanding  the
    positive findings made  by  Judge  Lindsley  and  the  success  of  the
    appellant's daughter's appeal which was said to be based on an issue of
    "honour", that there was no risk to this appellant.  The judge  reached
    his own conclusions for the reasons given and I am  satisfied  that  he
    gave adequate reasons for doing so.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of law  such
    that it should be set  aside  and  shall  stand.   The  appeal  by  the
    appellant is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 15 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.

Signed                                  Date: 15 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
