
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12842/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 September 2016 and 20 December 2017     |On 13 November 2019           |
|Further submissions on 18 June and 12 July    |                              |
|2019                                          |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                  D--- D---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
12 September 2016
For the Appellant:     Dr S Chelvan, Counsel, instructed by AT Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
20 December 2017
For the Appellant:     Dr S Chelvan, Counsel, instructed by AT Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                               Paragraphs 1-43
               REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because the  appellant  is  the  victim  of
       domestic violence and the decision requires  some  consideration  of
       her child. I see  no  legitimate  public  interest  in  knowing  the
       identities of the people concerned and people  whose  cases  require
       them to give very personal details about their histories should  not
       expect their identities to be broadcast unnecessarily.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who appeals with permission  a
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a
       decision of the respondent that she is not entitled to international
       protection.

    3. It is a feature of this case that the respondent accepted  expressly
       that the appellant was a victim of domestic violence at the hands of
       her estranged husband.  This is clear beyond all doubt at  paragraph
       18 of the "Detailed Reasons for Refusal".

    4. The same document summarised the appellant's case.

    5. It said that the appellant is an Albanian national who was  born  in
       1984 and who married in 2001 but the relationship has ended and  she
       wanted to divorce her husband.  They had a son, L--- and he was with
       her in the United Kingdom.  The child was born in 2003 and so is now
       13 years old.

    6. According to the summary  she  had  described  her  marriage  as  an
       arranged marriage and said that her husband became  violent  towards
       her soon after the wedding.  She remembered the date when she  first
       suffered violence at her husband's hands.  He hit her on 10 November
       2001.  He slapped her face  and  told  her  to  obey  him  when  she
       objected to rising at 6 o'clock in the morning.  She  was  asked  if
       she was injured in the attack and she said: "The injury was  that  I
       was quite surprised that he was hitting me, I was  only  17  at  the
       time."  (Question 22 of interview).  She accepted that the pain  was
       more mental than physical but said that the  incidents  of  violence
       continued.  She came to realise  that  he  was  a  violent  man  and
       although she intended to obey him "he would always find something, a
       word or anything, he didn't want the women to talk".  She said  that
       initially violent  episodes  occurred  every  two  months  and  were
       limited to a slap  in  the  face.   Her  husband  started  to  incur
       gambling debts and he became more violent.   She  said  "he  was  no
       longer just  slapping  me,  he  was  punching  me  and  hard."   She
       complained of bruises and pain.  She eventually found the courage to
       leave in August 2014.  Asked how often he would beat her during  the
       twelve years that they were together she said  "I  could  say  every
       month because he then continued to drink alcohol".

    7. She complained  that  she  sometimes  has  suffered  nosebleeds  and
       bruises on the body and pain to the  point  that  she  could  hardly
       move.  On  one  occasion  he  slapped  their  son  because  the  boy
       protested about his father hitting the appellant.

    8. She supported her case with a statement  dated  22  September  2015.
       There she explained that there was a celebration on 12 April 2001 to
       mark their  betrothal  and  on  19  July  2001  their  marriage  was
       registered at the local authority and she was "forced" to move  into
       her husband's family home.  She gave more details of her experiences
       of violence at her husband's hands.  She repeated her account of the
       first incident on 10 November 2001.  She said  the  second  incident
       was on 4 March 2002 when he slapped her because  she  complained  of
       the time he had spent out of the home.  She said "I began  to  learn
       that I was going to be controlled by G---".

    9. She then recalled how on 10 October 2002 which had been their  first
       week in their home away from his parents  he  came  home  drunk  and
       slapped her because dinner was not ready for him.  She described the
       incident  as  "different"  and  I  understand  that  to  mean   more
       threatening.

   10. Their son was born in June 2003.  In July 2003 she found him hunting
       out her gold necklace and he punched her in the stomach so that  she
       fell to the floor.  She said that was the  first  time  he  "hit  me
       properly".  This was to distinguish this attack from other occasions
       when she had been slapped.  She then explained how he  was  gambling
       too much and then drinking too  much  and  hitting  her.   She  gave
       accounts of other occasions when he slapped her.   At  paragraph  40
       she said:

  "He would carry on his normal ways: work, gamble, drink  and  come  home.
  He was a mess.  He would come home and cause arguments and treat me  like
  a slave.  He would continue to hit me - I don't even know why he left  me
  if he did this to me.  He told me once that 'he hit me because  he  loved
  me'."

   11. She then explained how she decided enough was enough and she had  to
       flee to the United Kingdom with their son.  It was her case that  in
       the eyes of her mother and father she was  given  to  her  husband's
       family and it would be shameful conduct for her  to  complain  about
       domestic violence.  She has compounded the sense of shame by leaving
       her husband's family.  She also explained that  she  considered  the
       police to be so corrupt that they would  offer  her  no  help.   She
       could have no dealings with the authorities without paperwork  which
       would identify her and her son to the authorities so  that  news  of
       their whereabouts might reach her husband.   She  then  supplemented
       that statement in the statement relied upon at the  hearing  of  her
       appeal.  She corrected  some  mistakes  which  it  considered.   The
       appellant also gave oral evidence but was stopped  by  the  Tribunal
       from introducing points that had not been raised in the papers.

   12. The Tribunal accepted that the appellant  had  been  the  victim  of
       violence and ill-treatment.  It noted the  detailed  accounts  given
       but concluded from considering  the  evidence  that  the  aggressive
       acts:

  "appear to occur as flashpoints every few months, rather than frequent or
  commonplace incidents.  There was no mention or hint of sexual  violence.
  Nor, as noted above, was there  any  suggestion  that  the  marriage  was
  forced.   It  appears  to  have  been  arranged  and  celebrated  in  the
  traditional way, which suggests that the appellant at least acquiesced in
  it."

   13. At paragraph 51  the  Tribunal  rejected  the  suggestion  that  the
       marriage was forced or that every act of intercourse in the marriage
       was an act of rape.  The Tribunal said at paragraph 51:

  "There was certainly physical  violence,  and  we  accept  the  incidents
  described by the appellant, but we do not accept that they reached such a
  pitch as suggested at the hearing".

   14. The Tribunal then  rejected  the  contention  that  the  appellant's
       husband had a cousin who was  "high  up"  in  the  police  force  in
       Albania.  It accepted that there was  a  cousin  who  was  a  police
       officer but no more.  The Tribunal did not accept that there was any
       real prospect of the appellant's return coming to the  attention  of
       her husband or family  by  reason  of  gossip.   The  Tribunal  were
       satisfied that Albania was just too big for that to be  a  realistic
       possibility.

   15. The Tribunal did not accept that  the  appellant's  husband,  if  he
       still lived in Albania, would have any  interest  in  the  appellant
       now.

   16. The Tribunal did not accept that the appellant was  a  member  of  a
       particular social group.

   17. Paragraph 60 of the determination has been criticised and I  set  it
       out below:

  "In any  event,  the  degree  of  ill-treatment  required  to  amount  to
  persecution is also a high one.  It  is  defined  in  Article  9  of  the
  Qualification Directive, which refers  to  acts  which  are  sufficiently
  serious by their nature or repetition to constitute a severe violation of
  basic human rights and can include acts of physical or  mental  violence,
  including sexual violence.  In the  appellant's  case  the  psychological
  effect of living for a prolonged period with a man  given  to  occasional
  violent outbursts, together with a concern for her  son,  may  have  been
  more telling than the immediate physical effects.  Making every allowance
  for that mental toll, however, given our findings about  the  nature  and
  extent of these adverse and the fact  that  it  did  not  include  sexual
  violence, we cannot accept that it involved such to  violation  of  basic
  human rights as to amount to persecution."  [The grammar  was  adrift  in
  paragraph 60].

   18. The Tribunal accepted that the appellant could not  return  to  live
       with her parents in Burrel but found that she was not afraid of  the
       authorities in  Albania.   At  paragraph  73  of  its  decision  the
       Tribunal found that internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

   19. The Tribunal decided that the  ill-treatment  was  not  sufficiently
       severe to amount to persecution.  The Tribunal did not  accept  that
       the attacks amounted to a "violation of basic  human  rights  as  to
       amount to persecution".

   20. In any event the Tribunal decided  that  there  was  sufficiency  of
       protection in Albania.  It had never been  her  case  that  she  was
       frightened of approaching the authorities.

   21. The Tribunal then said that even if it was wrong on that  point  she
       could  return  to  Tirana  without  risk.   The  Tribunal   accepted
       evidence, particularly summarised in DM (Sufficiency of Protection -
       PSG - Women - Domestic Violence)  Albania  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00059,
       followed in  MK  (Lesbians)  Albania  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00036,  and
       concluded that, save for some traditional  families  in  the  North,
       which was not a consideration in this case,  societal  attitudes  in
       Albania were changing. Additionally there was no evidence  that  the
       police would not react appropriately if they were involved.

   22. The Tribunal were satisfied that the test in Horvath v SSHD [2000] 3
       All ER 577 was met and there was effective protection  available  in
       this case.

   23. For the sake of completeness, in  case  an  alternative  remedy  was
       needed, the Tribunal then directed  itself  to  the  possibility  of
       internal relocation.  It was Dr Chelvan's case before the First-tier
       Tribunal  that  the  respondent  had  accepted  that  there  was  an
       insufficiency of protection in  Tirana  (see  paragraph  59  of  the
       respondent's Detailed Reasons for Refusal). The Secretary  of  State
       did not argue against this  submission  (see  paragraph  69  of  the
       Decision).  However it clearly is not the case that  the  respondent
       accepted that effective protection was not available in Tirana.  The
       respondent was considering how internal relocation might  work,  not
       deciding that it was necessary.

   24. The Tribunal looked for other places the appellant might go.  Having
       considered the evidence, and particularly the guidance given  in  MK
       the Tribunal was satisfied that internal relocation away from Tirana
       would be unduly harsh but that the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
       expected to live as a single woman with a son in Tirana.

   25. The reality is that there was no place  where  she  could  establish
       herself outside Tirana.

   26. The appellant did not need humanitarian protection.  In summary, the
       Tribunal did not accept there was a  real  risk  of  harm  from  the
       appellant's estranged husband but even if there were it would not be
       persecutory or sufficient to warrant humanitarian protection and  in
       any event there was a sufficiency of protection available.

   27. In short, the appeal was dismissed.

   28. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Ransley on all grounds.  In outline, it  was  the  appellant's  case
       that the First-tier Tribunal was  wrong  in  law  to  say  that  the
       appellant was not a member of a particular social  group,  that  the
       Tribunal was wrong in law to find that the appellant  had  not  been
       persecuted when  she  had  been  the  victim  of  domestic  violence
       throughout her fourteen-year marriage and the Tribunal was wrong  in
       law to find there was effective protection in Albania.  It was  also
       wrong to rely on the decision in MK (Lesbians)  Albania  because  it
       had been set aside by the Court of Appeal.

   29. I agree that the Tribunal erred when it said the appellant does  not
       belong to a particular social group.  The appellant's grounds  refer
       to the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
       (Qualification) Regulations 2006 and  particularly  Regulation  6(d)
       which says that:

  "a group shall be considered to form a particular social group where, for
  example: members of that group  share  an  innate  characteristic,  or  a
  common background that cannot be changed, or share  a  characteristic  or
  belief that is so fundamental to identity or  conscience  that  a  person
  should not be forced to renounce  it,  and  that  group  has  a  distinct
  identity in the relevant  country,  because  it  is  perceived  as  being
  different by the surrounding society."

   30. There are two ways in which the appellant could form a social group.
       Possibly because she is a woman and women can be perceived as weaker
       or somehow less worthy than men and but more appropriately  in  this
       case she could be seen as  a  woman  who  has  been  the  victim  of
       domestic violence  and,  according  to  the  evidence,  at  risk  of
       ostracisation because  of  her  broken  relationship  if  she  lives
       outside it and more violence if she remains within it. At  the  risk
       of being trite, a person is not entitled to international protection
       by reason of being a member of a particular social  group.   Rather,
       if  a  person  needs  international  protection  then  the  kind  of
       protection to which she is entitled depends on whether or not she is
       a member of a particular social group. If she is, and if that is the
       reason for her persecution, then she is a refugee.  If  she  is  not
       then she is (probably) entitled to some other kind of protection.

   31. I have read the respondent's reply.   It  is  not  helpful  on  this
       point.  Paragraph 5 is bizarre.  I mention it only to  say  that  Ms
       Isherwood disavowed it hastily.  It was settled  by  an  experienced
       Presenting Officer who I think  on  this  occasion  must  have  been
       distracted when he settled the grounds. Being a refugee and being  a
       victim of domestic violence are not mutually exclusive.

   32. Similarly there is nothing in the objection to the appellant relying
       on an unreported decision.  In any event the grounds do  not  really
       "rely" on such a decision. That is overstating  the  position.   All
       the grounds do is refer to a properly identified unreported decision
       that is helpful.  It is not suggested that it  amounts  to  a  novel
       proposition of law.  It may  have  been  better  not  to  have  been
       mentioned it but this is a peripheral point.

   33.  I  have  read  DM  (Sufficiency  of   Protection-PAG-Women-Domestic
       Violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059. Dr Chelvan, rightly, points
       out that the definition of PSG is now set out in Regulation  6(1)(d)
       of the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
       (Qualification) Regulations 2006. Regulation 6(1)(d)(ii)  prescribes
       that "the group has a distinct identity because it is  perceived  as
       different by the surrounding society". I accept the evidence  of  Dr
       Antonia Young that such victims who left would be "branded for life"
       as someone who has dishonoured her community.  The  extent  of  that
       branding will no doubt vary in each case  and  not  all  victims  of
       domestic violence  will  need  international  protection  but  I  am
       satisfied that the group  is  distinctive  enough  to  amount  to  a
       particular social group.

   34. I find that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to conclude  that  the
       appellant had not been the victim of persecution.  I do not find  it
       necessary to decide if  every  sexual  act  in  the  course  of  the
       marriage was consensual or whether the appellant was in  fact  raped
       on any occasion during the marriage.  Even  if,  as  the  First-tier
       found, the appellant had exaggerated the violence in the  course  of
       her marriage it was accepted that she had been repeatedly beaten  in
       different ways on different occasions.  In my judgment the  severity
       of violence in a marriage is only one of the factors that has to  be
       considered  in  determining  if  it   is   described   properly   as
       persecutory.  Any violence between partners is to be taken seriously
       although some violence is plainly even much serious than others.   A
       horrible element of domestic violence is not just the  fact  of  the
       violence but the fact that it is inflicted in a  relationship  where
       the victim, usually but not always a woman, should  be  entitled  to
       support and affection.  When that is replaced  by  violent  bullying
       and controlling behaviour it is horrible for her and there is  clear
       evidence here  of  repeated  nasty  acts  of  violence  intended  to
       humiliate and overbear the victim.   This  is  clearly  sufficiently
       severe to amount to persecution.  Again, I disagree with the  First-
       tier Tribunal's findings to the contrary.

   35. None of this is of any use to the appellant's claim to be a  refugee
       if in fact there is effective protection available to her in Tirana.
        As is explained above, the First-tier Tribunal found that she could
       not be  expected  to  remove.   However,  the  Tribunal  found  that
       effective protection  was  available  in  Tirana.   There  were  two
       objections to this in the grounds.  The first is that the  appellant
       could not afford state protection because she relied on her brother,
       who said he could not pay, and secondly because she has  a  relative
       who is a police officer  who,  it  was  said,  would  frustrate  the
       ordinary operation of the law.

   36. There is nothing irrational in the conclusion that the brother would
       help.  He is not a rich man but he is in regular work.  He said  his
       income was at the order of �30,000 plus bonuses.  He  has  supported
       his sister in the United Kingdom and it is  a  reasonable  inference
       that he would continue to assist.  I cannot  agree  that  it  is  an
       error of law to decide in these circumstances that he would help.

   37.  The  Tribunal  considered  carefully   the   evidence   about   the
       effectiveness of protection in  Albania  and  noted  the  change  in
       societal attitudes.  At paragraph 64 of its decision it noted how in
       most cases there is effective protection.  Importantly at  paragraph
       58 of its decision the Tribunal concluded that there was no risk  to
       the appellant from her husband.  They had been apart for nearly  two
       years and there was no suggestion of any kind of contact or enquiry.
        I appreciate that does not address the possibility of the appellant
       eventually coming to the attention of  her  former  husband  and  he
       feeling pressurised to react.  However, the only objection to police
       protection was the appellant's contention that  her  husband  had  a
       relative in the police force who had sufficient  rank  to  frustrate
       protection.  This was not made out to the  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal
       noted inconsistencies about  the  status  of  the  relative  and  no
       attempt to find corroborative evidence.  The  appellant's  brother's
       evidence was only recycling the appellant's own evidence  and  added
       nothing.  The Tribunal  did  not  accept  any  real  chance  of  the
       appellant's husband's relative finding out about her.  The appellant
       and her brother  may  genuinely  believe  that  the  relative  would
       frustrate  protection  but  there  was  no  evidence  to  make  that
       persuasive.

   38. I have read Dr Antonia Young's report.  It may be that the  Tribunal
       underestimated the possibility of the appellant being identified  to
       her former husband.  The point being made in  that  report  is  that
       even in Tirana a lone woman, or a  lone  woman  with  a  child,  are
       unusual and therefore attract  attention.   They  attract  attention
       from the authorities when they arrive and their arrival is  reported
       to their municipality.  However, the Tribunal was very aware of  the
       deficiencies of the security forces in Albania.  It reminded  itself
       of the Horvath test and considered other evidence before  concluding
       that there is a sufficiency of protection and there  is  nothing  in
       this case that would put it in a different category.

   39. Criticism was made in the grounds of  relying  on  the  case  of  MK
       because, it is said, it can no longer be country guidance because it
       was remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court  of  Appeal  but  in
       fact not redetermined because the appellant was allowed  to  remain.
       That assertion is right in part. The decision in MK  was  overturned
       by the Court of Appeal and, following Dr Chelvan's submissions being
       brought to the attention of the responsible judges, I expect  it  to
       be removed from the list of Country Guidance cases.

   40. The Respondent and the First-tier Tribunal relied on  MK  (Lesbians)
       to support the argument that a  woman  could  live  on  her  own  in
       Tirana. At the risk of oversimplification, the  First-tier  Tribunal
       preferred the guidance in MK to the evidence of Dr Young.  I  cannot
       rectify that without giving the Respondent notice  that  MK  is  not
       good guidance.

   41. It follows that I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   42. I find that women who have been  victims  of  domestic  violence  do
       constitute a particular  social  group  in  Albania.  I  accept  the
       finding  that  there  is  effective  protection  available   against
       violence by the appellant's former husband and the finding that this
       appellant cannot be expected to relocate outside Tirana.

   43. I am not able to complete this Decision because the  neither  party,
       and particularly not the Respondent,  could  be  confident  that  MK
       should not have been followed and so I adjourn the hearing for final
       determination. I set out below Directions for the next hearing.

                                 Directions

   44. No later than 5 days before the date fixed  for  next  hearing  this
       appeal each party shall serve on the other bundled  copies  (ideally
       secured with a treasury tag) of all documentary  evidence  on  which
       the party seeks to rely, full witness statements drawn to  stand  as
       evidence in chief from any witness the party wants to  call  and  an
       outline skeleton argument limited to deciding if the appellant  risk
       persecution or other serious  ill-treatment  in  the  event  of  her
       return to Tirana as a victim of domestic violence.  The  submissions
       should concentrate on where she can live with her son and  how  they
       can support themselves.

                             Decision and Reason

   45. This case has an  unfortunate  history.  Its  resolution  has  taken
       longer than it should have done and for this I apologise.

   46. The above Reasons for Finding an Error of Law were  sent  after  the
       hearing. They are reproduced  here  because  they  are  part  of  my
       decision and I set them out at the beginning rather  than  appending
       them because they serve to introduce the rest of my decision.

   47. The First-tier Tribunal found that there was effective protection in
       Tirana but the  Appellant  made  two  objections  to  that  finding.
       First,  the  appellant  said  that  she  could  not  get  access  to
       protection because she needed money and second there was a  relative
       who would frustrate the ordinary operation of the law.

   48. The Tribunal was satisfied  that  effective  protection  is  usually
       available in Albania and noted the  change  in  societal  attitudes.
       Particularly after two years separation there was no  indication  of
       any  attempt  to  follow  through  any  continued  ill-treatment  or
       grievance towards the appellant.  I concluded in  my  findings  that
       there was an error of law by my accepting  that  the  appellant  had
       been a victim of domestic violence and my accepting that victims  of
       domestic violence constitute a particular social group.  I  accepted
       the finding that there was effective  protection  available  against
       the appellant's former husband and the finding that  this  appellant
       could not be expected to relocate out of Tirana.  The sole point  of
       disagreement was whether the First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
       conclude that this appellant could be expected to establish  herself
       in Tirana.  That reasoning was based on a  decision  thought  to  be
       country guidance when  it  was  not  country  guidance  and  so  the
       Tribunal plainly erred by mistakenly  following  guidance  that  had
       been withdrawn.  I thought that was all that there was to  determine
       and that was what the case was about.  I gave directions.

   49. Although this was the only point of contention,  matters  dragged  a
       little and then came before a different division of the Tribunal  in
       October 2017.  On that occasion Mr Melvin  again  appeared  for  the
       Secretary of State.  It emerged at  that  hearing  that  there  were
       problems in my directions.  They were held  to  be  ambiguous.   The
       appeal came before me.

   50. It is not helpful to any party to list every twist and turn in these
       proceedings.  Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan gave  directions  at  some
       stage broadly because the respondent was not quite ready. Eventually
       the matter came before me in December 2017.

   51. There is a skeleton outlined from Dr Chelvan dated 14th November and
       supplementing one dated 27 October and written submissions from  the
       respondent.  I regret any lack of clarity  in  my  directions.   The
       hearing before me began with me having to make a ruling on the scope
       of the hearing before me on that day.  This is the relevant part  of
       what I said:

  Mr Melvin argued that all issues are unresolved because the  decision  of
  the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside. That is quite wrong.  I  have
  clearly ruled that the appellant has been a victim of domestic  violence,
  that she is a member of a particular social group and that she cannot  be
  expected to relocate outside Tirana.

  Mr Chelvan argues that it is open to him to argue that the  appellant  is
  at risk of violence from her former husband and cannot  expect  effective
  protection from the Albanian authorities.   That  is  not  what  I  said.
  Although I suggested that the First-tier Tribunal may have underestimated
  the threat from the former husband I found that  the  decision  was  that
  effective protection was available was lawful.  This is what I  meant  at
  paragraph 42 when I said, "I accept the finding that there  is  effective
  protection available against violence by the appellant's former husband."
  It is in the same paragraph that I disagreed with the First-tier Tribunal
  and ruled that women who  have  been  victims  of  domestic  violence  do
  constitute a particular social group in Albania and where I accepted  the
  First-tier Tribunal's decision that this appellant cannot be expected  to
  relocate outside Tirana.

  At paragraph 40 I noted that the First-tier Tribunal's finding  that  the
  appellant could live on her own in Tirana depended on the decision of the
  Tribunal in MK which was no longer reliable and so the decision  on  that
  point had to be made again.  Whilst I identified that the appellant was a
  "victim of domestic violence", which she clearly is, my  Directions  that
  any further submissions "should concentrate on where she  can  live  with
  her son and how they can support themselves"  should  have  made  matters
  clear but if that is not clear  enough  reading  the  Directions  in  the
  context of paragraph 40 where I said "The respondent and  the  First-tier
  Tribunal relied on MK (lesbians) to support the  argument  that  a  woman
  could live on her own in Tirana" would have  settled  the  matter.  I  am
  aware that there is now better evidence that was available to the  First-
  tier Tribunal about the standing  of  the  appellant's  relative  in  the
  police force.  This was not before the First-tier Tribunal and could be a
  basis of a further application if necessary.  If  I  am  wrong  then  the
  remedy is elsewhere. We will now hear evidence and  submissions  directed
  to the difficulties the appellant and her son would  face  in  living  in
  Tirana and whether any difficulties were so great that the appellant  was
  entitled to international protection as a result.

   52.  The  appellant  then  gave  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an
       interpreter.

   53. The appellant had made statements dated 22 September  2015,  10  May
       2016 and  had  been  interviewed  on  23  September  2016.   I  have
       considered all of these documents but refer  only  to  those  points
       that I consider relevant to the decision that I have to make.

   54. In her statement dated 22 September 2015 the appellant explained how
       she claimed asylum.  Her brother had already  left  for  the  United
       Kingdom.  He was later naturalised as a British citizen.

   55. Then her main concern about returning was that the gossipy nature of
       Albanian society means that her presence will  be  reported  to  her
       husband.  However, she also said at paragraph 96:

  "I have shamed my family and have added disorder to the family  name.   I
  am a woman and should only behave like one - this is the Albanian way.  I
  have not followed this way.  I have left my husband causing shame."

   56. Although I am not making any findings here,  I  record  the  obvious
       point that at an early stage and before it became  import  in  these
       proceedings, it was the appellant's contention that she had  brought
       shame on her family and that was disadvantageous to her in Albania.

   57. She appellant was interviewed about her asylum claim on 23 September
       2016.   Again  her  main  concern  in  that  interview  was  someone
       reporting to her husband her whereabouts but in answer  to  question
       123 she was clear that she was estranged from her parents.  They  no
       longer spoke to the appellant and she no longer spoke to them.

   58. A further statement is dated 10 May 2016.   In  that  statement  she
       disagreed with the respondent's contention that she could  get  work
       in Albania.  She had had menial jobs. She said it was the culture in
       Albania to bribe an employer to obtain work. That made  it  hard  to
       get work and caring for her son created additional problems.

   59. The last statement is dated 15 October 2017.  She then said that she
       had some contact with her mother in Albania but not her father.  She
       had no contact with anyone in Tirana.   She  had  had  a  friend  in
       Tirana who she did not contact and who would be unable to  help  her
       because of cultural reasons.  She  would  be  frightened  to  go  to
       Tirana in case she had contact with her husband.   She  also  feared
       that she could be trapped into prostitution as a  single  woman  and
       that concerned her not only on its own terms but for the fate of her
       son.

   60. In answer to supplementary questions she said that she  feared  that
       her husband would be able to insist on her son living  with  him  or
       indeed simply take him away and the courts would support him because
       he is a man.   She  was  given  an  opportunity  to  expand  on  the
       suggestion that she would  be  forced  into  prostitution.   To  her
       credit she did not exaggerate the claim but said it is  things  that
       can follow when a person is abused.

   61. The appellant was then cross-examined.

   62. She did not accept that she had no idea of the  whereabouts  of  her
       husband.  She  thought  that  he  was  in  Tirana  and  referred  to
       documents that tended to support that.

   63. She did not accept that she had regular  contact  with  her  mother.
       She had some contact with her mother who  was  concerned  about  her
       grandson.  They last spoke about a month before the hearing.

   64. She insisted she had no contact with any friends  or  neighbours  in
       Albania.  They had gone away.  In one case they had gone to  Greece.



   65. She had been employed work in Albania.  She had  worked  for  a  few
       months at a hospital.  It was her husband that stopped her getting a
       job because he hated her and would make  it  very  difficult  if  he
       found out about her.  She was asked to explain  her  fear  and  said
       that she could not point to anything  that  he  could  actually  do.
       They were not divorced.  She did not want to contact him and thought
       that that would be necessary to initiate proceedings.  She was still
       frightened of him.

   66. She was asked if she was aware of schemes run by United  Nations  to
       assist women who had been victims of domestic violence  in  Albania.
       She was aware of such schemes but was not aware that  she  qualified
       for any of them.  She was not prepared to entertain the hypothetical
       question about complaining about her husband in  the  event  of  her
       return.  She said she would be dead in the event of her return.

   67. Mr Melvin drew attention to evidence from the Home Office suggesting
       she would be entitled to housing, schooling and  protection  of  the
       authorities and some kind of benefit by way of income.  She said she
       would not be entitled to anything  in  Albania  and  that  that  was
       because they did not give help in Albania.  She  insisted  that  any
       contact with her husband would provoke him to anger even  though  it
       had been a long time since there had been any kind of contact.

   68. She said her brother cannot continue supporting her indefinitely  in
       the event of a return to Albania.  He had got a family to support in
       the United Kingdom.

   69. The appellant's brother gave evidence before me.

   70. The brother adopted his statements and gave evidence.  Again I  read
       the statements but only  referred  to  the  parts  that  I  consider
       relevant to the point that I have to decide.   He  starts  with  the
       disadvantage of having to accept  that  he  had  previously  claimed
       asylum on an entirely dishonest basis contending to be  from  Kosovo
       but he returned to Albania when that application was not successful.
        He is now married with three children but was  separated  from  his
       wife.  He was working for a roofing firm.

   71. He said in that statement that "Albania is a strange country -  they
       are set in  their  ways  with  culture  and  tradition,  values  and
       honour."

   72. Although his sister (the appellant) had acted to save her  life  and
       her son's life she has now "dishonoured our  family,  especially  my
       father."

   73. The appellant would be seen as someone who had  "brought  shame  and
       dishonour - this is the way that Albania operates".

   74. Nevertheless, the concern expressed in that statement  was  for  her
       safety because she would be identified and could not  hide.  He  did
       not say then that she would be ostracised.

   75. In his statement of 15 March 2017, he  explained  that  he  kept  in
       contact with the appellant and seemed to be settled happily  in  the
       United Kingdom.  He continued to give examples of  spurned  husbands
       being violent and even  killing  their  former  partners  and  being
       indulged by the police.

   76. Nevertheless, he said that the first call on his  resources  was  to
       his wife and their three children.  He had also had an obligation to
       support his parents financially.  He could not  possibly  afford  to
       assist the appellant in the event of relocation to Tirana.  His wife
       would not agree but in any event the money was just not  there.   He
       also produced a financial statement dated 22  October  2017  setting
       out his income and expenses.   This  was  intended  to  support  his
       contention that he could  not  afford  long  term  support  for  the
       appellant.

   77. He adopted these statements and was cross-examined.

   78. He agreed that he had another brother in the United Kingdom but they
       had fallen out a long time ago.  However, the brother did have  some
       contact with the witness' children.  He did not know why the brother
       was not supporting the appeal.

   79. He insisted he did not have the funds for long term support.

   80. He accepted that he now had his own business.

   81. He last went to Albania a  month  before  the  hearing  to  see  his
       parents particularly because his mother was unwell.   He  knew  that
       the appellant spoke to their mother but he did not know  how  often.
       He saw his relatives in Albania typically in the summer every  year.



   82. He was not aware of his sister the appellant having any contact with
       anyone in Albania other than their mother.

   83. He was not aware of any threats coming from the  appellant's  former
       husband directed to him but he was aware  of  threats  made  to  his
       sister.  He thought it was likely that there would be  support  from
       the relative in the police force the men  would  stick  together  to
       make things difficult for the appellant.

   84. He was not re-examined.

   85. The appellant's sister-in-law gave evidence.  She said that although
       she had the greatest respect  for  the  appellant  she  would  "very
       strongly oppose my husband supporting her and  her  son  financially
       should they be required to leave the UK".  Essentially  they  needed
       the money for themselves.

   86. She was not cross-examined and so the question of re-examination did
       not arise.

   87. I then heard evidence from Antonia Young who gave expert evidence on
       conditions in Albania.  Ms Young's qualifications  appear  to  be  a
       Bachelor of  Arts  degree  from  the  University  of  California,  a
       certificate in social work from the University of Edinburgh  and  to
       be working for a higher degree from the University of  London.   She
       was aware that her evidence had been criticised in another case  and
       had taken to  heart  the  criticisms  given  and  had  improved  her
       methodology as a consequence.

   88. Her main report is dated 21 March 2016. It is supplemented by a note
       dated 8 May 2016 and a second report dated 13 June  2017.  Again,  I
       read the entire reports but only  comment  on  that  part  which  is
       relevant to the material before me. There are further notes dated  6
       September  2017  and  27  October  2017  written  in   response   to
       submissions from the Respondent. I have not dwelled  on  Ms  Young's
       evidence that the appellant fears contact with her husband as I have
       upheld the finding that the appellant can  look  to  the  state  for
       protection.

   89. Ms Young does refer to "traditional law" remaining  strong  and  the
       society being very patriarchal so that women found it  difficult  to
       assert their rights.  She said at page 15 of her report:

  "I cannot overstate the enormity of the  sense  of  shame  that  Albanian
  women fell about themselves once they have deviated  from  strict  family
  traditions concerning sex and marriage.  Not only does she blame herself,
  but the shame will be increased by knowing  about  the  possible  revenge
  which may be taken towards her family."

   90. She continued, having referred to learned journals  suggesting  that
       women who were different in this way who had been trafficked were by
       reason of the trafficking stigmatised and developed low self-esteem.
        She said:

  "A woman who leaves her husband,  or  family  home  without  very  strong
  family support and without accounting for where she is going and for what
  reason, is perceived in Albanian society as a "stained" woman, not worthy
  of civil treatment from anyone."

   91. Ms Young opined that such a woman would "be marked as  an  outsider"
       and also as a "woman without morals and, hence, worthless". She then
       referred to the reported article indicating  how  a  "woman  can  be
       stigmatised just because she left the village, no  matter  for  what
       reason, the mentality of the community  simply  assumes  she  was  a
       prostitute".

   92. Ms Young accepted a message sent to her by email. It said:

  "We know of only two friends in Albania who have not spurned DD.  But  in
  spite of that, they are unable, dues to pressures, to  make  any  further
  mover to help her. Even her own mother is unable  to  help  her.  She  is
  fortunate that her brother, having lived for a long time in the  UK,  has
  relaxed this need to follow Albanian traditional patriarchal behaviour".

   93. Ms Young commented:

  "This view exactly reflects my own on the harsh situation that  DD  would
  face were she and her son returned to Albania".

   94. Mr Melvin cross-examined and sought to lay the  foundation  for  the
       respondent's case which is that the expert evidence  was  unreliable
       and/or biased.

   95. Ms Young confirmed that she agreed it would be impossible to make  a
       life as a single woman in Albania.  She insisted that in  a  society
       that is honour based she had brought disgrace by  rebelling  against
       conventional values.

   96. Nevertheless the witness accepted  that  there  are  "thousands"  of
       divorces in Albania every year.  She said that they were  mainly  in
       towns rather than in rural Albania.  She was then asked if  it  were
       her position that divorced women in Tirana will be unable to make  a
       life for themselves, the appellant replied:

  "Yes, in most but not all circumstances, some wealthy divorced women live
  near to supporting family network".

   97. She said that it is very hard for any woman on her  own  in  Albania
       including widows to establish herself.  The position is different if
       a person is wealthy but the level of corruption in society makes  it
       very difficult for anyone without support to even get a job.

   98. Mr Melvin then drew attention to the report about a  woman  who  was
       the victim of domestic violence who went into a shelter and who  had
       now established herself working in a local hotel.  Ms Young accepted
       that these things happened.  She said  she  was  familiar  with  the
       report but she regarded that illustration as exceptional rather than
       typical.  The appellant was doubtful that as many as 45%  of  single
       women were employed.  She could not  explain  statistics  suggesting
       that that was the case.

   99. Ms Young was aware of shelters in Albania in Tirana and  indeed  had
       visited a centre but did not regard them  as  safe.   In  particular
       they do not protect children from being kidnapped  at  school.   She
       accepted that benefits will probably be available to her but said it
       would take a long time to arrange them.  She  did  not  accept  that
       enough was being done to change the culture of the  police  although
       she accepted that something had been done.  She did not  believe  an
       illustration put to her of a police  officer  being  prosecuted  for
       using improperly identification data found  in  the  course  of  his
       work.  She had no proper basis  for  disputing  it  but  it  was  so
       contrary to her experience and expectations that she did not believe
       it.

  100. Ms Young accepted that a  woman  who  was  the  victim  of  domestic
       violence would be entitled to protection and  will  be  entitled  to
       some social benefits.

  101. Miss Young was shown in the respondent's papers an  apparently  well
       researched story of a woman who had been  the  subject  of  domestic
       violence but who had established herself and started a new life.  It
       was said that her children were "attending  school  in  a  nurturing
       environment" and the woman had a job as a housekeeper  in  a  hotel.
       Miss Young did not accept that this was indicative of  a  change  in
       societal attitudes.  She said it was one example of somebody who had
       done well.

  102. Ms Young was remined that her  evidence  was  not  accepted  in  the
       decision in MF (Albania).  She said that the evidence  was  given  a
       long time ago and she tried to heed the reasons.  She had  forgotten
       that she had been criticised in another case.

  103. It was also her view that the appellant's  husband  would  be  under
       societal pressure to assert himself and take revenge.  She described
       it as a traditional response.  Not everybody behaved like that.  She
       was then re-examined.

  104. That was the end of the oral evidence.

  105. There is a medical report from Dr Chiedu Obuaya whose qualifications
       include his being a Member of the Royal  College  of  Psychiatrists.
       The appellant is not seriously ill and this is not  an  appeal  that
       should be allowed on "medical" grounds but Dr Obuaya  noticed  signs
       of the appellants concentration and energy levels being impaired. He
       expected a good long-term  prognosis  if  the  appellant  was  given
       support but not if she was isolated socially.

  106. The file includes Amnesty International Reports on  Albania  dealing
       particularly with human rights and  domestic  violence  dated  April
       2014.  It is clear from the reports that the  government  is  making
       serious efforts to bring about change but also clear that change  is
       not complete.  The Amnesty International Report refers  for  example
       to the recognition of domestic violence in criminal code in 2012  as
       "a major step  forward,  but  much  remains  to  be  done  to  fully
       implement the Law on Islands  in  Family  Relations  to  ensure  the
       protection of the victims."  This is not strictly  relevant  to  the
       point before me but is illustrative of a government that is bringing
       about change but change is not yet effective in all aspects.

  107. The Amnesty Report goes on to records that "Albania is  a  signatory
       to most  of  the  major  international  and  regional  human  rights
       treaties, but implementation often lags far behind ratification,  as
       may be seen from the examples highlighted below."  Examples are then
       given.

  108. A report from the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  dated  30
       April 2014 deals particularly with domestic violence.  It refers  to
       the "domestic violence is deeply rooted in  'patriarchal  traditions
       and  customs,'  such  as  'strict  gender  identities   and   roles,
       patriarchal authority, adherence to an honour-and-shame" system.

  109. The respondent particularly relied on a Country of  Information  and
       Guidance Albania - Women Fearing Domestic Violence version  1  April
       2016 and a note from the British Embassy in Tirana dated 30  January
       2017 and another dated 6 October  2017  as  well  as  a  Country  of
       Information Note Albania (domestic  violence)  July  2017  and  news
       reports from UN women.  Mindful of the submissions  made  I  work  I
       have considered those reports.

  110. The Country Information and Guidance on Albania purports to  address
       itself to women in fear  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  due  to
       domestic violence.  This  refers  to  a  sufficiency  of  protection
       (which is not in issue here) and also says at 3.1.3  that  "Internal
       relocation to avoid risk from domestic  violence  is  likely  to  be
       possible, as long as it would not, on the particular  facts  of  the
       case, be unduly harsh to expect the woman to do so."

  111. The report of April 2016 under the heading "assistance available  to
       women" refers to there  being  "some  good  practices  in  place  to
       provide services to women and girls" who are  victims  of  violence.
       There is a section on government run shelters which  are  inadequate
       and again not really dealing with the issue that I have to consider.



  112. A document entitled "Albania:  country  guidance  case  on  domestic
       violence July 2017" refers to a report by the Albanian Institute  of
       Statistics and Public Health in 2010.  This is  the  source  of  the
       information that women who are divorced, separated  or  widowed  are
       most likely to be employed.  It is suggested that 45% of such  women
       are employed, married or cohabiting women about 35%.   Nevertheless,
       the same document referring to a report from the Peoples Advocate of
       Albania says that "Women, particularly  divorced  women  and  single
       mothers, Roma women, women with disabilities, and  other  vulnerable
       women, face problems with their access to justice, inequality in the
       labour relations, and barriers in receiving the social and  economic
       benefits to which they are entitled".  It is the  same  report  that
       refers to the police acting "very fast" in a particular case and was
       the source of much of Mr Melvin's entirely appropriate questioning.

  113. The embassy note dated 6 October 2017 deals with the possibility  of
       tracing a person who regularly  believes  in  police  data.   It  is
       accepted that some not all police officers have access  to  a  civil
       registration system and says how a victim could remain in a  shelter
       until they were satisfied that the risk had passed.

  114. The note dated 13 January 2017 purports to deal  directly  with  the
       question that most interests me.  It  concerned  whether  a  "Single
       woman, who has previously been  the  victim  of  domestic  violence,
       would be able to live in Tirana with her 13 year old  son,  and  how
       she can support herself and her son."

  115. The Secretary  of  State's  officers  at  the  British  Embassy  had
       arranged a meeting with a senior official from the Albanian Ministry
       of Social Welfare and Youth, the director  of  the  Albanian  Social
       Services and two employment officers in Tirana.   This  report  says
       that a person returning would have to register  to  obtain  benefits
       and explained how registration would be organised.

  116. There is a quotation from a speech of the then Prime Minister of the
       Republic of Albania Mr Edi  Rana  which  refers  to  Albania  making
       important legal commitments promoting the role of women  in  society
       and protecting them.

  117. One of the reasons for  delay  in  this  case  was  anticipation  of
       relevant country guidance  and  a  decision  was  produced  by  this
       Tribunal now known as BF (Tirana - gay men) Albania CG  [2019]  UKUT
       00093 (IAC).  I gave the parties the opportunity of  making  further
       submissions in the light of that decision. I declined to reopen  the
       issues completely and admit fresh  evidence.   I  simply  wanted  to
       consider if anything in that case bore on the submissions  that  had
       to be made and I think the short answer is no there is not.

  118. Both parties made further submissions on 18 June 2019  and  12  July
       2019  respectively.  I  have  carefully  considered  them.  I  have,
       however, concluded that  the  fact  the  gay  people  generally  can
       establish themselves in Tirana  is  not  a  strict  comparator  with
       victims of violence. Whilst gay people may  attract  social  outrage
       they also have a support group, namely each  other,  that  does  not
       appear to exist in the case of victims of domestic violence.

  119. This is the kind of case that possibly illustrates the  difficulties
       that  so  often  face  tribunal  judges  at  both  levels  in   this
       jurisdiction.  I am satisfied  that  I  have  been  told  the  truth
       broadly by the witnesses.  The appellant may have  exaggerated  some
       of the difficulties because she  clearly  wants  to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom but she is not making up the fear  that  she  has  of
       isolation in Albania.

  120. Her fear is enhanced by an unjustified believe that her husband will
       seek vengeance on her and that the state will not protect her but it
       does add to her concerns.

  121.  It  is  clear  from  background   evidence   that   isolation   and
       ostracization tends to happen.  The degree and intensity  of  it  is
       much harder to predict.

  122. Domestic violence is common in Albania.  Albania is  making  serious
       attempts to bring about a change in culture and has had  significant
       successes.  This decision is not about whether or not a  person  who
       has been the victim of domestic violence will risk further  domestic
       violence and persecution by the perpetrator.  It is plain  that  the
       government of Albania is aware of its poor international  reputation
       and that much of  it  is  deserved.   It  is  also  plain  that  the
       government of Albania is trying very hard to change society.   There
       are examples of good practice and it is clearly,  the  case  as  the
       Home Office have been able to show, that some people in the kind  of
       circumstances indicated by this appellant have  been  able  to  make
       good.

  123. I found Miss Young's evidence of limited value.  She does not  refer
       to a long list of peer reviewed publications and  the  tone  of  the
       report is indicative of someone who was favouring the applicant.  As
       I have already indicated, I do not suggest that this  was  dishonest
       but I am concerned about her objectivity. Some of her evidence  read
       more like advocacy than objectivity.

  124. Nevertheless, I was impressed by the answer that  she  gave  to  the
       happy story of a woman who had established herself and said that she
       did not regard that as typical but regarded it as somebody  who  had
       been able to do it.

  125. I also found it very  significant  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
       additional note from the embassy which  looked  from  the  title  as
       though it was going to be very helpful  dealt  simply  or  primarily
       with access to a benefit.  This is not the issue at all.  I  do  not
       think it is anybody's  case  that  this  appellant  will  really  be
       starving and destitute. The Appellant believed that the  process  is
       slower and harder than the government officials  suggested  but  the
       appellant would clearly be entitled to some kind of benefit.

  126. The relevant question  is  whether  conditions  in  Tehran  make  it
       unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect this appellant to live  there
       as a single woman with a teenage boy to look after.

  127. I was impressed with the evidence that she  would  be  perceived  as
       somebody who had violated the values of society.

  128. This must "knock on" to attitudes towards her son who must be a risk
       of being seen as "illegitimate" and, in this respect at  least,  his
       worries are the appellant's worries.

  129. It is accepted she has a brother in the United Kingdom who may  well
       be able to give some financial support but I accept his evidence and
       his wife's evidence that that money is needed for her family in  the
       United Kingdom.  This is not a  case  where  there  is  considerable
       financial backing to help  a  woman  establish  herself  although  I
       anticipate something would be provided to help  her  settle  because
       that is the kind of provision  that  family  members  give  to  each
       other.

  130. There is no evidence to show that anyone in Albania would  give  the
       appellant any financial or social support. The  evidence  points  in
       the opposite direction that she would indeed be on her own, which is
       why she left.  She has no particular skills to  offer.  She  is  not
       somebody with a professional qualification or  otherwise  access  to
       good employment.  She will be on her own, she will be isolated,  she
       will be ostracised, she  is  exactly  the  kind  of  person  who  is
       vulnerable to trafficking.  I remind myself that I am not  concerned
       with certainty or even probability but with whether there is a  real
       risk.  I am satisfied that, if the appellant were to be returned  to
       any part of Albania, she would (in the particular  circumstances  of
       her case) be at  real  risk  of  suffering  treatment  which  would,
       cumulatively, be so serious  as  to  amount  to  persecution  for  a
       refugee Convention reason.

Notice of Decision.

  131. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision and I
       substitute a decision allowing the appeal on refugee grounds.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 November 2019               |









|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |





