
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12312/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 12 September 2013                          |On 26 September  2013        |
|Prepared 13 September 2013                    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     Z L
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, Counsel, instructed by Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr R Walker, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Turquet,  promulgated  on  12  October  2012
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 17
    August 2012 to refuse his claim for asylum and to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom.


 2. The appellant is citizen of Burma, born on 4 June 1976. He is a  Muslim
    and is married. His case is that he came to the  adverse  attention  of
    the authorities while  assisting with Cyclone Nargis  relief  in  2008,
    was ill-treated and forced to sign an undertaking not to participate in
    political activity. He later left Burma having obtained a visa to  come
    to the United Kingdom, where, since 2009 he  has  engaged  publicly  in
    opposition to the regime. His brother was arrested in 2010 in Burma  on
    account of political material the appellant sent him; he  is  still  in
    detention, whereabouts unknown. The appellant's activities have  become
    known to the regime and as  a  result,  he  faces  detention  and  ill-
    treatment on return and is therefore a refugee.

 3. The respondent accepts the appellant's nationality  and  religion;  his
    membership of the Burmese Muslim Association ("BMA-UK") since 2010; his
    participation in aid distribution and cyclone relief efforts  in  2008;
    and, his participation in oppositionist events in the  United  Kingdom.
    She does not however accept that he had in the past come to the adverse
    attention of the  Burmese  authorities,  nor  that  they  arrested  the
    appellant's brother on account of political articles  sent  to  him  in
    2010 by the appellant, nor that he is still in detention; or, that  the
    authorities have visited the appellant's family home in  Yangon  on  27
    June 2012 with a warrant for his arrest.  She considers that  he  would
    not be at risk on return to Burma.

Procedural history

 4. This appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 1 October 2010  and
    was dismissed by Judge Turquet in a  determination  promulgated  on  12
    October 2010. On 2 December  2010,  following  a  renewed  application,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. The appeal was then heard by  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8 March 2011, held  that  Judge  Turquet's
    determination did not involve the making of an error  of  law,  finding
    that it in the light of TL & Others (sur  place  activities  -  risk  )
    Burma CG [2009] UKAIT 00017, had been reasonable to conclude  that  the
    Burmese authorities would have seen the appellant as  a  hanger-on  and
    thus not of adverse interest.

 6. Permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  was  granted  on  limited
    grounds by Stanley Burnton LJ on 4 August 2011. Subsequent to that on 4
    January 2012 the appeal was allowed by  consent  and  remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal for a de novo hearing on the basis that,  amongst  other
    reasons, a new Burma Country Guidance case was pending before the Upper
    Tribunal.  That decision,  TS  (Political  opponents  -risk)  Burma  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00281 (IAC), was promulgated on 10 June 2013.


 7. On 23 April 2013  the  Upper  Tribunal  directed  that  it  would  hear
    evidence and make findings of fact on  all  issues.  Following  further
    directions from the Upper Tribunal the parties produced a  Schedule  of
    Issues. The respondent has agreed to items 1-11 (but not the number  of
    demonstrations set out at item 10). She disputes items 12-14.

 8. The Schedule of Issues is as follows:-

    Undisputed Issues

    Based on the available evidence and objective information, the
    Appellant (ZL) believes that the following points can be agreed with
    the Respondent.

     1. The Appellant's identity (ZL) and that he is Burma/Myanmar
        national. He submitted his Myanmar passport to the SSHD at his
        asylum screening interview on 23 July 2010.

 2. The Appellant's Myanmar passport had expired on 23 December 2013.

     3. The Appellant still had valid leave to remain when he applied for
        asylum, and since then he has un-interrupted Temporary Admission as
        his appeal process is still on-going.

 4. He has no criminal records in the UK, as far as he is aware.

 5. The Appellant is a Muslim

     6. Muslims are oppressed in Myanmar. There have been frequent violent
        anti-Muslim attacks all over Myanmar in recent years. Especially,
        the '969' campaign in Myanmar requires the majority Burmese
        Buddhist people to make a complete socio-economic boycott on
        minority Muslim people. These facts are all supported by objective
        information abundantly available within public domain, some of
        which the Appellant has already submitted in the Consolidated
        Bundle.

     7. Myanmar government does not make adequate efforts to protect Muslim
        minority people, and is even seen as complicit on some occasions,
        as documented by the Human Rights Watch in their report of 22 April
        2013.
        Http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/burm0413webcover_0.pd
        f

     8. The Appellant has been and remains a member of the  Burmese  Muslim
        Association (BMA-UK) since early 2010, as evidenced by  his  BMA-UK
        member card, letter from BMA-UK, and written and oral evidence from
        witnesses from BMA-UK members, Mr Than';  Zin  at  the  First  Tier
        Tribunal hearing and Mr Mating Maung Gyi at the Upper  Tribunal  de
        novo hearing.

     9. The Appellant took part in  aid  distribution  and  cyclone  relief
        efforts in 2008 in Myanmar with his friend Mr Z N, as  corroborated
        by Mr Z N's written and oral evidence, information and  photographs
        from   Brighter   Future   Foundation   website,   and   additional
        photographic  evidence  submitted   by   the   Appellant   in   the
        Consolidated Bundle.

    10. The Appellant has  attended  about  60[1]  oppositionist  political
        events in the UK, as  corroborated  by  the  photographic  evidence
        submitted in the Consolidated Bundle.

    11.  Myanmar  country   information,   especially   current   political
        situation,  and  risk  on  return  to  Myanmar  for   oppositionist
        political activists are as  found  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  TS
        (latest Burma/Myanmar Country Guidance)

    Issues in Contention

12. The Appellant's political history in Myanmar:

        . that he took part in student demonstrations in 1996

        . that he took part in the September 2007 Saffron Uprising

        . that he encountered problems  with  the  authorities  due  to  his
          involvement in Cyclone relief efforts in 2008


    13. Regarding the Appellant's brother:

        . that he asked the  Appellant  to  provide  him  with  a  trove  of
          political news articles from exile Myanmar websites

        . that the Appellant sent such political news articles in 2010  with
          a family friend who visited London in April 2010

        . that he was arrested in Myanmar as he shared these political  news
          articles with his colleagues, and the authorities also  wanted  to
          question the Appellant regarding this matter

        . that he is still in detention in Myanmar

    13. Although the Appellant could find, and has  submitted,  photographs
        of his oppositionist political activities in the UK from  as  early
        as February 2010, he could not find  photographs  of  three  events
        which he attended in 2009.

    14. With the intensifying of the authorities' scrutiny  and  monitoring
        of known Muslim  activists  and  their  families  in  Myanmar,  the
        authorities visited the Appellant's family home  in  Yangon  on  27
        June 2012 with a warrant for  him,  searching  the  house  for  any
        evidence of political cooperation between him  and  his  family  in
        support of Muslim  organizations  and  movements  in  Myanmar.  The
        Appellant  has  submitted  the  original  arrest  warrant  and  its
        certified English translation in the Consolidated Bundle.

 9. We heard evidence from the appellant as well as submissions  from  both
    representatives.  In addition we had the following documents before us:

      a) Respondent's bundle ("RB").

      b) Appellant's consolidated bundle ("AB").

      c) Schedule of issues.

      d) Chronology,  list  of  political  events  attended  and  additional
         statement of the appellant, 12 July 2013.

      e) Human Rights Watch Report "All You Can Do is Pray"  Crimes  Against
         Humanity and Ethnic Cleansing of Rohingya Muslims, 22 April 2013.

      f) Home Office Operational Guidance Note on Burma, 23 July 2013 ("2013
         OGN").

      g) Letter from Jamiat Ulama El-Islam ("Jamiat"), Rangoon, 16 July 2013
         plus translation.

      h) Newspaper article - "Myanmar's  '969'  crusade  breeds  anti-Muslim
         malice", 27 March 2013.

      i) Article from Voice of America News, 21  August  2013  re  UN  Human
         Rights Envoy, Quintana.

      j) Skeleton argument from Mr Jacobs.

10. The appellant gave evidence in Burmese with the assistance of  a  court
    interpreter, after confirming that he understood her.  He  adopted  the
    contents of his witness statements as well as his asylum interview [C90
    to C101] as his evidence-in-chief, adding  that  he  had  been  to  now
    nearly 60 political events in the United Kingdom and  he  believed  the
    Burmese authorities knew what he had been doing as he had  demonstrated
    in front of the Burmese  Embassy  many  times.   It  was  evident  that
    cameras are installed and that as officials in  the  embassy  all  come
    from a military background, they would probably know  who  he  is.   He
    also referred us screenshots from the internet showing that he  appears
    in uploaded videos [D40, D42, D43, D45].

11. The appellant also referred to the photographs (AB,  Annex  D)  showing
    him in a  leading role at demonstrations. He was able to  name  one  of
    the speakers [D75] as Win  Naing,  adding  that  the  nickname  of  the
    speaker in D49 was "Kopauk" who is part of  the  same  organisation  as
    him, BMA-UK and that the speaker in D93, is Aung Aung  from  the  Burma
    Liberation Front ("BLF").  He added that in that photograph  Aung  Aung
    was shouting slogans and that it was his turn next.

12. The appellant explained that a  photograph  at  D94  was  "Prayers  for
    Burma" in which slogans were shouted rather than speeches being made.

13. The appellant said that if returned to Burma now, he would continue  to
    protest against the government and would always continue to do this. He
    said that there are religious struggles taking place and the people who
    are suppressing Muslims are not arrested; he said that because of  that
    he would continue to demonstrate.  He  said  that  if  there  were  any
    organisations he would join them but there is no branch of the  BMA  in
    Burma. He said that the Burmese Muslims  need  to  know  why  they  are
    suffering and he would give them the evidence of what is going  on.  He
    said that he would organise with them, and would  protest  against  the
    government. He said that at first he would start with meetings, form  a
    group, and then carry out  demonstrations.  He  said  that  at  present
    Muslims are suffering very much.

14. The appellant said that he had  obtained  the  arrest  warrant  as  his
    sister in Burma had telephoned him and told him about it. She said that
    she had given it to a person visiting London who gave  it  to  him.  He
    said that the summons was on account of him being suspected of being  a
    Muslim activist in Britain.

15. When asked about the document relating to his brother from the  Jamiat,
    he said that he  had  obtained  it  as  his  solicitor  had  asked  for
    information. He phoned his sister in Rangoon; she had obtained  it  and
    had been forwarded to him by DHL. He had not been  contact  his  family
    since the end of June as he did not want to call regularly as  all  the
    phones are tapped.

16. In cross examination, the appellant said he had not asked his sister to
    go to Jamiat in particular, but just told her that his solicitor wanted
    a letter as evidence to show that his  brother  is  still  in  jail  in
    Burma. He said that prior to that, his sister had not known  where  her
    brother is although she had approached the organisation some  time  ago
    to enquire; but at that point they had not been able to  say.  He  said
    that his family had from 2011 onwards enquired about  his  brother  but
    only his sister had spoken to Jamiat.

17. At this point as it became clear that there were some difficulties with
    the appellant's evidence as he was trying to understand  the  questions
    in English before they were translated, and consequently,  his  answers
    were becoming confused. We did  not,  however,  consider  that  it  was
    necessary at this stage to adjourn the hearing,  instead  advising  the
    appellant to wait for questions to be translated into Burmese  for  him
    and to use the names of individuals rather than pronouns.

18. The appellant said that the arrest warrant had been passed to him by  a
    family friend, Daw San  Da,  his  family  having  received  the  arrest
    warrant when officials had come to the family house in Burma on 27 June
    2012 to search for evidence. On 29 June 2012 his family had  telephoned
    him to explain what had happened, his sister telling him that they  had
    not found anything in the house but that the officials were looking for
    him and knew he was in the United Kingdom. His sister did not  say  how
    they knew that.

19. The appellant said that he did not think that his  wife's  parents  had
    been visited by the  authorities  on  account  of  his  involvement  in
    politics. His wife was in contact with her  family  and  they  had  not
    mentioned having any problems.

20. Asked why it had taken so long to find out where his  brother  is,  the
    appellant said that he only knew about "it" in the middle of  2011  and
    that his sister had told a telephone conversation. It was  put  to  him
    that twelve months had elapsed before he found out about "it" to  which
    he replied "Yes." He was asked why his sister had not told him in  2010
    that their  brother  had  been  arrested,  replying  that  it  is  very
    difficult to phone Burma from the United Kingdom as payment must be  in
    dollars and there is no other way to communicate. He did not  know  why
    she could not write to say that  his  brother  had  been  arrested  but
    thought that they had not informed him as they were very frightened.

21. The appellant said that the memory stick he had given to  a  friend  to
    take back to Burma  contained pictures of him and the friend London  as
    well as material relating to  the  2010  election  campaign,  including
    articles downloaded from  magazines  and  websites  accessible  in  the
    United Kingdom.

22. In re-examination, the appellant said that when interviewed on 3 August
    2010 he had said that he had last spoken to his  family  in  July  2010
    when his sister had gone to a friends house, spoken to him on the phone
    and told him that their brother had been arrested.  He  confirmed  that
    his claim for asylum was based on  the  fact  that  in  July  2010  his
    brother had been arrested. He said that,  in  cross  examination,  when
    referring to "it" he meant that it was only in the middle of 2011  that
    he found out where his brother was being imprisoned.

23. In response to our questions, the appellant  said  that  on  return  to
    Burma he would start by campaigning in the area where he lives as there
    are many Muslims in his township. He said that he had  been  told  that
    the Buddhists had attacked houses and Muslim schools.

Submissions

24. Mr Walker relied on the refusal letter subject to the issues which  had
    been agreed. He accepted that the appellant was identifiable at various
    demonstrations outside the Burmese embassy  but  not  that  he  sent  a
    memory stick back to Burma or that his brother had  been  arrested.  He
    submitted that it was unclear when the appellant  found  out  that  his
    brother had  been  arrested,  and  his  evidence  in  cross-examination
    contradicted what he had said at interview.

25.  Mr  Walker  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  been   involved   in
    demonstrations and had given speeches but that this was not to the high
    level referred to in TS, the appellant  there  being  involved  in  the
    higher end of the scale, plotting to overthrow the  Burmese  government
    and so the appellant was not likely to come to the adverse attention of
    the authorities was his activities in the United Kingdom and due to the
    cyclone relief several years ago.

26. Mr  Jacobs  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument,  submitting  that  the
    appellant's evidence was consistent and  detailed;  and,  that  on  the
    basis of TS, there  was  a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
    monitored actively on return to Burma, given  his  profile  of  voicing
    opposition to the regime from within  the  United  Kingdom,  activities
    which are documented on the Internet, and  in  the  public  domain.  He
    submitted that the appellant would, if returned to Burma,  continue  to
    be active in opposition to the  regime  and  would,  as  a  politically
    active Muslim, seeking to mobilise in his own area, be  at  significant
    risk of persecution. He submitted that it was evident that the  Burmese
    regime was complicit in violence against Muslims,  and  that  there  is
    evidence of attacks on Muslims across Burma, not just Rohingyas.

Decision and Reasons

27. In coming to our determination we have considered the totality  of  the
    evidence before us and we have applied throughout the lower standard of
    proof applicable to asylum claims.  The burden is on the  appellant  to
    show that he has a well-founded fear of persecution or that  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing  that  his  rights  under  the  Human
    Rights  Convention  would  be  breached.   In  order  to  qualify   for
    international protection the appellant must meet  the  requirements  of
    the Qualification  Regulations  and  the  provisions  set  out  in  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules (CM6918, 18 September  2006),
    both of which implement Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29  April  2004
    on minimum standards for the qualification and status of third  country
    nationals or stateless persons as refugees or a  person  who  otherwise
    needs international  protection  and  the  content  of  the  protection
    granted.

28. In assessing the background evidence which has been produced to  us  we
    observe first that it is not suggested that the recent country guidance
    case, TS, is incorrect in its analysis of the  current  situation.   We
    do, however, consider that it is important to remember that the changes
    which have occurred in Burma are relatively recent and certainly  since
    the appellant left the country.  In assessing what he says happened  to
    him in the past, and what happened to his brother  in  2010,  that  the
    regime clamped down on any opposition with considerably  greater  force
    than at present.

29. It is not disputed that Muslims are oppressed in Myanmar or that  there
    are violent attacks on Muslims across  the  country  (see  schedule  of
    issues para 6). We note that what was agreed  between  the  parties  is
    supported by the  background  evidence  of  campaigns  against  Muslims
    across the whole country.  We note with particular  concern  the  "969"
    campaign whereby Buddhist shopkeepers are encouraged to  place  a  sign
    bearing those  numbers  in  their  windows,  nationalist  monks  urging
    followers to avoid all shops unwilling to fix the emblem to their store
    fronts, a symbol indicating that the  business  is  owned  and  run  by
    Buddhists.  The rhetoric underpinning the  campaign  tends  to  present
    Muslims as not  being  Burmese,  the  offensive  term  "kalar"  meaning
    "guest" being used to describe them.

30. There is  little  evidence  of  the  authorities  trying  to  stop  the
    campaigns although we do acknowledge that curfews and patrols have been
    imposed in Rangoon in an attempt to stop  the  violence  although  this
    does result in Muslims having to shutter their shops by sunset.

31. We consider that the issue  of  the  inter-communal  strive  concerning
    Muslims is of significant concern to the Burmese authorities not  least
    because of the extent to which  it  draws  significant  criticism  from
    abroad, particularly with respect to the Rohingya.

32. Turning to the issues specific to the appellant, we note  that  in  the
    aftermath of Cyclone Nargis in 2008 the Burmese regime  blocked  large-
    scale  international  relief  efforts  and  generally  obstructed   the
    provision of outside aid.  Burmese civil society  groups  did  mobilise
    but a significant number of  aid  workers  were  attacked,  arbitrarily
    arrested and some later put on trial, as is noted in the  Human  Rights
    Watch Report, "I Want to Help My Own People" - State Control and  Civil
    Society in Burma after Cyclone Nargis [AB, B37 to B141]. We  note  that
    the military erected roadblocks in the  area  more  closely  linked  to
    corruption than providing security [B54], that the authorities tried to
    deter private aid distribution outside  government  control  [B61]  and
    targeted activists for harassment, arbitrary arrest and in a number  of
    cases lengthy prison  sentences  for  organising  activities  that  the
    regime viewed as threatening its control [B83].  Some of those arrested
    were later released but others were put on trial as is  confirmed  also
    by Amnesty International [see International Report 2010 - Myanmar,  AB,
    B147].

33. The appellant's account of him being questioned by  military  personnel
    during  the  cyclone  relief  is   consistent   with   the   background
    information.  There is, however, little to support his  claim  that  it
    was only after he returned to Rangoon that he  was  arrested,  detained
    and ill-treated.  The appellant has  provided  photographs  of  himself
    recovering from injuries but these are not determinative of this issue.
     In any event, it is unlikely that adverse interest in the appellant on
    the part of the authorities was of any lasting significance, given that
    he was able to leave the country having obtained a passport and it  was
    evident that they knew he had a friend in the United Kingdom, Z N.

34. In assessing the appellant's credibility, we remind ourselves  that  it
    is possible for us to accept some parts of the appellant's account  but
    to reject others.  It does not necessarily follow that if an  appellant
    is not believed in all parts of his claim that none of it is  true;  it
    is not unknown for asylum seekers with good claims to seek to embellish
    them unnecessarily and we note that the core of the  appellant's  claim
    is the risk he faces on return to Burma flows from political activities
    undertaken in the United Kingdom which are not in dispute.

35. We find it improbable that the appellant would, knowing the risk,  have
    given a memory stick to a friend of the family to take to his  brother.
    Whilst we accept that there may be reasons why he would  want  to  send
    material  unobtainable  in  Burma  to  his  brother,   we   found   the
    explanations for putting someone at risk to be vague  and  implausible.
    We also consider it implausible in the context of the brother's  arrest
    that the authorities would, as the appellant states (Witness Statement,
    29/7/2010 [25]), have told the appellant's mother that they done checks
    on him by contacting the Burmese Embassy in London and that  they  knew
    he was politically active  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  somewhat
    convenient that the Burmese authorities  would  have  given  sufficient
    information to the appellant's family  to  ensure  that  he  would  not
    return to the country, which is presumably not what they had  in  mind,
    and at the same time to provide him with a prima facie strong  case  to
    be granted asylum.

36. We further find it somewhat implausible  that  the  authorities  would,
    some two years later, search the appellant's home in Rangoon  when,  if
    they were keeping him under surveillance in the  United  Kingdom,  they
    would have realised that he is not there.  Why  they  would  then  have
    given him further evidence to support his asylum claim  is  beyond  us.
    That said, it is difficult to know how a regime  such  as  the  Burmese
    regime which acts with impunity would act  on  particular  information.
    It is evident from the evidence given in TS that  the  actions  of  the
    state are difficult to predict given that in a system where  there  are
    no checks and balances, local officials can  in  effect  do  what  they
    want, ignoring or following legal procedures as they wish.

37. Even allowing for the  difficulties  arising  through  giving  evidence
    through an interpreter, the appellant's evidence with  respect  to  his
    brother's continued detention and  the  search  in  2012  was  somewhat
    evasive.

38. That said, the appellant's evidence  when  giving  evidence  about  his
    political activities and intentions was clear, direct and detailed.  It
    is consistent and is supported by numerous photographs showing  him  at
    demonstrations on different dates, including those where he is standing
    as part of those about to give speeches or, in some cases, where he  is
    giving a speech.

39. In addition, it is not in dispute that the appellant is a member of the
    BMA UK and it is  clear  from  the  demonstrations  that  he  has  been
    participating  and  leading  demonstrations  in  that  capacity.    His
    activities have continued for over three years and in the light of that
    we find it improbable that he has not come  to  the  attention  of  the
    Burmese authorities, given  the  extent  and  sophistication  of  their
    surveillance in the United Kingdom, as set out in TS. We are  satisfied
    that they know of their activities and his identity.  We are  satisfied
    also that they are aware that he is a politically active  Muslim.   The
    evidence establishes that he has demonstrated on at least 60 occasions.

40. It was not submitted to us that the appellant's activities were in  bad
    faith, nor was there any effective cross-examination of  the  appellant
    on his intentions on return to Burma.

41. We consider that the appellant has set out clearly and credibly what he
    would do if he returned to Burma.  He has said that he would  look  out
    for organisations in his local area, talk to local Muslims and if there
    were no  organisations  spread  the  word  about  how  they  are  being
    oppressed and start  to  hold  meetings  with  a  view  to  forming  an
    organisation and then to construct demonstrations.

42. Despite the concerns we have about  the  veracity  of  the  appellant's
    account of his brother being  arrested  and  having  sent  material  to
    Burma, his evidence as to  his  activities  in  this  country  is  well
    supported by documentation and photographs which confirm it and we note
    that the respondent made no submission that the appellant's  activities
    had been conducted in bad faith.  There was no submission  either  that
    the appellant would not participate in demonstrations on return.

43. Taking all these factors into account and viewing  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, whilst we do not accept the appellant's account  of  being  ill-
    treated in Burma in 2008 or his account of his brother  being  arrested
    or still being in detention,  we  do  accept  that  the  appellant  has
    created  a  significant  profile  in   the   United   Kingdom   through
    participation in  and  leading  demonstrations.   We  accept  that  his
    activism is  in  good  faith,  and  that  he  will  continue  to  be  a
    politically active Muslim on return to Burma and will, as  he  claimed,
    seek out other Muslims to mobilise them.

44. Having made these findings, we consider then what is likely  to  happen
    to him on return, bearing in mind the guidance given in  TS:

    1. In order to decide whether a person would be at risk of  persecution
       in Burma because of opposition to  the  current  government,  it  is
       necessary to assess whether such activity is  reasonably  likely  to
       lead to a risk of detention.  Detention in Burma, even for  a  short
       period, carries with  it  a  real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment,
       contrary   to   Article   3   of   the   ECHR   and   amounting   to
       persecution/serious harm within the  meaning  of  the  Qualification
       Directive.

    2. A person is at real risk  of  being  detained  in  Burma  where  the
       authorities regard him or her to be a threat to the stability of the
       regime or of the Burmese Union.

    3. The spectrum of those potentially at risk ranges from those who  are
       (or  are  perceived  to  be)  actively  seeking  to  overthrow   the
       government to those who are in outspoken and  vexing  opposition  to
       it.  Whether a person is in need of protection will depend upon past
       and future political behaviour.  This  assessment  has  to  be  made
       against the background  of  a  recently  reforming  government  that
       carries a legacy of repression  and  continues  to  closely  monitor
       those in opposition. The evidence points  to  a  continuing  anxiety
       over the break up of the state and the loss of its power.

    4. The question of risk of ill-treatment  will  in  general  turn  upon
       whether a returnee is detained by the authorities at any stage after
       return.

    5. A person who has a profile of  voicing opposition to the  government
       in the United Kingdom  through participation  in  demonstrations  or
       attendance at political meetings will not for this reason  alone  be
       of sufficient concern  to  the  Burmese  authorities  to  result  in
       detention immediately upon arrival.  This is irrespective of whether
       the UK activity has been driven by opportunistic or  genuinely  held
       views and is regardless of the prominence of  the  profile  in  this
       country.

    6. A person who has a profile of  voicing  opposition  to  the  Burmese
       government in the United Kingdom can expect  to  be  monitored  upon
       return by the Burmese authorities.  The intensity of that monitoring
       will in general  depend  upon  the  extent  of  opposition  activity
       abroad.

    7. Whether there is a real risk that monitoring will lead to  detention
       following  return  will  in  each  case  depend   on   the   Burmese
       authorities' view of the information it  already  possesses  coupled
       with what it receives as the result of any post-arrival  monitoring.
       Their view will be shaped by (i) how active the person had  been  in
       the  United  Kingdom,  for  example  by  leading  demonstrations  or
       becoming a prominent voice in political meetings, (ii)  what  he/she
       did before leaving Burma, (iii) what that  person  does  on  return,
       (iv)the profile of the people he or she mixes with and (v) whether a
       person is of an ethnicity that is seen by the government to  be  de-
       stabilising the union, or if the person's activity is of a kind that
       has an ethnic, geo-political or economic regional  component,  which
       is regarded by the Burmese government as a sensitive issue.

    8. It is someone's profile in the eyes of the state that is the key  to
       determining risk.  The more the person concerned maintains an active
       political profile in Burma, post-return, the  greater  the  risk  of
       significant monitoring, carrying with it a real risk of detention.

45. We accept that he has attended approximately 60 events  and  has  given
    speeches.  We therefore find that, accordingly,  the  appellant  has  a
    profile of voicing opposition to  the  Burmese  regime  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  We are satisfied  that  as  a  result  he  is  likely  to  be
    monitored on return and we accept also that this will, in the light  of
    the frequency of his attending events and his identification  with  the
    Muslim cause, will result in the monitoring being more  intensive.   We
    are satisfied, bearing in mind the lower standard of  proof,  that  the
    appellant will continue to act as he has done in the past.   We  accept
    that, as he said, he would attempt to mobilise  local  Muslims  and  to
    protest against oppression.  Given that he will be  involved  with  and
    attempting to mobilise a  religious  minority,  which  is  a  sensitive
    issue, we are satisfied  that  there  is  a  significant  risk  of  the
    appellant being  detained  and  thus  ill-treated.   We  are  satisfied
    therefore that the appellant is at risk of  persecution  on  return  to
    Burma on  account  of  his  political  and/or  religious  beliefs.   We
    therefore allow the appeal on  Refugee  Convention  grounds.   We  also
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds as we are satisfied  that  the
    ill-treatment which the appellant faces  would  be  in  breach  of  the
    United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article 3 of the Human  Rights
    Convention.

46. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary for us to  consider  the  other
    grounds of appeal.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of
      an error of law. We set it aside.
   2. We remake the determination by allowing  the  appeal  on  refugee  and
      human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

-----------------------
[1] This number is disputed by the respondent.

