
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/12242/2015
                                                               AA/12243/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd May 2016                               |On 1st June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                       MR THALPA DON CHAMINDA LIYANAGE
              MS ANUJA PRASANGIKA PERERA WEERATUNGA ARACHCHIGE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka. The first appellant was born
    on 20 November 1974 and has been in the UK since 1999. He is the
    husband of the second appellant who was born on 31 October 1977 and has
    been in the UK since 2002. The appellants married in Sri Lanka in 1998.

 2. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent to refuse the
    appellants' application for asylum and leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis of their private and family life under Article 8 ECHR. The
    appellants' ensuing appeal, which was pursued on Article 8 grounds
    only, was heard by First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Samimi. In a
    decision promulgated on 2 March 2016, the FtT dismissed the appeal. The
    FtT's decision to dismiss the appeal is now being appealed.

 3. The immigration history of the appellants is highly relevant to the
    claim and therefore I have set it out in full, based on the evidence
    that was before the FtT.

 4. The first appellant's immigration history is as follows:

       a) On 19 November 1999 he entered the UK

       b) On 6 January 2000 he claimed asylum

       c) On 29 January 2001 his asylum claim was refused. However, the
          decision was not served on him or his representatives.

       d) On 8 March 2001 the first appellant was sent a letter from the
          respondent which stated  as follows:

             You have applied for asylum in the UK. Your application has
             been carefully considered, and a decision has now been taken
             that you do not qualify for asylum within the terms of the
             1951 United Nations Convention relating to the Status of
             Refugees. The date on which your application is recorded as
             having been determined is 29/01/01.

             The implications of this decision for your immigration status
             within the UK are being considered separately within the
             Immigration and Nationality Directorate. When that process is
             complete, you will receive a further letter from your port of
             entry.

       e) In 2003 he was listed as an absconder.

       f) Between 2001 and 2008 there is no evidence of there having been
          any communication between the first appellant (or his solicitors)
          and the respondent. The first appellant has produced a letter from
          his solicitors to his employer, sent in 2005, concerning his
          immigration status but no correspondence to or from the
          respondent.

       g) In 2008 the first appellant submitted a legacy casework
          questionnaire. In 2010 this was followed upon on several
          occasions.

       h) The FtT found that the first appellant did not at any stage "go
          underground" and that the respondent was fully aware of his
          whereabouts. Moreover, it found that the first appellant relied on
          his solicitors to make relevant enquiries with a view to
          regularising his immigration status.

 5. The second appellant's immigration history is as follows:

       a) On 18 June 2002 she applied for asylum

       b) Her application as refused on 15 July 2002.

       c) On 13 December 2002 her appeal was dismissed and as of 7 February
          2003 her appeal rights were exhausted.

 6. In 2012 a fresh application was made by both appellants, which was
    refused in 2015.

 7. The appellants claim that they have established a private and family
    life in the UK. They have been in the UK a very long time (over 16
    years in the case of the first appellant). Their life in the UK
    includes regular attendance at a Buddhist temple and involvement with
    charity work. The first appellant works at Tesco (in the same location
    for about 15 years) and delivers food for a restaurant. They have no
    criminal convictions and consider themselves to be valued members of
    the community who are wholly integrated into UK life.

 8. The appellants do not have children and do not have wider family in the
    UK. They both have family in Sri Lanka. The first appellant worked in
    Sri Lanka at a casino.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellants' appeal was heard by FtT Judge Samimi on 28 January
    2016. The FtT stated that the only issue before it related to Article 8
    ECHR outside the Rules.

10. The FtT found that the appellants had built up a private life in the
    UK, consisting of their friends, the first appellant's job and their
    connections with the Buddhist community but that there were not
    compelling circumstances that would warrant their claims succeeding
    under Article 8 outside the Rules.

11. One of the issues considered by the FtT, in its assessment of
    proportionality, was the respondent's delay in dealing with the
    application. In this respect, it made the following comments:

         10. The length of the appellants stay in the UK, together with the
         delay caused by the respondent's failure to consider their cases
         promptly and in accordance with the Legacy Policy has enabled them
         to remain and build private lives.

         11. I do not find that the fact of delay and length of residence in
         the circumstances of this case are of sufficient weight so as to
         tip the balance in the appellant's favour. I do not find that the
         fact of delay and length of residence have strengthened their ties
         to the community, friendships or work.



Grounds of appeal and submissions

12. There are several grounds of appeal but in essence the appeal is
    brought on the basis that the FtT failed to have proper regard to the
    delay by the respondent in dealing with the appellants' applications
    and in particular failed to give proper consideration to, and apply, EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 40. The grounds contend that there was a complete
    administrative breakdown which meant the application by the appellants
    was mishandled. The grounds also submit that the delay is exceptional
    and the judge should have taken into account both paragraph 353B of the
    Immigration Rules and chapter 53 of the respondent's Enforcement
    Guidance and Instructions.


13. Ms Seehra reiterated the arguments made in the grounds of appeal -
    contending, in particular, that the FtT had failed to recognise that
    the weight given to immigration control should be reduced because of
    the excessive delay, which was entirely the fault and responsibility of
    the respondent. The FtT also erred by not taking into account the
    respondent's policy guidance.

14. Mr Melvin argued that the appellants' case rests on there being a delay
    attributable entirely to the respondent. However, the reality is that
    the first appellant was at least partly responsible.  Mr Melvin
    contended that he did not follow up with the respondent for a decade
    and it does not appear that he took any steps after his wife lost her
    appeal. There are no letters from him or his solicitors to the
    respondent between 2001 and 2010. In these circumstances, the guidance
    referred to by Ms Seehra is not relevant.

Relevant law

15. It is clear that delay by the respondent can be a relevant
    consideration when conducting a balancing exercise under Article 8
    ECHR.


16. In EB (Kosovo) Lord Bingham indentified three ways in which delay could
    be relevant.

         14.  It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision-making
         process is necessarily irrelevant to the decision. It may,
         depending on the facts, be relevant in any one of three ways.
         First, the applicant may during the period of any delay develop
         closer personal and social ties and establish deeper roots in the
         community than he could have shown earlier. The longer the period
         of the delay, the likelier this is to be true. To the extent that
         it is true, the applicant's claim under article 8 will necessarily
         be strengthened. It is unnecessary to elaborate this point since
         the respondent accepts it.
         15.  Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way. An
         immigrant without leave to enter or remain is in a very precarious
         situation, liable to be removed at any time. Any relationship into
         which such an applicant enters is likely to be, initially,
         tentative, being entered into under the shadow of severance by
         administrative order. This is the more true where the other party
         to the relationship is aware of the applicant's precarious
         position. This has been treated as relevant to the quality of the
         relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2007] EWCA Civ 655, para 11, it was noted that "It was
         reasonable to expect that both [the applicant] and her husband
         would be aware of her precarious immigration status". This reflects
         the Strasbourg court's listing of factors relevant to the
         proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted of crime:
         "whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he or
         she entered into a family relationship" seeBoultif v
         Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 1179, para 48; Mokrani v France (2003)
         40 EHRR 123, para 30. A relationship so entered into may well be
         imbued with a sense of impermanence. But if months pass without a
         decision to remove being made, and months become years, and year
         succeeds year, it is to be expected that this sense of impermanence
         will fade and the expectation will grow that if the authorities had
         intended to remove the applicant they would have taken steps to do
         so. This result depends on no legal doctrine but on an
         understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work and it may
         affect the proportionality of removal.
         16.  Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight
         otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm and fair
         immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a
         dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent and
         unfair outcomes. In the present case the appellant's cousin, who
         entered the country and applied for asylum at the same time and
         whose position is not said to be materially different, was granted
         exceptional leave to remain, during the two-year period which it
         took the respondent to correct its erroneous decision to refuse the
         appellant's application on grounds of non-compliance. In the case
         of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of Appeal at the same time
         as the present case, there was a somewhat similar pattern of facts.
         JL escaped from Sierra Leone with her half brother in 1999, and
         claimed asylum. In 2000 her claim was refused on grounds of non-
         compliance. As in the appellant's case this decision was erroneous,
         as the respondent recognised eighteen months later. In February
         2006 the half brother was granted humanitarian protection. She was
         not. A system so operating cannot be said to be "predictable,
         consistent and fair as between one applicant and another" or as
         yielding "consistency of treatment between one aspiring immigrant
         and another". To the extent that this is shown to be so, it may
         have a bearing on the proportionality of removal, or of requiring
         an applicant to apply from out of country. As Carnwath LJ observed
         in Akaeke v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA
         Civ 947, [2005] INLR 575, para 25:
             "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on the part of
             the Secretary of State is capable of being a relevant factor,
             then the weight to be given to it in the particular case was a
             matter for the tribunal"
17. The Immigration Rules, at paragraph 353B, recognise that delay can have
    implications for a human rights claim.

         Exceptional Circumstances
         353B. Where further submissions have been made and the decision
         maker has established whether or not they amount to a fresh claim
         under paragraph 353 of these Rules, or in cases with no outstanding
         further submissions whose appeal rights have been exhausted and
         which are subject to a review, the decision maker will also have
         regard to the migrant's:
            (i) character, conduct and associations including any criminal
            record and the nature of any offence of which the migrant
            concerned has been convicted;
            (ii) compliance with any conditions attached to any previous
            grant of leave to enter or remain and compliance with any
            conditions of temporary admission or immigration bail where
            applicable;
            (iii) length of time spent in the United Kingdom spent for
            reasons beyond the migrant's control after the human rights or
            asylum claim has been submitted or refused; in deciding whether
            there are exceptional circumstances which mean that removal
            from the United Kingdom is no longer appropriate. This
            paragraph does not apply to submissions made overseas. This
            paragraph does not apply where the person is liable to
            deportation.


18. Similarly, the significance of delay is recognised by the respondent in
    its Enforcement Guidance and Instructions (chapter 53), where it is
    stated:

         The length of residence in the UK is a factor to be considered
         where residence has been accrued by an unreasonable delay which is
         not attributable to the migrant. Periods of residence which are
         built up by actions of non-compliance attributable to the migrant
         will not count in the migrant's favour. More weight should be
         attached to the length of time a child has spent in the UK compared
         to an adult.


         Provided that the factors outlined in 'Character' or 'Compliance'
         do not mean that the claimant cannot benefit from the exceptional
         circumstances guidance, then caseworkers must also consider whether
         there has been significant delay by the Home Office, not
         attributable to the migrant, in deciding a valid application for
         leave to remain on asylum or human rights grounds or whether there
         are reasons beyond the individual's control why they could not
         leave the UK voluntarily after their application was refused. For
         example:


             ( 'Family' cases where delay by the Home Office, or factors
             beyond the control of the family which have prevented
             departure, have contributed to a significant period of
             residence (for the purposes of this guidance, 'family' cases
             means a parent or parents as defined in the Immigration Rules
             and children who are emotionally and financially dependent on
             the parent, and under the age of 18 at the date of the
             decision). Following an individual assessment of the prospect
             of enforcing removal, and where the factors outlined in
             'Character' and 'Compliance' do not prevent a case from
             benefiting from the exceptional circumstances guidance, family
             cases may be considered exceptionally on grounds of delay
             where the dependent child has lived in the UK for more than 3
             years or more whilst under the age of 18.


             ( Any other case where the length of delay by the Home Office
             in deciding the application, or where there were factors
             preventing departure, may be considered exceptionally on
             grounds of delay where the person has lived in the UK for more
             than six years.

Consideration

19. The appellants' case, as set out in their grounds of appeal and argued
    by Ms Seehra, is that an administrative breakdown resulted in a
    "staggering" delay of 16 years for which the respondent was
    responsible.


20. I do not consider this to be an accurate characterisation of the
    appellants' immigration history. The second appellant applied for
    asylum in June 2002. Her application was refused in July 2002 and her
    subsequent appeal was dismissed in December 2002. Notwithstanding her
    appeal rights being exhausted in February 2013, she remained in the UK.
    It is clear from this chronology that her application was dealt with
    promptly and, following her 2002 application, there was no delay in
    decision making relevant to an assessment under Article 8.

21. The first appellant applied for asylum in January 2000 and his
    application was refused on 29 January 2001, just over a year later. The
    decision was not served on him but he was sent a letter, dated 8 March
    2001, the contents of which are set out above at paragraph [4(d)]. In
    sum, this letter notified the first appellant that his application for
    asylum had been rejected but that the implications of this decision for
    his immigration status were being considered separately and would be
    communicated to him in due course. No such letter was sent to the first
    appellant. For the next seven years he continued to live and work in
    the UK. There is no evidence during that time of there being any effort
    on his part (or by solicitors on his behalf) to contact the respondent
    to clarify his status or find out when he would receive the letter
    referred to in the letter of 8 March 2001. This inaction occurred even
    though during this time his wife entered the UK and made an
    unsuccessful asylum application and appeal, and he had the benefit of
    legal representation.



22. Although it is the case that the respondent failed to complete the
    necessary process following its decision to refuse the first
    appellant's asylum application, in my view the period between 2001 and
    2008 cannot properly be described as one in which there was an
    unreasonable delay on the part of the respondent. Rather, it is a
    period in which the first appellant knew he had been unsuccessful in
    his asylum appeal but because of inaction by the respondent continued
    living and working in the UK. To the extent the period between 2001 and
    2008 can be characterised as a delay, such delay was at least in part a
    result of the conduct of the first appellant in failing to follow up
    with the respondent.

23. In 2008 the appellants made a legacy application, and in 2012 a fresh
    application. A decision was not made until 2015 and I accept that there
    was an unreasonable delay by the respondent in respect of these later
    applications.

24. I now turn to consider the FtT's approach to the "delay". The FtT did
    not undertake a detailed analysis of the delay (indeed, it is unclear
    from the decision whether the references to "delay" encompass the
    period from 2001 to 2008 as well as the period from 2008 to 2015 or
    only the latter) and the decision does not include any reference to EB
    (Kosovo) or the respondent's Enforcement Guidance. However, this does
    not mean delay was not taken into account by the FtT in its Article 8
    proportionality assessment. The conclusion at paragraph [11] that "the
    delay and length of residence in the circumstances of the case" were
    not "of sufficient weight so as to tip the balance in the appellant's
    favour" clearly shows that "delay" was treated as one of the relevant
    factor in the balancing exercise under Article 8.

25. The appellants argue that, because of the delay, the FtT should have
    given reduced weight to the public interest in immigration control and
    that it was an error of law for it not to do so. I do not accept this
    argument. EB (Kosovo) recognises that in cases where delay is the
    result of a dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable,
    inconsistent and unfair outcomes, it may be appropriate to reduce the
    weight accorded to the public interest in the maintenance of effective
    immigration control. However, this is not a case where unpredictable or
    unfair outcomes were reached and the factual matrix is very different
    to EB (Kosovo) which concerned a 13 year old whose asylum application
    was not determined for four and a half years despite the application by
    his cousin (who had entered the UK with him and whose circumstances
    were analogous) being determined several years earlier. Accordingly,
    there was not a material error by the FtT in failing to reduce the
    weight given to the public interest because of delay by the respondent.

26. Given my finding that the delay between 2001 and 2008 (to the extent it
    can even be characterised as a such) was at least in part due to the
    choices made by, and conduct of, the first appellant, I do not consider
    the Enforcement Guidance and Instructions or Paragraph 353B of the
    Immigration Rules to be relevant and accordingly there was no error of
    law by the FtT in failing to consider and apply them.

27. The FtT's approach to the delay in this case (whether it is from 2001
    to 2015 or only from 2008 to 2015) needs to be understood in the wider
    context of how the appellants' claim under Article 8 was considered.

28. The appellants were unable to succeed under the Rules and therefore, in
    order to prevail, it was necessary for them to show "compelling
    circumstances" to warrant the appeal being allowed outwith the Rules:
    see SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387. However, it is clear from the
    evidence that was before the FtT that the appellants were unable to
    identify any compelling circumstances other than the length of time
    they had spent in the UK. The appellants are both from Sri Lanka and
    would be returned together; their wider family reside in Sri Lanka and
    they have cultural, social and religious ties with the country; they do
    not have children who would face upheaval in moving country; and their
    private life in the UK was established whilst their status in the UK
    was precarious.

29. Although delay is a relevant factor under Article 8 and can, in certain
    circumstances, reduce the weight given to the public interest in
    immigration controls, the fact of there being a delay is not a trump
    card which can turn an appeal with no prospect of succeeding under
    Article 8 outside the Rules into one that can succeed. Applying Section
    5A of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2002 to the facts of
    this case it becomes clear why the FtT determined the balancing
    exercise under Article 8 in favour of the appellants' removal. Whilst
    the appellants speak English and are financially independent, Section
    117B(5) stipulates that little weight should be given to a private life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration status
    was precarious. The appellants' private lives in the UK were
    established following a decision to refuse their asylum applications;
    that is, at a time when their status was undoubtedly precarious.

30. Irrespective of the delay, and even if (which is not accepted) the
    delay is indicative of a dysfunctional system yielding unfair and
    inconsistent outcomes such that reduced weight should be given to
    immigration control, the Article 8 balancing exercise still weighs
    heavily against the appellants who are unable to show any compelling
    circumstances, other than the length of time they have spent in the UK,
    to warrant their appeal being allowed outwith the Rules. The decision
    of the FtT was therefore one that was clearly open to it based on the
    evidence.



Decision

a. The appeal is dismissed.

b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of  a
   material error of law and shall stand.






|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 27 May 2016                   |

