
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12711/2015
Oral Judgment

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2016                              |On 5 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Masood, instructed by Aden & Co Solicitors

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Somalia
    born on [ ] 1997 whose application for asylum and humanitarian
    protection was refused by the appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of
    State").  His ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard by
    Judge Seelhoff who, in a decision following a hearing on 14 January
    2016, allowed the appeal.

 2. The claimant is from Mogadishu and came to the UK via Ethiopia on 20
    September 2012 using a Swedish passport. He was 15 at the time.  His
    sister lives in the UK (having left Somalia in 2007 and been granted
    asylum) with her husband and children and the claimant now lives with
    them.

 3. The basis of the claimant's claim is that he is a member of a minority
    clan who has been persecuted and who would be at risk on return to
    Mogadishu. His account of persecution and ill treatment he and his
    family have experienced in Somalia includes the following:

      a) His father was abducted in 1999.

      b) His mother was killed in an attack in 2007, which he understands
         occurred because of her ethnicity.

      c) In 2011 he and other male children in his district were ordered by
         Al-Shabab to gather on a football pitch in order to be recruited.
         His aunt hid him and when this was discovered she was beaten and
         his sisters abducted.  He then lived with an uncle and worked to
         support himself.  A local child threatened to report him to Al-
         Shabab. Fearing the consequences of this, arrangements were made
         for him to leave Somalia.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal, having heard evidence from the claimant and
    his sister, accepted their accounts - including the events described in
    paragraph [3] above - as being broadly credible.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal then considered the appeal in light of the
    country guidance case MOJ & Ors (Returns to Mogadishu) Somalia CG
    [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). After citing in full the relevant parts of the
    headnote to MOJ, the First tier Tribunal, at paragraphs [25] - [29],
    applied MOJ to the circumstances of the claimant. At paragraph [30] it
    concluded as follows:

         "In accordance with MOJ I do find it likely that this appellant
         will end up living in one of the IDP camps in conditions in which
         the panel in MOJ held would likely fall below acceptable
         humanitarian standards.  Accordingly I find that the appellant is
         entitled to humanitarian protection in the UK".

 6. The First-tier Tribunal briefly considered the claimant's claim under
    Article 8 ECHR and  found that he would face very significant obstacles
    integrating into Somalia such that paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules was satisfied.  The reasoning given for this finding
    was that the factors giving rise to the need for humanitarian
    protection amounted to "very significant obstacles" that would be faced
    by the claimant.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. The first ground of appeal submits that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to properly engage with MOJ and that the evidence does not support a
    finding that the claimant would end up in an IDP camp given that, inter
    alia, he had worked in Mogadishu, has enhanced his skills whilst in the
    UK, would receive remittances from his sister and would benefit from
    the employment opportunities now prevalent in Mogadishu.

 8. The second ground argues that the First-tier Tribunal failed to make
    adequate findings to justify its conclusion in respect of 276ADE and
    Article 8 ECHR.

 9. Before me, Mr Bramble argued that the evidence, properly analysed, does
    not support the First-tier Tribunal's finding about the risk to the
    claimant of living in circumstances that fall below an acceptable level
    in humanitarian protection terms and that if MOJ had been correctly
    applied the Tribunal would have reached the opposite conclusion. He
    also argued that the First tier Tribunal failed to take into account a
    more recent Upper Tribunal decision (that was reported prior to the
    hearing) in which the situation and risks in Somalia were considered
    and that reinforced why the claimant would benefit from the improved
    economic climate in Mogadishu: AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia
    [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC)

10. Mr Bramble made a number of specific comments about the First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning, which include the following:

      a) At paragraph [25] the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant
         no longer had contact with relatives in Somalia, his aunts and
         sister having disappeared. No mention is made, however, of the
         claimant's uncle, with whom, by his own account, he lived before
         leaving Somalia and Mr Bramble argued that this undermined the
         finding.

      b) At paragraph [26] the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant
         did not have qualifications that would enable him to find work but
         failed to take into consideration the study he had undertaken in
         the UK. Mr Bramble argued that no explanation is given as to why
         this education will not assist the claimant upon return. Nor, he
         argued, was consideration given to the improved opportunities in
         Mogadishu for returnees and advantages stemming from changes to
         employment law, as explained in MOJ and highlighted in AAW.

      c) At paragraphs [27] and [28] the First-tier Tribunal considered the
         support the claimant would receive from his sister and family and
         found that "it would be difficult for them to find a significant
         amount of money to remit" to the claimant. Mr Bramble argued that
         the judge failed to consider the actual amount that could be
         remitted and how much the claimant would in fact need.

11. Mr Masood, on behalf of the claimant, argued that the Secretary of
    State has failed to identify an error of law: the Tribunal recognised
    and cited the relevant Country Guidance case and then proceeded to
    apply it, giving adequate reasons. He submitted that the First-tier
    Tribunal's findings at paragraph [25]-[30] were consistent with the
    evidence and properly reasoned.

12. Mr Masood also sought to distinguish AAW, on the basis that the factual
    matrix in that case was very different to the present one. The
    appellant in AAW was a 40 year old whose father had owned a six bedroom
    house and had the patronage of an influential member of a dominant
    clan.  The judge in AAW characterised the appellant's circumstances as
    not being particularly difficult in Mogadishu.  Mr Masood contrasted
    this to the present case where according to the factual findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal, which had not been challenged, the claimant and
    his family suffered very serious difficulties in Somalia including
    death, abduction and attempted forced recruitment to Al Shabab.

Consideration

13. The First-tier Tribunal identified that the relevant Country Guidance
    case in light of which to assess this appeal is MOJ. This is relatively
    recent Country Guidance case which addresses the risk faced by citizens
    of Somalia returning to Mogadishu. It is a comprehensive and detailed
    decision where a considerable amount of material has been assessed and
    I am satisfied that it was entirely appropriate for the First-tier
    Tribunal to assess the claimant's claim in light of the findings and
    conclusions therein. The First-tier Tribunal did not consider AAW but
    no error arises from its failure to do so. AAW is not a Country
    Guidance case. Nor, in any event, does its assessment of the situation
    in Mogadishu differ materially to that in MOJ.

14. MOJ makes clear that generally an ordinary civilian returning to
    Mogadishu will not face a risk of persecution at a level that requires
    protection under Article 3 ECHR or Article 15(c) of the Qualification
    Directive. Nor will an ordinary civilian face a real risk of forced
    recruitment to Al-Shabab.

15. However MOJ recognises that there may be some individuals who face the
    prospect on return to Mogadishu of living in circumstances falling
    below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms. The
    head note to MOJ includes the following:

         ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu
         after a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives
         in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return,
         there will need to be a careful assessment of all of the
         circumstances. These considerations will include, but are not
         limited to:


           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           . length of absence from Mogadishu;
           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           . access to financial resources;
           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be  employment
             or self employment;
           . availability of remittances from abroad;
           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
           . why his ability to fund the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


         (x) Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


         (xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
         support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and
         who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
         return who will  face  the  prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
         falling below that which is acceptable in  humanitarian  protection
         terms.

16. The First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the considerations identified
    in MOJ is at paragraphs [25] - [30].

      a) At paragraph [25] the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant
         is from a minority clan and consequently is not likely to be in a
         position to access significant support from his clan. That the
         claimant is a member of a minority clan was a finding that was
         clearly open to the Tribunal on the evidence before it and this has
         not been challenged by the Secretary of State. Having so found, the
         Tribunal was entitled to conclude, in line with MOJ, that the
         claimant's clan membership would not result in him being able to
         access meaningful and significant support upon return from his
         clan. At subparagraph (vii) of the headnote to MOJ it states that
         "minority clans may have little to offer."

      b) Also at paragraph [25] the First-tier Tribunal found that the
         claimant does not have contact with relatives in Somalia, his aunt
         and sisters having disappeared, and would not be in a position,
         upon return, to re-establish contact with immediate family members.
         Mr Bramble highlighted the absence of a reference to the claimant's
         uncle, with whom the claimant claimed to have lived before leaving
         Somalia. However, when the decision is read as a whole it is clear
         - and I am satisfied - that the First-tier Tribunal's finding was
         that the claimant has lost contact with all his relatives (the
         mention of aunt and sisters being examples of those with whom the
         claimant has lost touch). Having accepted the credibility of the
         claimant's and his sister's account, the Tribunal's finding about
         the claimant's lack of contact with family was open to it based on
         the evidence.

      c) At paragraph [26] the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant
         had only undertaken menial work in Somalia, would not have a trade
         to fall back on, and would not derive opportunities because of
         qualifications based in the UK.  These findings are consistent with
         the evidence. The claimant is an eighteen year old whose only work
         experience in Somalia was washing cars. In these circumstances, I
         am satisfied that, even though, as highlighted by Mr Bramble by way
         of reference to MOJ and AAW, there are improving economic
         opportunities in Mogadishu for returnees, it was open to the First-
         tier Tribunal to find that the claimant would not be well equipped
         to benefit from these.

      d) At paragraphs [27] and [28] the First tier Tribunal considered the
         financial support from family outside of Somalia, by way of
         remittances, that the claimant would receive and found these would
         likely not be forthcoming. The Tribunal reached this conclusion
         having heard oral evidence from the claimant's sister (which was
         found to be credible). Whilst a fuller explanation and less
         ambiguous language may have avoided Mr Bramble's challenge, taken
         in context, and considering the decision as a whole, it is clear
         that the Tribunal has reached a reasoned and justifiable finding as
         to the remittances the claimant will receive if returned to
         Somalia.

      e) At paragraph [29] the First-Tier Tribunal noted that the claimant
         had been outside of Mogadishu during the formative years of 15 to
         18 years of age and as such would have difficulty managing as an
         independent adult.

17. Having made the factual findings described above at 16(a)-(e), it was
    consistent with MOJ to conclude that the particular and specific
    circumstances of the claimant (which are clearly different to those of
    the appellant in AAW) are such that he could reasonably be said to fall
    into the narrow category of person returning to Mogadishu who will face
    the prospect of living in circumstances falling below that which is
    acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

18. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal has not made a
    material error of law.  For the reasons I have explained, it has (a)
    made factual findings and drawn conclusions from those findings that
    were consistent with the evidence; and (b) properly applied MOJ to the
    specific and particular circumstances of the claimant.

DECISION

      a) The appeal is dismissed.


      b) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
         error of law and shall stand.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 2 May 2016                    |

