
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12981/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th July 2016                        |On 14th July 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   MR G P
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Malik and Malik
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this is a
protection based claim, I consider it appropriate that the anonymity
direction is continued.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Talbot
    promulgated on 10 March 2016 ("the  Decision")  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated 17  March  2015  directing  his
    removal to Albania and refusing his asylum claim.

 2. The facts of the Appellant's claim are as summarised at [6] to [11]  of
    the Decision.  The Appellant's account is accepted by the Respondent as
    true and was not disputed before the Judge ([16] of the Decision).  The
    appeal turns therefore on  issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation.  The Judge dismissed the appeal finding  there  to
    be a sufficiency of protection.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr on 31 May
    2016 on the basis that the Judge may have wrongly compartmentalised the
    issues of the threat from the gang into whose grasp the  Appellant  had
    fallen and the threat from his  own  father  who  was  responsible  for
    trafficking him in order to pay off his debt to the gang.

 4. The appeal comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains a
    material error of law and, if I so find, to either re-make the Decision
    or remit to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Submissions

 5. Mr Khan argued the case on three grounds.  In  relation  to  the  first
    which is the compartmentalisation issue to which I have referred above,
    Mr Khan pointed out that it was important that the Judge considered the
    two threats together because it is the Appellant's case that  he  would
    be re-trafficked by his father for financial reasons.  Accordingly,  he
    would fall back into the hands of the gang he fears because his  father
    would place him in the way of that threat.  He would be  at  risk  from
    his father because, if he turned back to his family for support as  the
    Judge envisaged, his father would come to know of his return.  Mr  Khan
    pointed out that Albanian society is patriarchal  and  the  Appellant's
    mother was accepted to be in an abusive relationship with his father so
    if he looked to his mother for support, his father would come  to  know
    of his return and he would be within the reach of the gang.  His family
    is therefore the source of the Appellant's problem and not part of  the
    solution as the Judge appears to envisage.

 6. Mr Khan accepted that sufficiency of protection is at the core of  this
    appeal. His first submission and his second ground is  that  the  Judge
    has misdirected himself at [24] of the Decision where he states himself
    to be "satisfied (even to the lower standard of proof) that there would
    be 'Horvath-standard' sufficiency of protection for this  Appellant  on
    his return to Albania". Mr Khan submitted that insofar as this reflects
    a finding by the Judge that the burden  of  showing  a  sufficiency  of
    protection to the standard only of reasonable likelihood has been  met,
    that is an error of law.  As Mr Khan pointed out, the burden is on  the
    Appellant to show that there was a real risk that he would not  receive
    adequate protection (by reference to  what  is  said  in  Bagdanavicius
    [2003] EWCA Civ 1605).

 7. In relation to the third  ground,  Mr  Khan  accepted  that  this  case
    overlaps with TD & AD.  He pointed out however that the focus of  those
    appeals was the position of female victims of trafficking.   There  was
    therefore a focus on such things as the availability  of  shelters  for
    women.  Those would not be available to  the  Appellant.   The  country
    guidance does not deal with male victims of trafficking and TD & AD  is
    not therefore wholly relevant.

 8. That the Appellant is a victim  of  trafficking  was  accepted  by  the
    Respondent and the Judge.  Mr Khan accepted that, insofar as  the  case
    of TD & AD (Albania) [2016] CG UKUT 00092 is relevant, that shows  that
    the Albanian authorities have made significant efforts to improve their
    response to trafficking.  However, he pointed to the need  to  consider
    the particular circumstances of the Appellant, especially when  dealing
    with the risk of re-trafficking.  Those  factors  include  the  support
    network available to the Appellant. Mr Khan  submitted  that,  in  this
    case, the Appellant cannot rely on his family network (for the  reasons
    outlined at [5] above).  He originates from the North  of  Albania  and
    that is the area where the gang is based. He could not relocate  there.
    His father is in Tirana and he cannot  go  there.   Mr  Khan  submitted
    that, in light of what is said at [18] of the Decision in  relation  to
    corruption of the authorities, there had been no  proper  consideration
    of whether the Albanian authorities would be willing and able to assist
    the Appellant against the composite threat identified.

 9. Mr Kotas began his submissions by pointing out  that,  in  relation  to
    sufficiency  of  protection,  the  Judge  at  [16]  had  set  out   the
    appropriate test by reference to Bagdanavicius [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605.
    It was inconceivable that, having referred to the correct test at  [16]
    of the Decision, he would then  have  misdirected  himself  some  eight
    paragraphs later.

10. In relation to the third ground, Mr Kotas submitted that it was grossly
    unfair for the Appellant to criticise the Judge's reliance on TD  &  AD
    since it was the Appellant's representative who placed reliance on that
    decision.  He pointed out that, in any event, the reason that the Judge
    placed reliance on that decision related to sufficiency  of  protection
    which was relevant.  Furthermore, the Judge did not treat that decision
    as determinative but instead went on to consider at [18] that issue  in
    the context of the other background evidence.

11. The main focus of Mr Kotas' submissions was on the  first  ground.   Mr
    Kotas made the point that the Appellant's claim is that there  are  two
    distinct issues - the risk from the gang and the risk from  his  father
    albeit that the former is said  to  emanate  through  the  latter.   As
    sufficiency of protection is the focal issue in  the  appeal,  he  then
    took me to the way in which the Judge dealt with those issues.  At [20]
    the Judge found that there was no real evidence  as  to  the  size  and
    reach of the gang.  He finds that "no reliable conclusion can be formed
    as to the size and the reach of the gang." There is no suggestion  that
    their reach extends to Tirana and that they would themselves  be  in  a
    position to target the Appellant  there  with  the  connivance  of  the
    authorities.  The Appellant would therefore be  able  to  look  to  the
    authorities for protection.

12. Mr Kotas then referred me to [21] of the Decision where the Judge deals
    with the risk from the Appellant's father.  He  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant's father is an unemployed alcoholic who is also a bully.  The
    Judge finds however that "There is no evidence that he was  a  powerful
    man in the wider society".  Although the Judge records the  Appellant's
    fear that he would not receive protection against his father, it is not
    suggested by the Appellant that his father has any influence  with  the
    police.   It is for that reason that the Judge says  at  [24]  that  he
    does not need to consider internal relocation and  that  the  Appellant
    can return to Tirana.

    Decision and reasons

13. I begin by considering  the  third  of  the  Appellant's  grounds.  The
    Appellant relied on the case of TD & AD before  the  Judge.   As  such,
    there is no error of law in the Judge making reference  to  that  case.
    The Judge recognised at [17] of the Decision  that  this  decision  had
    only some relevance because it concerned the trafficking of  women  and
    not that of boys for forced labour.  Furthermore, the Judge went on  at
    [18] to consider the issue of sufficiency  of  protection  against  the
    other  background  evidence.   There  is  no  error  of  law   in   his
    consideration of that evidence and he was right to  make  reference  to
    the country guidance case whilst recognising the limitations of that in
    the instant case (particularly when that was the course urged upon  him
    by the Appellant's legal representative).

14. There is no merit either in the second ground.  Although I accept  that
    the  sentence  at  [24]  which  I  have  cited  at  [6]  above  may  be
    infelicitously worded, it is  clear  in  the  context  of  the  overall
    Decision that the Judge recognised that what he needed to consider  was
    the availability and sufficiency of protection which  applied  in  this
    case and whether that reduced the risk to the Appellant such that he is
    not entitled to international protection (see in particular [16] of the
    Decision).

15. Mr Khan did not  direct  my  attention  to  any  particular  background
    evidence which showed that the Albanian authorities would not  be  able
    and willing to protect the Appellant.   Aside  the  references  in  the
    background material to corruption and bribery which are highlighted  in
    the skeleton argument before the Judge and to which he alludes at  [18]
    of the Decision, the other background evidence  relied  upon  does  not
    support a finding that the Judge has failed to properly have regard  to
    the position as set  out  in  the  background  evidence.   I  refer  in
    particular to the extract from the Respondent's Country Information and
    Guidance Report dated 26 August 2015 which is cited in the  Appellant's
    skeleton argument at page 5 as follows:-

         "2.1.5    In general Albanian authorities are able and  willing  to
         provide protection to a person fearing non state  agents  or  rogue
         state  agents;  however  this  is  dependent  on   the   particular
         circumstances of the case and the profile of the person.  Each case
         must be determined on its own facts.  The onus is on the  applicant
         to demonstrate that the state is not willing and  able  to  provide
         effective protection."

    I have considered the marked up passages in the Appellant's  bundle  of
    background  evidence.   There  is  nothing  in  those  extracts   which
    displaces the Judge's findings.

16. I turn finally to the first ground which is the  main  basis  on  which
    permission was granted.  In order to consider the complaint made, it is
    helpful to set out in full what is said by the Judge when dealing  with
    the risk  on  return,  in  particular  the  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to the Appellant:-

         "[20]    The Appellant fears the gang that  operated  the  cannabis
         factory.  He believes that the gang are a large gang who  have  the
         power and influence to pursue him and punish him wherever he was in
         Albania.  The Appellant was threatened and ill-treated by the  gang
         and it  is  hardly  surprising,  in  the  context  of  this  forced
         detention in the  house,  that  he  would  have  been  sufficiently
         intimidated to believe in their power and reach.  However, when  he
         was asked questions at his interview as to the  basis  for  such  a
         belief, the Appellant was quite vague.  He was unable  to  say  how
         many people were involved in the operation beyond saying that there
         were 'quite a few people around'.  He said that there were  'a  lot
         of houses used for the storage of goods  for  the  gang  and  other
         groups engaged in the lucrative cannabis business in the area'  but
         the Appellant was himself confined to the house and can hardly have
         been in any position to gauge the size of the operation.  I have to
         conclude that no reliable conclusion can be formed as to  the  size
         and reach of this gang.  This is a relevant factor both in terms of
         the ability of the gang to trace the Appellant and the  ability  of
         the  gang  to  resist  enforcement  by  the  police  and   judicial
         authorities.  It may also be relevant that the gang  appear  to  be
         based in a remote area in the north of the country and even if they
         have some  influence  in  this  immediate  locality,  there  is  no
         evidence that this extended to Tirana where the Appellant is from.

         [21] The Appellant also fears his father. The Appellant's father is
         an unemployed construction worker and his  wife  is  a  supermarket
         cleaner.  He also appears to be a bully who  beat,  threatened  and
         intimidated both his  wife  and  children.   There  is  however  no
         evidence that he was a  particularly  powerful  man  in  the  wider
         society.  The Appellant believes that the police could not  protect
         him  from  his  father.   The  Appellant  said  at  interview   'my
         understanding was that my father knew some of  the  police  people'
         but provides no  details  to  substantiate  this  belief.   In  his
         witness statement he says that  his  mother  complained  about  her
         husband's conduct to her relatives and that they complained to  the
         police (which is somewhat inconsistent with his interview  evidence
         when he said that his mother complained directly  to  the  police).
         This inconsistency indicates to  me  that  the  Appellant  was  not
         really clear about what complaints had or had not been made to  the
         police and I am not satisfied (even to the lower standard of proof)
         that the police would be  powerless  to  take  action  against  the
         Appellant's father or that he had any particular influence with the
         police (either locally or outside his immediate locality).  I  also
         note that his influence with  the  police  was  not  sufficient  to
         prevent him from being prosecuted for a road traffic offence. "

17. The case as urged on me by Mr Khan is in reality this.   He  says  that
    this is a drugs gang with a number of houses producing cannabis in  the
    north of Albania.  As such, they are likely to have some influence with
    the police.  However, the prior point is whether the gang would  either
    be aware of the Appellant's return to Tirana or would seek him out even
    if they were aware of it.  It is not the Appellant's case that  he  was
    targeted by the gang directly but rather that his father put  him  into
    their grasp.  As such, the real  risk  emanates  from  the  Appellant's
    father.  Mr Khan says that this is a risk that the Appellant's  father,
    who undoubtedly will still need to use the  Appellant  as  a  means  of
    earning money to pay off his  debts,  will  re-traffic  him.   Mr  Khan
    argues that the Appellant's father will become aware of the Appellant's
    return to Tirana because he will need to turn to his family  there  for
    support and the Appellant's  father  is  likely  to  find  out  he  has
    returned and will target him.

18. That is the case which the Judge addresses at [20] and [21].  The  fact
    that the two threats are dealt with individually does not undermine the
    Judge's conclusions that, in the case of the gang, they are unlikely to
    become aware of the Appellant's return (or even be  interested  in  it)
    whereas in relation to the risk from his father who might be tempted to
    return him to the gang, the evidence shows  that  the  authorities  are
    willing and able to protect the Appellant against the risk that he will
    be re-trafficked. There is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
    protection afforded by the authorities is undermined by  corruption  or
    bribery given the Appellant's father's circumstances.

19. The key issue, as the Judge noted is whether there is a sufficiency  of
    protection against either or both of the father and the gang.   Insofar
    as Mr Khan relied on what is said at [23] about the availability  of  a
    support network for  the  Appellant  in  Albania,  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's father might, by reason  of  that  family  support,  become
    aware of the Appellant's return does not alter the conclusion that  the
    authorities could still protect the Appellant if his  father  did  find
    out and come after him.

20. Furthermore, that paragraph is a focus on the individual factors in the
    Appellant's case based on what is said in TD & AD.  The availability of
    family support is only one factor.  As is also found in that paragraph,
    the Appellant is a young man in good health with a reasonable level  of
    education who has lived alone in the UK for some  eighteen  months  and
    travelled abroad with his football team  to  other  countries.   It  is
    implicit in those findings that he would not need to turn to family for
    support if he did not wish to do so.  It is also the case that not  all
    of those family members are based in Tirana  (the  Judge  mentions  for
    instance his cousin who assisted him to leave Albania).

21. For the foregoing reasons, I find that there is no error of law in  the
    Decision.  It follows that I uphold the Decision.

Decision
I am satisfied that  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
contain a material error of law.  The Decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Talbot promulgated on 10 March 2016 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
therefore maintained.


Signed        [pic]                 Date 13 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
