
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/12176/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2016                        |On 31 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                    S R Z
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Fripp, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge K. Swinnerton, promulgated on 19 April 2016, in which he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum case I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was refused on ground 1, but granted on grounds  2
    and 3.  In the grant of permission Upper Tribunal Judge Smith stated:


    "Ultimately  the  Appellant  may  not   succeed   on   these   grounds,
    particularly when he clearly stated in interview at Q36 that  the  risk
    his father faced was not the same as the risk he  faced.   However,  in
    light of the answer at Q137 that the risk to him would  be  exacerbated
    by his father's activities and also in the light of the  acceptance  by
    Judge Maxwell that his father's eldest son (who  I  assume  to  be  the
    Appellant's brother and not him) had to be sent abroad as a  result  of
    threats  emanating  from  the  father's  activities,  it  was  arguably
    incumbent on the Judge to consider the risk on this basis and  to  take
    into account Judge Maxwell's acceptance  of  the  Appellant's  father's
    account in so doing."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Fripp relied on the grounds of appeal.


 6. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no material error of law  in  the
    decision.  In relation to ground 3, the father's claim  was  different.
    The material facts of his claim had been accepted by the Respondent.  I
    was referred to paragraph 11(iii) of the Appellant's father's decision.
     It had been accepted that the Appellant had been employed by the  bank
    in Afghanistan.  She submitted that the Appellant's claim was different
    to that of his father.  The  case  of  Ocampo  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1276,
    provided by Mr. Fripp in support of the grounds of appeal, concerned  a
    case where the claims of family members were the same.   She  submitted
    that the father's decision did not go  as  far  as  the  Appellant  was
    claiming.   Judge  Maxwell  had  accepted  that  the  father  had  been
    employed, and that he had children  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Neither
    paragraphs 23 nor 27 of that decision went as  far  as  Mr.  Fripp  was
    claiming.  She submitted that the judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    father's claim but the claims were different.


 7. In relation to whether this would make a  material  difference,  I  was
    referred to paragraph 102 where the judge  had  found  the  Appellant's
    account to be vague and not plausible.  The account of the letter  from
    the Taliban had not been ignored - I was referred to paragraphs 98  and
    99.  The judge was entitled to take  into  account  the  fact  that  no
    letter had been provided and place weight on this.   In  paragraph  100
    the judge had taken account of the inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's
    account.  The judge had been entitled to dismiss the appeal.


 8. In response Mr. Fripp stated that the father's asylum appeal  had  been
    considered by Judge Maxwell in August 2013.  The Appellant's father had
    worked as an executive in Afghanistan and, in the course  of  his  job,
    had refused to cooperate with the Taliban by taking militants into  his
    own workplace.  Judge Maxwell had found that the Appellant's father had
    lied in panic about the date on which he had  started  employment,  but
    the remainder of his account had been  accepted.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 11 of Judge Maxwell's  decision.   In  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision it was accepted that the  Respondent  had  conceded  that  the
    account given by the Appellant's father was not inherently implausible.
     I was further referred  to  paragraphs  22,  23,  26  and  27  of  the
    decision.


 9. Subsequently the Appellant himself had claimed asylum.  His account  of
    his work at the bank had been rejected.  It was accepted by  Mr.  Fripp
    that, following the refusal to  grant  permission  to  appeal  on  this
    ground, this matter had been resolved against the Appellant.


10. He submitted that the further basis of claim, the risk from the Taliban
    owing to his association with the bank, which in  turn  was  associated
    with ISAF forces, meant that the Appellant was perceived  as  being  on
    the side of the occupiers and opposed to the values of the Taliban.  In
    this context I was referred to the threatening letter.  He referred  to
    paragraphs 98 to 102 of the  decision  which  is  where  the  reasoning
    regarding the threat from the Taliban was set out.   In  paragraphs  98
    and 99 the judge had not indicated that he had  accepted  the  father's
    account.  The reasoning given by the judge for why the Taliban were not
    threatening was very slim.


11. The second point which was taken against the  Appellant  regarding  the
    threat from the Taliban was the inconsistency in  his  evidence  as  to
    when the threat was received, 2010 or 2011.  I was referred to the case
    law regarding screening interviews, in particular paragraph  19  of  YL
    (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145, set out at paragraph 11 of  the
    grounds of appeal.  The judge had not referred to this.  Slight  weight
    should have been given to this discrepancy given that the Appellant had
    attempted to correct it at his asylum interview.  There was substantive
    background evidence  that  the  Taliban  went  after  people  who  were
    associated with the occupying forces,  which  is  why  the  Appellant's
    father's case had been accepted as plausible.


12. The judge could not decide the issue of  the  Appellant's  plausibility
    without deciding the weight to be attached to the positive findings  in
    the Appellant's father's case, given that he was also  associated  with
    the occupying forces and that he faced a relevant  risk  as  a  result.
    There were significant common features between the Appellant's case and
    that of his father.  There were related issues regarding the perception
    of the Appellant by the Taliban which had not been considered  properly
    by the judge.  The failure to consider the weight to be  given  to  the
    Appellant's father's  grant  of  asylum  fundamentally  undermined  the
    viability of this part of the decision.


13. In summary he accepted that the part of the decision  relating  to  the
    Appellant's employment at the bank stood, but the part of the  decision
    relating to the threat from the Taliban could not  be  sustained.   The
    judge had failed to look at the country  evidence  and  had  failed  to
    apply Devaseelan.


Decision and Reasons


14. As accepted by Mr. Fripp, following the refusal of permission to appeal
    on ground 1, the findings in relation to the Appellant's activities  at
    the bank are not the subject of this appeal.  It was accepted that this
    part of the Appellant's case had been resolved against him.


15. In relation to the second basis of his  claim,  the  threats  from  the
    Taliban, the judge sets out his findings from  paragraphs  98  to  102.
    The entirety of the judge's findings and reasoning in relation to  this
    issue are set out in five short paragraphs.


16. In paragraphs 98 and 99 the judge addresses the fact that the Appellant
    had not been able to produce the letter from the Taliban  to  which  he
    referred at his  screening  interview.   He  states  that  no  adequate
    explanation was provided as to why this letter would not have  been  in
    the Appellant's possession, or why his father would not have brought it
    to the United Kingdom in 2013.


17. In paragraphs 100 and 101 the judge finds that the Appellant's  account
    was not consistent, as he had referred to the threats starting in  2010
    at his screening interview  and  2011  in  his  asylum  interview.   In
    paragraph 102 he finds that the Appellant's account  of  the  Taliban's
    failed attempt to grab him was vague.


18. Nowhere in these five paragraphs does the judge take into  account  the
    Appellant's  father  and  any  risk  from  the  Taliban  due  to   that
    association.  In paragraph 99 the judge states "I note that the  father
    of the Appellant landed in the UK on 4.7.2013  and  claimed  asylum  on
    12.8.2013."  This  is  the  only  reference  in  the  findings  to  the
    Appellant's father.  The only other reference  to  the  father  in  the
    decision is where the judge recounts the submissions.  In paragraph  77
    it states "Reference was made to the judgment of FTT Judge J J  Maxwell
    of 30.8.2013 in relation to the father of the Appellant.  It was stated
    that it had been accepted that the Appellant's father was a businessman
    who had been at risk  at  the  hands  of  the  Taliban  and  that  this
    supported the appeal of the Appellant."


19. In the judge's findings it states  only  that  the  Appellant's  father
    claimed asylum.  There is no acknowledgment that  asylum  was  granted.
    There is no reference to the basis on which asylum was granted,  or  to
    the findings of Judge Maxwell.  Given that the Appellant had stated  in
    his asylum interview that he was at risk as a result  of  his  father's
    activities, Q137, and given that the judge had recorded that this issue
    was raised in submissions, I find that this is an  inadequate  analysis
    of the connection between  the  father's  situation  and  that  of  the
    Appellant.  There is no reference to the Appellant's claim that  he  is
    at risk because of his father's activities, and no  assessment  of  the
    risk to the Appellant as a result of these  activities.   There  is  no
    reference to the fact that the Appellant's father's account was held to
    be plausible both by the judge and by the Respondent.  The reference in
    the findings to the Appellant's father not bringing a document  to  the
    United Kingdom is not enough to show that the  judge  has  fully  taken
    into account the father's activities.


20. Further, even though the judge rejected the Appellant's account of  his
    activities at the bank, the fact that the Appellant worked at the  bank
    was not rejected.  In paragraph 93 the judge states "I accept that  the
    Appellant held the position of a management trainee officer at the  AIB
    in 2011".  I find that this is a relevant consideration when  assessing
    the threat from the Taliban which the judge has not taken into  account
    in his findings from paragraphs 98 to 102.  It is also relevant to  the
    assessment of risk to the Appellant emanating from association with his
    father, given that the basis of this risk to  the  Appellant  from  the
    Taliban arises from his perceived support  for  the  occupying  forces,
    which is the same basis as the Appellant's father's claim  for  asylum.
    There is no assessment of the threat to the Appellant because of  these
    associations.


21. I find that there is no adequate assessment of the  father's  situation
    and the risk to the Appellant  because  of  this.   I  find  that  this
    failure to properly engage with this basis of the Appellant's claim  is
    a material error of law.


22. Further, while the judge was entitled to place weight on the fact  that
    the Taliban letter was not produced, this was not the only evidence  of
    threats.  The Appellant gave evidence of the threats, which  the  judge
    deals within paragraph 100 but finds that the Appellant's  account  has
    not been consistent.  I have considered the records of the  interviews.
    The Appellant repeatedly  stated  at  his  asylum  interview  that  the
    threats started in 2011, not 2010.  There is no reference in paragraphs
    100 and  101  to  any  explanation  given  by  the  Appellant  for  the
    discrepancy.  Neither has the judge taken into  account  the  case  law
    relating to the purpose of a screening interview when placing weight on
    the discrepancy.  It is on the basis of this discrepancy alone that the
    judge rejects the account of the threats.


23. The judge finds in paragraph 102 that  the  account  of  the  Taliban's
    failed attempt to grab him is "vague", but there is no reason given for
    this finding.  There is no reference to the  account,  and  why  it  is
    found to be vague.


24. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    in the judge's failure properly to analyse the risk  to  the  Appellant
    from the Taliban, by failing  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    relationship to his father, and his employment at  the  bank.   He  has
    failed to give adequate reasons for  placing  so  much  weight  on  the
    discrepancy in the dates, and has failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    his finding that the Appellant's account was vague.


Notice of Decision


25. The decision involves the making of a material error of law.  I set the
    decision aside, except that the findings in relation to the Appellant's
    activities at the bank stand, paragraphs 92 to 97.  This  was  accepted
    by Mr. Fripp at the hearing.


26. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 28 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




