










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA120852015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 3 May 2016                        |On 23 May 2016                        |
|                                     |                                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                     S J
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, counsel (instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I continue the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal. It
      is to remain in place unless and until  this  Tribunal  or  any  other
      appropriate court, directs otherwise. As  such,  no  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellants  or
      any member of their family. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
      could amount to a contempt of Court.


   2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born  on  28  May  1998.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge promulgated on 15 February 2016, dismissing his  appeal
      on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


   3. The appellant is still a minor and is 17 years old. Mr Muquit, who did
      not represent him before the First-tier Tribunal, contended  that  the
      Judge's approach to the report of Mr Martin, who prepared a  "scarring
      report," was flawed. The Judge misconstrued the  significance  of  its
      terms and conclusions.  Accordingly,  the  Judge  ignored  significant
      evidence relevant to the appellant's own credibility.


   4. Dr Martin's  report  was  compiled  with  the  guidance  given  in  SA
      (Somalia) in mind. The assertion by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that
      Dr Martin had adopted a wholly uncritical approach was incorrect.


   5. Contrary to the Judge's view, the issue of the symmetry of some of the
      scars was considered by Dr Martin which justified his  view  that  the
      injuries were non- accidental. The Judge also wrongly considered  that
      Dr Martin had given no reasons for the view that the scars were caused
      in the manner described by the appellant, rather  than  in  any  other
      way. Dr Martin clearly adopted the correct approach by  having  regard
      to the "principles" set out in KV (Scarring -  Medical  Evidence)  Sri
      Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC).


   6. The Tribunal in KV noted  that  doctors  examining  scars  should  not
      automatically and pre-emptively discount SIBP as a cause of  scars  in
      the sense  that  nothing  is  impossible  or  improbable;  but  if  in
      considering whether SIBP was "more than a remote possibility"  doctors
      should identify "presenting facts" which are in fact referred to in KV
      and which Dr Martin stated he had considered.


   7. The Judge noted that Dr Martin discounted the possibility of SIBP as a
      realistic  possibility.  However,  he  had  not  indicated  what  such
      presenting facts might be [38].


   8. In particular, Mr Muquit referred to the findings by  the  Judge  that
      there was a significant degree of regularity in the scarring caused by
      hot metal bars and it is correct to say that Dr Martin  regarded  this
      near  symmetrical  pattern  as  being  typical  of  "unwillingly   and
      deliberately" caused injuries, however, he failed to explain why  this
      is so. There was no deviation  at  all  in  the  scars  which  are  in
      perfectly straight lines, having the appearance of the  victim  having
      been lying or standing still whilst these were being inflicted. It was
      difficult to understand how this torture was inflicted on an unwilling
      victim and how in the circumstances such regularity and symmetry would
      have been achieved. That is particularly so bearing in mind that it is
      the appellant's case that  these  injuries  were  inflicted  over  the
      course of several weeks [38].


   9. However, Mr Muquit submitted that the appellant had in fact claimed to
      have been tied up at  the  time  that  these  particular  wounds  were
      inflicted.  In his witness statement that he made prior to his  asylum
      interview at C1 he stated at paragraph 10 that during his  torture  he
      was beaten with different devices. He was burned with  hot  iron  bars
      and cigarette butts. They covered his face with plastic bags soaked in
      petrol. They tied his legs "and hang me upside  down  and  beaten,  my
      head was "immunised" into water and made it difficult to breathe, they
      put chilli powder into my eyes."


  10. Mr Muquit submitted that the Judge paid no  regard  to  that  evidence
      which was capable of explaining  the  pattern  of  those  scars.  That
      evidence had in fact been referred to by the Judge  at  [14].  It  had
      also been referred to and set out in the refusal letter  at  paragraph
      46. It is noted there that the appellant stated at interview  that  he
      was hung upside down. He said he was immersed in  water.  He  did  not
      however give an account of having chilli powder put into his eyes when
      interviewed.  Apart  from  that,  however,  the  appellant  had   been
      consistent in respect of having been hung upside down.


  11. Mr Muquit referred to paragraph 1.2 of Dr  Martin's  report  where  he
      stated that determining the age of the scars by just visual inspection
      is not a precise science.  In some instances it is  just  possible  to
      say that the injuries are  mature  or  immature,  enough  to  give  an
      approximate range of times when they were caused. He stated  that  the
      appellant's scars are fully mature and this  is  consistent  with  the
      injuries that are more than six-12 months old.  The  events  that  the
      appellant referred to occurred in 2014, and the date of the report  is
      January 2016.


  12. Accordingly, Mr Muquit submitted that Dr Martin had  set  out  reasons
      and has discounted SIBP.


  13. Dr Martin was not tested by way of  cross-examination  on  his  visual
      assessment of the scars. There was no inquiry made as to the linearity
      of the scars. Having regard to the appellant's claim that he was  tied
      up at the time, it needed to be established more clearly whether there
      was a proper foundation for suggesting that there  was  a  "presenting
      fact" present.


  14. Moreover, the deviation of the scarring in the back is criss  crossed.
      The scars are not symmetrical.


  15. The finding by the Judge at [40] that Dr Martin  and  Dr  Dhumad  (the
      psychiatrist who also  presented  a  report),  had  adopted  a  wholly
      uncritical approach and had not properly considered  any  alternatives
      to the appellant's account,  was  incorrect.  Dr  Martin  had  briefly
      stated that he read and followed the recommendations outlined  in  the
      decision of KV, supra. He also prepared the report in accordance  with
      the Istanbul Protocols.


  16. Mr Muquit also submitted that the Judge erred in his approach  to  the
      appellant's testimony. He properly directed himself with regard to the
      evaluation of credibility in the case of a vulnerable  child,  but  in
      fact elevated inconsistencies in  his  evidence  when  evaluating  the
      credibility of his claim.


  17. The Judge accepted Dr Dhumad's assessment. The reference by him to the
      appellant's  "unstable  mental  state"  and  the  elevation   of   the
      inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  to  "highly  significant"
      was accordingly irrational as set against the self direction at  [23].
      Moreover, Dr Dhumad painted a "sorry picture" of the appellant,  whose
      overall  presentation  was  consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of  severe
      depressive episode with psychotic symptoms. These were also consistent
      with a diagnosis of post traumatic stress disorder.


  18. On behalf of the respondent Mr Walker referred to a note  prepared  by
      the presenting officer at the  hearing.  The  report  from  Dr  Dhumad
      stated that the appellant was in effect not fit to give evidence.  The
      presenting officer stated that he would be cross-examined.


  19. Mr Walker stated that it appears that the appellant's evidence was  at
      the heart of the Judge's negative credibility findings.


  20. The Judge in fact found that the appellant had  established  that  his
      father had been serving as a Sea Tiger. He was prepared  to  give  the
      appellant the benefit of the doubt in that  respect.  He  nevertheless
      held against the appellant some inconsistencies despite  the  evidence
      that he was suffering from various psychological vulnerabilities.


  21. Mr Walker accordingly very fairly accepted that the Judge had  adopted
      an incorrect approach to the evidence.


  22. In addition Mr Walker noted that the appellant's "guardian", who  gave
      evidence at  the  hearing,  stated  at  paragraph  4  of  her  witness
      statement that the appellant's mother contacted her and told her  that
      her husband was arrested by the Sri Lankan government  authorities  as
      well as her son. She managed to get the  son  out  of  detention  with
      great effort. She told her that it was  dangerous  for  her  son,  the
      appellant, to stay in Sri Lanka and asked whether she would  help  him
      if he came to the UK. This she agreed.


  23. Mr Walker submitted that the matter came down to paragraph [40] of the
      decision where the Judge found that both doctors had adopted a  wholly
      uncritical approach and had not properly considered  any  alternatives
      to the account that has been given.


  24. However, Mr Walker  referred  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
      explained in his evidence how the wounds were inflicted on him. It was
      never put to the appellant that his evidence  that  he  was  tied  and
      hanging upside down when the metal rods were placed on his  back,  was
      false.


  25. Accordingly, Mr Walker accepted that there had  been  material  errors
      and that the decision should accordingly be set aside and re-made.


  26. Both  parties  submitted  that  in  the  circumstances,  this  was  an
      appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Assessment


  27. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  given  a  lengthy  and  detailed
      decision in this case.  He  has  also  made  significant  findings  in
      relation to the appellant's father.


  28. I accept that his finding with regard to the doctors, namely that they
      have adopted a wholly uncritical approach and have not considered  any
      alternatives to the account that has been  given,  was  incorrect.  Dr
      Martin had in fact addressed the possibility of  SIBP  and  discounted
      this as a remote possibility.


  29. Moreover, Dr Martin had considered the state of the wounds from  which
      he came  to  the  clinical  conclusion  that  the  injuries  were  non
      accidental. The appellant had stated at the outset that they had  tied
      his legs and hanged him upside down and he was beaten.


  30. Dr Martin had been aware of the appellant's description of his torture
      and has expressly stated that the appellant informed him that  he  was
      suspended upside down by his ankles. It was in that position  that  he
      was burned with hot metal rods and cigarette butts.


  31. Further, the Judge had not considered the evidence of the  appellant's
      "guardian" in the UK.  Accordingly, his  findings  at  [41]  that  the
      appellant failed to prove that his father had been detained or that he
      himself was detained and tortured, were flawed.


  32. In the circumstances, I accept the parties' submissions that  this  is
      an appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Notice of Decisions


      The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error of law and is set aside.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross)  to  be
      re-heard by another Judge. The agreed hearing  date  is  16  September
      2016 with a time estimate of three hours.  Two  witnesses  are  to  be
      called. A Tamil interpreter is also required.


      Anonymity direction continued.














            Signed                                       Date 16 May 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

