
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12348/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2016                |On 23rd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MRS HELEY [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bashir of Bashir Consultancy, Bradford


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs [B] is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth is  recorded  as
    15th December 1965.  On  10th  March  2015  she  made  application  for
    international protection  as  a  refugee.   On  7th  September  2015  a
    decision was made by the Secretary of State to refuse that  application
    and so she appealed.

 2. On 23rd September 2016 her appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Monaghan, sitting at  Bradford.   In  a  decision  dated  27th
    September 2016 Judge Monaghan dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights  grounds.   On  its
    face therefore it would appear that she had disposed of the  appeal  in
    its entirety.  However, there is some confusion caused by the manner in
    which she has dealt with  this  appeal  because  at  paragraph  55  she
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State was not in accordance with the law: "The Respondent [in this case
    the Secretary of State] having failed to  take  into  account  her  own
    policy guidance in respect of the grant of limited  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules".  That is to be read together with paragraph  51  of
    the decision in which Judge Monaghan directed that the matter was to be
    remitted to the Secretary of State for her to make a further assessment
    and in so doing to take into account the findings of fact made  in  the
    decision.  (By "the decision", Judge Monaghan was referring to her  own
    decision).

 3. Not content with the manner in which the judge dealt with this  matter,
    by  Notice  dated  12th  October  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  made
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The grounds
    take the point that it was not open to the judge to allow the appeal to
    the extent that it was not in accordance with the law and then remit to
    the Secretary of State to reconsider her own policy, but it is accepted
    that it was open to the judge to deal with the matter as an  Article  8
    appeal and the Secretary of State states in terms, in the grounds,  "It
    is not clear as to why the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not proceed in
    this way".

 4. On 24th October  2016  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission thus the matter comes before me.

 5. There was some discussion around paragraph 17 of the  guidance  in  the
    case of Greenwood (automatic deportation: order of events) [2014]  UKUT
    00342 which on its face appears to provide some authority for the judge
    to proceed as she did, namely to allow the appeal on the basis that the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and  then  follow  up  with
    directions.  What has caused the confusion in this  case  is  that  the
    judge has dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds but also allowed
    the appeal as not in accordance with the law.

 6. Mr Bashir placed before me guidance in the case  of  Ukus  (discretion:
    when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307(IAC).   That  is  a  decision  which
    predates the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement etc.) Order 2014 but it
    does suggest a way in which the matter might have proceeded namely  for
    the judge to say to the Secretary of State that she had  not  completed
    her task.  The judge has general management powers under the  Procedure
    Rules 2014 and so it was open to her, if she thought it appropriate, to
    adjourn the matter part heard and invite, if not direct, the  Secretary
    of State to consider the point and then return on a future date, if  so
    advised, with any amendments, to the substantive  decision.   That  was
    not done.

 7. Both parties before me agreed that there is an error of law.  The issue
    then was what to do.  It is not suggested that the decision in relation
    to asylum or humanitarian  protection  should  be  interfered  with  by
    either party.

 8. The Secretary of State in the second paragraph of the grounds  concedes
    that it was open to the judge to deal with Article 8 in a different way
    and so with the consent  of  both  parties,  I  having  set  aside  the
    decision of the judge in relation  to  human  rights,  and  her  having
    allowed the decision as not in accordance  with  the  law,  remit  this
    matter not to the Secretary of  State  but  to  the  judge  herself  to
    "finish the job" which was before her".

 9. However given that the issue remains live, I direct  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider her own policy as directed by Judge Monaghan so  that
    a decision can then be made whether or not to allow the appeal.

Directions (made by consent)

10. The Secretary of State shall within 28 days make a  further  assessment
    of Mrs [B]'s case as directed  at  paragraph  51  of  Judge  Monaghan's
    decision of 27th September 2016.

11. The Secretary of State shall notify in writing  the  Tribunal  and  Mrs
    [B]'s representatives of such decision as she may make having made that
    further assessment.

12. So soon as reasonably  practicable  thereafter  this  matter  shall  be
    listed in the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Monaghan in  order  that
    she can resolve the outstanding issues.

13. For the avoidance of doubt this decision and the directions made  under
    it were by consent and this decision was dictated in  open  hearing  in
    the presence of both representatives.  I invited both parties to inform
    me if there was anything they wished to add.  Neither had anything that
    they wished to say.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of   asylum   and
humanitarian protection stands.  However  there  was  an  error  of  law  in
relation to the manner in which the appeal  was  allowed  as  not  being  in
accordance with the  law  and  being  dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds.
Therefore for the avoidance of doubt paragraphs 55 and 58  of  the  decision
of Judge Monaghan of 27th September 2016 are set aside to be remade  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

