
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/12111/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     ar
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Naz, Morden Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal from the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hussain
    sitting at Birmingham on 14 March 2016) dismissing his  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as  a
    refugee on account of him having had a leadership role in the Ahmadiyya
    Muslim faith in Pakistan, or on account of his sur place activities for
    the AMA UK, or on account of him facing an enhanced risk on return from
    the KN as a result of a religious fatwa being issued against him at the
    instigation of the former in-laws of his daughter "F".  The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider that the appellant
    should continue to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Judge  Hussain  found  that  the  appellant  had  followed  his  faith
    discreetly in Pakistan, and that he had not acquired  a  profile  which
    would have attracted the adverse attention of the  authorities  or  the
    FN. He found that the account of past persecution at the hands of  non-
    state agents was not credible, as was the claim of future risk from non-
    state agents, including from the former in-laws. The appellant admitted
    he was not concerned about a risk from the authorities: paragraph [32].
    The judge accepted that the appellant  had  practised  his  faith  more
    openly in the UK, but found that on return to  Pakistan  the  appellant
    would have behave in the same way as he had done in the past, which was
    to manifest his  faith  in  a  way  which  did  not  attract  hostility
    amounting to persecution from the mainstream Sunni Muslim population.

 3. Judge Chambers refused the appellant permission to appeal, holding that
    the judge had given adequate reasons for his findings. But following  a
    renewed  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge  Finch   granted
    permission as she considered it was arguable that  the  judge  did  not
    apply the necessary anxious scrutiny to the  oral  and  other  evidence
    relied upon at the hearing:

         In particular, the evidence given by the witnesses was not analysed
         and no weight was given to the fact that it  corroborated  much  of
         the basis for the Appellant's sur place claim.

 4. Stefan Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team settled an  extensive  Rule
    24 Response in which he conceded that the judge had erred in law in the
    respects pleaded in Grounds 1-3. He however disputed that  Grounds  4-6
    had any merit. He submitted that some of  the  findings  of  the  judge
    should be preserved (including the finding that the appellant  was  not
    credible in his account of past persecution or as to the alleged future
    risk emanating from the in-laws and/or the fatwa),  and  that  the  re-
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal should be confined to the  issue  of  why
    the appellant had practised his faith discreetly  in  Pakistan  in  the
    past, and as to how and why he would continue to manifest his faith  if
    he returned to Pakistan.

Discussion

 5. By conceding Grounds  1-3,  the  respondent  conceded  that  the  judge
    materially  erred  by  (a)  failing  to  consider  "important   witness
    evidence" in making his findings; (b) failing to consider evidence from
    AMA (UK); and (c) failing to address the correct issues when looking at
    risk on return.

 6. As I raised with Mr Mills in oral argument, the evidence from AMA  (UK)
    is not confined to the appellant's sur place activities.  According  to
    the permission application, it also contains a  purported  verification
    from a source in Pakistan of the former in laws contacting the KN about
    the appellant, leading to the KN threatening to attack the  appellant's
    house with a view to killing him.

 7. So I do not consider that there is a neat segregation of  the  evidence
    such that a re-hearing can fairly proceed on the basis  that  the  only
    live issues are those advanced by Mr Kotas in  the  Rule  24  Response.
    Moreover, the judge's adverse credibility findings are rendered  unsafe
    by the acknowledgment that he has  not  properly  considered  important
    evidence relied on as corroborating the appellant's claim, and as  thus
    enhancing his general credibility.

 8. I consider that the  effect  of  the  concession  is  that  the  entire
    decision is vitiated by a material error of law such that  it  must  be
    set aside in its entirety, with none of  the  findings  of  fact  being
    preserved. However, the evidence given at the previous hearing will  be
    admissible in evidence at the fresh hearing, and it will be open to the
    Tribunal to take into account,  if  it  is  material,  the  appellant's
    admission that his fear on return is confined to non-state agents.

 9. Given the extent of the fact-finding that will be required at  a  fresh
    hearing, and the fact that the oral evidence will have to be re-adduced
    in  its  entirety,  the  representatives  are  in  agreement  that  the
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Conclusion

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law, such that it shall be set aside.

Directions

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham  for  a
    de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Hussain.  None of the
    findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

