
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12470/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2016                           |On 14 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

                                 THEEPAN [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  from  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert, promulgated on 11 August 2016.  The appellant is a Sri  Lankan
    citizen born on 28 October 1985 who was advancing claims for asylum and
    humanitarian protection. Those claims were rejected by the Secretary of
    State and the appeal to the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    dismissed.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal decision is careful and detailed  decision.  It
    deals at some length with the evidence given by the appellant and finds
    it to be internally inconsistent and therefore  incredible.  The  judge
    rejected the claim because he could not  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant in relation to the history of the matter  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    subsequent incidents in the United Kingdom.

3.   The original grounds of appeal were fairly extensive and the  grant  of
    permission was on all six grounds advanced.

4.    Mr  Mannan  who  acts  for  the  appellant  has  wisely  limited   his
    submissions to three substantive points.   The  first  dealt  with  the
    issue of sur place activities and he contended that the judge  did  not
    deal with this adequately.  There is nothing in this ground. The  judge
    made reference to various activities which the appellant claimed he had
    been involved in.  Mr Mannan has conceded that there was no independent
    documentary or other evidence in relation to sur place  activities  and
    therefore it was solely the testimony of the appellant which the  judge
    had to consider.

5.   The judge made findings that the case advanced  by  the  appellant  did
    not  sit  happily  with  the  medical  evidence  as  recorded  in   the
    psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Gupta  and  having  found  the   appellant
    incredible in relation to a substantial part of his evidence the  judge
    was perfectly entitled to find that the appellant could not be believed
    in relation to sur place activities.  This criticism is wholly  without
    foundation.

6.   The second and the third grounds advanced by Mr Mannan both  relate  to
    the medical evidence. First, that of Dr Martin  who  gave  evidence  in
    relation to scarring and, secondly, Dr Gupta a psychiatrist.

7.   The judge in paragraph 9.4 gave more than adequate reasoning as to  the
    difficulties he had with Dr Gupta's evidence.  The appellant was a poor
    historian. Since the psychiatric evidence  was  for  the  most  part  a
    recitation of matters related by the appellant, the judge was  entitles
    to remark upon a range of inconsistencies  with  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant. I can see nothing wrong in the approach of the judge.

8.   In relation to Dr Martin the judge is critical of him for not  engaging
    with the recommendations outlined in KV (Scarring medical evidence) Sri
    Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230.  Dr Martin makes reference to  that  authority
    and deals with it sufficiently.

9.   The judge's conclusion at the end of paragraph 9.7 reads:  "I  do   not
    find therefore that is report takes matters much further with regard to
    the issue of SIPB." I have been taken to  Dr  Martin's  report  and  in
    particular the summary and conclusions. The judge set out paragraph 6.3
    of Dr Martin's report.
         "I consider the possibility that the injuries were caused  by  self
         infliction by proxy and although it is impossible to fully  discard
         this possibility, I did not find any evidence to support it and  it
         remained in my opinion just a remote possibility."

10.  The judge, however, did not make reference to the following  paragraph,
    namely 6.4 which said that the appellant's
         "overall pattern of scarring is not suggestive of a  self-inflicted
         explanation for all the scars".

11.  With the greatest of respect to this  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, it is quite wrong to say "I  do  not  find  therefore  that  his
    report takes matters much further with regard to  the  issue  of  SIPB"
    when one  of  the  expert's  conclusions  is  a  professional  reasoned
    assessment that the overall pattern of scarring "is not suggestive of a
    self-inflicted explanation."

12.  It is incumbent upon any  judge  when  rejecting  the  evidence  of  an
    expert to give full and sufficient reasons for  so  doing.  Regrettably
    that was not the case here.

13.  Miss Brocklesby-Weller, for the Respondent, accepted  that  this  could
    have been dealt with rather better  and  sought  to  persuade  me  that
    looking at the decision on the holistically it is clear that  even  had
    the judge expressed himself  more  appropriately  in  relation  to  the
    rejection of the  expert's  finding  the  same  conclusion  would  have
    resulted.

14.  I strongly suspect that Miss Brocklesby-Weller is right.  The  evidence
    here was very powerful and she took  me  to  it  in  some  detail;  but
    ultimately there is clear an error of law on the face of the  decision,
    and I cannot be certain of the extent to  which  that  error  may  have
    infected other parts of the judgment. Notwithstanding Miss  Brocklesby-
    Weller's able submissions, and not without some hesitation, I set aside
    the decision. Because the issue of credibility is at large, this is not
    the type of decision where factual findings can be preserved.  It  will
    be necessary for a different First-tier Tribunal Judge to approach  the
    matter de novo albeit there is  a  strong  possibility  that  a  remade
    decision may ultimately reach exactly the same conclusion.

Notice of Decision

(1)  Decision of First tier-tribunal set aside.
(2)  Matter remitted to be  heard  afresh  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Judge Lambert.
(3)  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         13 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
