
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/12064/2015
                                                               Aa/12042/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2016                          |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                       MOHAMMED [U] (first Appellant)
                       BABUDEEN [U] (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms B Jones (Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal against a decision made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Swinnerton) ("FTT") promulgated on 22 July 2016.  The FTT  found
    that the appellants were not refugees from Sri Lanka because he did not
    believe their accounts, and dismissed the appeals.

2.   The appellants, father and son, are citizens  from  Sri  Lanka.   Their
    claims for asylum  were refused by the Secretary of State on 27  August
    2015.  The basis of the first appellant's claim was that  he  had  been
    falsely accused of assisting the LTTE and had been  beaten  up  by  the
    police and forced  to  pay  a  ransom  for  his  release.   The  second
    appellant  claimed  also  to  have  been  beaten  by  the  police   and
    hospitalised.  The adverse interest in him  was  as  a  result  of  the
    continued pursuit of the first appellant by the Sri Lankan authorities.
     It was also asserted that the brother-in-law of  the  first  appellant
    had been killed by the Sri Lankan authorities in January 2015.

FTT decision

3.    An  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made  because  the  second
    appellant was unable to attend the hearing as he  was  caring  for  his
    sick mother who was also to have attended as a witness.   The  FTT  had
    regard to a medical report confirming that the mother had attended  the
    surgery on 30 June 2016  with  multiple  health  issues  in  particular
    associated with diabetes and hypertension.  It was submitted  that  the
    evidence of the mother was important as it dealt with her own situation
    and further  she had witnessed some of the core events in Sri Lanka and
    could corroborate the accounts given by the   appellants.   The  second
    appellant would have been able to cover issues of fact that related  to
    his account separate from that of the first appellant.

4.   The FTT refused the appellants' application for an adjournment  of  the
    hearing. The FTT looked at the overall position and took the view  that
    the first appellant was the main appellant.  He was able to  give  oral
    evidence.  Accordingly there  was  no  unfairness  resulting  from  the
    refusal to adjourn.  It was noted that the  second  appellant  did  not
    have any medical  condition  that  prevented  him  from  attending  the
    hearing. His position was that he had to remain  in  Dewsbury  to  look
    after his mother.  The  FTT  considered  the  medical  evidence  to  be
    inadequate in that it did not  refer  to  any  specific  medical  issue
    preventing the appellant's mother   from  attending  or  requiring  the
    second appellant to care for her.

5.   The FTT proceeded to hear the evidence  of  the  first  appellant.   It
    took into account the lack  of  documentation  provided  by  the  first
    appellant in connection with injuries and scarring sustained  following
    the detention in January 2009 and further the lack of documentation  in
    relation to injuries sustained by the second appellant in  relation  to
    an attack towards him in January 2010.  The FTT referred  to  a  letter
    from an advocate Mr R M Amam dated 15 January 2016 and  concluded  that
    little weight could be placed on the document that had  been  belatedly
    produced in support of the claim.

6.   The FTT did not find the appellants accounts to be credible.   The  FTT
    found  it  implausible  that  children  would  be   attacked   by   the
    authorities, and the failure to provide detailed  evidence  as  to  the
    name of the hospital where the second appellant had  been  treated  was
    significant.  The FTT took into account that there was  no  independent
    evidence to confirm the death  of  the  appellant's  brother-in-law  in
    2015.  It  further placed weight on the delay in  making  a  claim  for
    asylum namely six years after May 2009.


Grounds of Application for Permission to Appeal

7.   The FTT erred by refusing to  grant  an  adjournment  in  circumstances
    where a material witness was unavailable for good  reason  on  a  fixed
    date but able to attend within a reasonable period.  (AS  (Pakistan)  v
    SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 703).

8.   The FTT criticised the lack of documentation having regard to  injuries
    and scarring sustained by both appellants.  The FTT then failed to give
    adequate reasons as to why little weight was placed on a letter from  R
    M Amam which corroborated the appellants' account and  the  FTT  failed
    therefore to consider the contents of that letter at all.

9.    The  FTT  failed  to  consider  objective  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellants showing that there were instances where the authorities  had
    used excessive force and torture against women and children.

Grant of Permission

10.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on 16 August 2016.

11.  Judge McCarthy  found  the  grounds  argued  were  well  made  and  all
    arguable.  In addition he stated

         "I mention that in addition to the grounds presented, I have my own
         concerns that  the  reasoning  in  paragraphs  35  and  37  is  not
         consistent.  In the formal paragraph the judge  finds  against  the
         appellants partly because he is surprised that the appellants  have
         been unable to recall the year in which  an  attack  happened.   He
         suggests that the appellants are not to be  believed  because  this
         event would have been significant and therefore memorable.  In  the
         latter paragraph the judge identifies that the appellants  did  not
         consider that incident as significant except in  hindsight  because
         of events in 2015.  It is possible, therefore, that the  appellants
         have given a consistent account and this has been  ignored  by  the
         judge.


         (I comment that my observations  should  not  be  given  any  undue
         attention and should be seen as an indication that the  grounds  as
         settled might merely scratch the surface of the  problems  in  this
         decision.)"

Rule 24 Response

12.   The  Secretary  of  State  opposed  the  appeal.   The  FTT  gave  due
    consideration to the request for an adjournment and took  into  account
    that the doctor's letter  made  no  specific  reference  to  any  issue
    resulting  in  the  witness'   inability  to  attend  the  hearing,  no
    adjournment request was made before the day of the  hearing  and  there
    was no medical evidence to  indicate  that  the  second  appellant  was
    required to care for his mother and therefore would be absent from  the
    hearing.

13.  Further the Secretary of State submitted that the FTT provided  reasons
    for the findings made and in  particular  that  the  first  appellant's
    evidence was not consistent and in particular confirmed that he was not
    involved with the LTTE.

Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

14.  Ms Jones  relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   She  considered  those
    points made by Judge McCarthy but did not seek to  amend  the  existing
    grounds of appeal.  In considering the issue of procedure unfairness Ms
    Jones submitted that she had now been instructed that  the  appellants'
    wife/mother is unfit to travel  as  confirmed  in  a  letter  dated  15
    September 2016 from her GP.  With that in mind Ms Jones did not  intend
    to pursue the complaint  that  the  appellants  were  deprived  of  the
    opportunity to have this witness in attendance  at  the  hearing.   She
    relied instead on the ground that the second  appellant  had  not  been
    given the opportunity to give direct evidence in support of  his asylum
    claim in circumstances where there would have been no prejudice to  the
    respondent by an adjournment. The second appellant would or  would  not
    have attended at the next hearing and would  be expected to  provide  a
    proper explanation as  to  why  he  had  not  attended  for  the  first
    hearing.

15.  Ms Jones submitted that the FTT erred by in effect holding  it  against
    the appellant for their failure to produce objective evidence.

16.  The reasons for rejecting the letter from Mr Amam were insufficient  in
    light of the fact that the letter was dated 5 January 2016 and had been
    produced in the bundle for the hearing.  The FTT had not  engaged  with
    the substance of the letter at all.

17.  The FTT failed to address the basis  of  the  first  appellant's  claim
    that he was a supporter of the LTTE and the authorities were  adversely
    interested in him rather than as an LTTE member.

18.  Ms Ahmad relied on the Rule 24 response  and  submitted  that  the  FTT
    properly considered the adjournment  application  and  weighed  up  the
    relevant  considerations.   In  particular  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence provided by the second appellant detailing why he  was  unable
    to attend. It appeared that he had chosen not to attend.

19.  The FTT was entitled to place weight on documentary  evidence  produced
    and whilst such reasoning was limited it was nevertheless valid.

20.   Ms  Jones  accepted  that  the  second  appellant  had   provided   no
    documentary evidence himself but it had been explained that he had been
    required to care for his mother.  The parties lived in  Leeds  and  the
    hearing was in London.

Decision and Discussion

21.  At the end of the hearing I found that there was a  material  error  of
    law in the decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton
    which I set aside.  The medical evidence in relation to the appellant's
    wife/mother was not wholly satisfactory in that it  failed  to  specify
    exactly what the medical issues were and  why  the  witness  could  not
    travel to attend the hearing and/or why it was necessary for the second
    appellant to remain at home to care  for  her.   Notwithstanding  those
    matters I take the  view  that  the  refusal  to  adjourn  resulted  in
    unfairness to the second appellant in  circumstances  where  there  was
    some evidence to show that his mother was unable to attend the  hearing
    and given the distance that the family  lived  away  from  the  hearing
    centre, it would appear reasonable that the second appellant  would  be
    required to care for her.  It was clear  to  the  FTT  that  the  first
    appellant would only be able to give evidence  having  regard  to  core
    events in his claim and given that the second appellant was a party  to
    the proceedings rather than a witness, an adjournment was the fair  and
    proper course of action to  take  to  allow  the  second  appellant  an
    opportunity to give evidence. This was important  as   the  appeal  was
    founded on the credibility of the accounts given by the appellants.  In
    addition the  FTT  also  took  into  account  the  failure  to  provide
    independent corroboration  and   where  there  was  some  corroborating
    evidence the FTT failed to give full  and  proper  reasons  as  to  why
    little weight was  placed on that evidence.  I  find  that  the  reason
    given namely delay in producing  the  evidence,  was  insufficient  and
    inaccurate in the circumstances.  Furthermore where there was objective
    evidence for example as to the  use  of  violence  by  the  authorities
    towards children, I find that the FTT appears not to  have  taken  this
    into account.

22.  Accordingly having regard to all of the grounds raised  cumulatively  I
    have decided that there are material errors in  law  in  the   decision
    which I set aside.  The matter is to be remitted for a hearing de  novo
    at Taylor House (excluding Judge Swinnerton) on a date and time  to  be
    fixed.


Signed                                  Date 6.10.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black





No anonymity order made






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 6.10.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


