
 [pic]


The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/12037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th April 2017                  |On 10th May 2017                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    H.S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr.Read, Counsel, instructed by Lei Dat and Baig,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr.McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant made a claim to protection on the basis he would be at
      risk if returned to Egypt because of his Nubian ethnicity. He also
      claimed that a political opinion would be imputed because of the
      belief he was in the Muslim Brotherhood.

   2. He said that his father had owned a substantial property in Cairo.
      However in 2003 an Arab official at the Council wanted to buy what was
      then his house at a low price. When the appellant refused he was
      threatened with a tax demand. He subsequently received a substantial
      demand. Eventually, in 2005 he reluctantly agreed to sell the house at
      a significant discount and was given inferior alternative
      accommodation.

   3. Because of the way Nubians were treated he did not feel able to
      complain. However, following the uprising of 2011 he felt more
      confident and did lodge a complaint. Instead of this being acted upon
      the appellant found himself arrested for several days during which
      time he was mistreated. He then referred to a subsequent detention the
      next year of 45 days, followed by a further arrest in 2013. Although
      he was not a member of the Muslim Brotherhood it was suggested to him
      he supported them. When he was released he decided to leave and came
      to the United Kingdom in October 2014. In March 2015 he made his claim
      for protection.

   4. The respondent refused his claim. It was accepted that as a Nubian he
      faced discrimination and harassment. However, the respondent found
      this did not reach the level of persecution. His account of a corrupt
      official wanting his home at a discount was accepted given the country
      information on land acquisition. It was also accepted that he may have
      felt more confident in 2011 to complain and the country information
      indicated there were widespread arrests around this time. It was
      accepted he would be targeted for complaining about an official but
      the respondent felt he had embellished upon his account in relation to
      the subsequent detentions.

   5. The respondent saw no risk on the basis of any association with the
      Muslim brotherhood.

   6. The respondent highlighted his delay in claiming and concluded with
      the passage of time he would not be at risk on return.

The First tier Tribunal

   7. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker and was
      dismissed. The judge referred to the acceptance that the appellant's
      property was taken by a corrupt official and that he was arrested six
      years later when he made a complaint. His claims in relation to
      subsequent detentions and of perceived membership of the Muslim
      Brotherhood were not accepted. There was an expert report before the
      judge on the treatment of Nubians as well as a medical report in
      relation to the scarring which the appellant attributed to his time in
      detention.


   8. At paragraph 24 the judge referred to the claim that the appellant
      would be perceived as a member of the Muslim brotherhood. At paragraph
      25 the judge referred to the expert's report which said that if the
      Egyptian police suspected someone was in the Muslim brotherhood they
      would be detained on arrival at the airport where a watchlist was
      maintained. However, the judge reasoned that as the appellant was
      never in the Muslim Brotherhood; had not engaged in any activities
      likely to give the government reason to suspect he was a member; he
      would not be on this list. The judge rejected the appellant's claim
      that the police suspected he was a member and found he was targeted
      because of his complaint about the official taking his house. The
      judge could see no reason why he would be targeted or perceived to be
      a member of the Muslim brotherhood.


   9. The judge referred to the respondent's view that the appellant had
      embellished his account albeit it was largely accepted. Regarding the
      burn marks the judge pointed out this was not referred to at screening
      and at screening he was asked if anything happened during his third
      period of claimed detention and he said not. In his asylum interview
      he referred to being tortured and beaten. At paragraph 35 the judge
      found the appellant would not be of interest to the authorities on
      return as he had not been involved in the Muslim Brotherhood and would
      not be on a watch list. The judge acknowledged he faced discrimination
      and harassment because of his ethnicity but that this was not
      sufficient to amount to persecution. The judge found with the passage
      of time the complaint made about his property being taken would not
      place him at risk now.


The Upper Tribunal

  10. In seeking permission to appeal it was contended that the judge erred
      in concluding because the appellant was not a member of the Muslim
      Brotherhood there would be no perception that he was. At paragraph 38
      of the appellant's statement he confirmed he had never been a member
      of the Brotherhood but that false accusations were made so the
      authorities would have an excuse to arrest him for complaining about
      the land acquisition. However, he said that having been accused of
      membership he would always be on the wanted list and this could be
      used by the authorities.


  11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge failed to reach a conclusion on whether a false allegation of
      membership of the Muslim Brotherhood would result in adverse interest
      if returned. It was also arguable that the judge failed to engage with
      photographic evidence about scarring.

  12. The respondent lodged a rule 24 response referring to paragraph 15 of
      the decision. The judge records the appellant's claim the police
      accused him of membership of the Brotherhood but that he was not a
      member and had nothing to do with them. The judge at paragraph 24
      concluded he would not be detained at the airport as he was never
      involved. It was submitted that the grounds amounted to a disagreement
      with the conclusions.

  13. At hearing, Mr.Reed argued that the judge failed to make adequate
      findings as to the effect of the accusation of membership of the
      Brotherhood and whether it was false. He referred to paragraph 20 of
      the decision where the judge noted the expertise of the expert making
      the report had not been challenged. However the judge discounted the
      expert evidence that the appellant would still be targeted. He also
      submitted the judge failed to make any finding as to the risk purely
      on account of the appellant's ethnicity. He pointed out that the
      authorities had not protected the appellant in relation to the
      appropriated property.

  14. In response, Mr McVeety made the point that the expert report was
      premised upon the appellant being suspected of membership of the
      Brotherhood. The judge rejected the appellant's claim of a risk in
      relation to the Muslim Brotherhood and found that the matter
      essentially was a dispute over land. He submitted that the expert
      report did not address why the police would conclude the appellant was
      a member.

Consideration.

  15. It has been accepted by the respondent that as a Nubian he would face
      discrimination and harassment. It was accepted that if he had a
      valuable property a corrupt Arab official could take advantage of his
      vulnerable position. This was the background to the events claim. It
      was also accepted that the appellant may have felt more confident
      about complaining in 2011 but this was displaced. Thereafter, the
      judge found the appellant embellished his claim in relation to
      subsequent episodes.


  16.  The principal challenge to the decision is how the judge dealt with
      the appellant's claim he was at risk because the police falsely
      accused him of being in the Muslim Brotherhood. However, the
      appellant's account was that this was simply a ruse to detain him over
      his complaint about the property. The judge makes the point if he was
      not genuinely suspected of membership then he would not be on a watch
      list in relation to the Muslim Brotherhood. The judge covers this at
      paragraphs 24 and 25. The judge dealt with the injuries complained of
      at paragraph 37. The judge also referred to inconsistencies about the
      subsequent claimed detentions.


  17. Having considered the decision in its entirety it is my conclusion the
      judge correctly dealt with the claim that the appellant would be at
      risk due to an association with the Muslim Brotherhood. The judge
      engaged with the expert report which the judge found proceeded on a
      false premise. The expert had assumed the risk on the basis he was
      involved in the Brotherhood or believed to be.

  18. In the decision the judge dealt with the appellant's ethnicity and
      acknowledged the difficulties he would face because of this. However,
      this was not felt to amount to persecution. The judge dealt with the
      index dispute over property and it was noted that the property had not
      simply been taken but there had been some negotiation. The judge
      referred to the passage of time since. The judge also dealt with
      question of relocation at paragraph 34. I find the judge has dealt
      adequately was all of the issues arising and has given reasons for the
      conclusions arrived at. I find no material error of law established.


Decision.

The decision of First-tier tribunal Judge Parker dismissing the appeal
shall stand. No material error of law has been established.

 Deputy Judge Farrelly

6th May 2017

