
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12250/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 14 November 2016                           |On 25 November 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Appellant
                                     and

                                     MN

                         (Anonymity order continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent: Mr C Lane (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  The appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department (hereinafter "the Secretary of State"). The
   respondent in this appeal, since I have decided to continue an  anonymity
   order made by the First-tier Tribunal, is to be simply referred to as  MN
   (but hereinafter "the claimant"). The Secretary of State has appealed  to
   the Upper Tribunal from a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
   Shergill hereinafter "the Judge") promulgated on 6 May 2016, allowing the
   claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  4
   September 2015 refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  or  any  other  form  of
   international protection.

2. By way of brief background, the claimant is a national  of  Zimbabwe  and
   was born on 26 October 1981. He entered the  UK  on  30  March  2015  and
   claimed asylum upon arrival. In making his claim  he  said  that  he  had
   originally been a member of the Zanu PF political party in  Zimbabwe  but
   that, in 2012, he had changed his allegiance and had joined the  Movement
   for Democratic Change (MDC). He claimed  that,  in  consequence  of  this
   change of allegiance, he was arrested by the  Zimbabwean  authorities  on
   three occasions and was ill-treated. He stated that he had been kept in a
   cell and had been raped on two occasions by officers  in  charge  of  his
   detention and that he had been taken to a farm and shown  a  place  where
   police officers loyal to the regime would drown MDC supporters.  He  had,
   he said, secured his most recent release from custody through payment  of
   a bribe after which he had fled Zimbabwe.

3. The Secretary of State did not accept the  claimant's  account  as  being
   truthful. So, his claim was refused. His appeal was heard by  way  of  an
   oral hearing which took place on 22 April 2016. He  gave  evidence.  Both
   parties were represented. The Judge, it is fair  to  say,  was  impressed
   with  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and  at  paragraph  17   of   his
   determination said this;

            "17. I have had the benefit of hearing from the  appellant  whom
I  accept  was  a                straightforward  and  candid  witness.  The
accounts given were plausible  and                   consistent  and  I  was
able to attach full weight to all of the evidence I heard."

4. The Judge then went on to explain his findings and  the  reasoning  which
   underpinned his decision to allow the appeal in more detail in a  passage
   running from paragraph 20-32.  He said this;

      "Membership of ZanuPF and MDC

      20. I am satisfied to the lower standard  that  the  appellant  was  a
      member of ZanuPF. I have noted the various objections  raised  in  the
      refusal as to inconsistencies, lack of knowledge about the party,  and
      the appellant's vague account of  membership.  However,  having  heard
      from the appellant and considered all of the  further  evidence  I  am
      satisfied that satisfactory evidence has been produced to find to  the
      lower standard that the appellant was a member of ZanuPf  as  claimed;
      and that he decided to change allegiance.

      21. I am therefore satisfied having changed allegiance he went over to
      support MDC.     I am satisfied that he undertook the activities  that
      he claimed in  relation  to  organising  dates,  travel,  leaflets  et
      cetera. I do not attach the significance that the respondent  does  to
      the inconsistencies about what the appellant did for the  MDC  or  the
      inability to name the various  personnel.  The  appellant's  case  has
      always been that he was a relatively low-grade  figure  and  undertook
      relatively minor tasks. In those  circumstances one would  not  expect
      detailed  knowledge  when  considering  the  evidence  at  the   lower
      standard. I am satisfied inconsistencies  or  lack  of  knowledge  may
      arise. The account given in oral evidence as to  the  motivations  for
      switching parties and the steps that the appellant undertook  for  the
      MDC were credible.  That  accounted  for  any  potential  for  adverse
      inferences about inconsistencies etc.

      22. I have considered the expert report that was provided. I note  the
      submissions made by the presenting officer as to the  caution  that  I
      should take with regards to  this  report.  However,  the  conclusions
      drawn on the report with regards to the low level of knowledge  within
      the party about the party structure et cetera is  not  a  particularly
      controversial conclusion. When assessing all of the  evidence  in  the
      round the appellant's claims of supporting the MDC and the roles  that
      he undertook are credible at the lower standard.

      23. I do not draw any adverse findings with regards to the  motivation
      for changing parties which appears to have formed a  significant  part
      of the refusal. The MDC was an emerging party during the relevant time
      period that this case concerns. It was well documented  in  the  world
      news as to the issues that Zimbabwe was facing during this time period
      and the harassment and crackdown  on  MDC  supporters.  That  is  well
      documented in  the  various  cases  that  have  appeared  within  this
      jurisdiction. I do not put the weight as to any inconsistencies in the
      accounts that the  respondent  does  with  regards  to  any  of  these
      matters. Furthermore, having decided that this was a relatively  minor
      issue the issues relating to any benefit he would  derived  [sic]  was
      not relevant in  my  view;  he  was  supporting  the  new  (potential)
      dominant power.

      24. The appellant's claims as to being arrested and mistreated by  the
      police form the basis upon which he fears  returning  to  Zimbabwe.  I
      note the submission in the  skeleton  argument  that  the  appellant's
      account of how he was treated is not  inconsistent  with  the  country
      evidence. I agree with that  submission.  I  further  agree  with  the
      submission made about the lack of  clear  questioning.  As  such,  the
      inferences and conclusions drawn by the respondent as to the  lack  of
      detail and inconsistency lose their potency. When considering  all  of
      the evidence in the round and to the lower  standard  I  am  satisfied
      that the appellant was likely to  have  been  detained  on  the  dates
      claimed  and  that  he  was  maltreated  on  those  occasions.  I  was
      particularly persuaded by  the  manner  in  which  he  described  what
      mistreatment he faced and how and why  the  police  would  carry  that
      particular type of  mistreatment  out.  His  evidence  was  fluid  and
      animated with  hand  gestures  showing  the  positions  he  was  held/
      assaulted in, which persuaded me that it actually happened to  him.  I
      am satisfied that the appellant's evidence had the ring of truth. When
      assessing all of the evidence in the round and particularly given that
      I have broadly accepted all of the other evidence  the  appellant  has
      relied upon, I am satisfied that he was mistreated as claimed.

      25. I am satisfied that the appellant  had  lived  in  Bulawayo  until
      February 2013, Masuingo until October 2013 and then in Gwanda (i.e. in
      different areas of the country). I am satisfied  that  Gwanda  is  the
      capital of the province of Matabeleland South.

      26. I note there is  consistency  in  the  answers  in  the  screening
      interview and later evidence regards [sic] the 'attacks' (which  I  am
      satisfied relate to arrests). I am satisfied that  the  appellant  was
      beaten by others in February 2013;  then  arrested/  detained  by  the
      police in October 2013 whilst  in  Bulawayo.  I  accept  he  was  then
      arrested in January 2014 and again in January  2015  which  must  have
      been in Gwanda.

      27. I note the reliance on the case of CM (Zimbabwe) CG [2013]  UKUT00
      059. I note the head note paragraph 3 which states:

           "(3) The only change to the  EM  Country  Guidance  that  it  is
           necessary to make as regards the  position  as  at  the  end  of
           January 2011 arises from the judgments in RT  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]
           UKSC 38. The EM Country Guidance is, accordingly,  re-stated  as
           follows (with the change underlined in paragraph (5) below):

                 (1)   As a general  matter,  there  is  significantly  less
                 politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe,  compared  with
                 the situation considered by AIT in RN. In  particular,  the
                 evidence does not show  that,  as  a  general  matter,  the
                 return of a failed asylum seeker from the  United  Kingdom,
                 having no significant MDC profile,  would  result  in  that
                 person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate  loyalty
                 to ZANU-PF.

                 (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in
                 the case of a person without ZANU-PF connections, returning
                 from the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a
                 rural area of Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or
                 Matabeleland South. Such a person may well find it
                 difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to serious
                 ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF authority figures and those
                 they control. The adverse attention may well involve a
                 requirement to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the
                 prospect of serious harm in the event of a failure. Persons
                 who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to
                 ZANU-PF are entitled to international protection, whether
                 or not they could and would do whatever might be necessary
                 to demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe)).

                 (3)   The situation is  not  uniform  across  the  relevant
                 rural areas and there  may  be  reasons  why  a  particular
                 individual, although  at  first  sight  appearing  to  fall
                 within the category described in the  preceding  paragraph,
                 in reality does not do so. For example, the evidence  might
                 disclose  that,  in  the  home   village,   ZANU-PF   power
                 structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

                 (4)   In general, a returnee from  the  United  Kingdom  to
                 rural Matabeleland North or Matabeleland  South  is  highly
                 unlikely  to  face  significant  difficulty  from   ZANU-PF
                 elements,  including  the  security  forces,  even  if  the
                 returnee is a  MDC  member  or  supporter.  A  person  may,
                 however, be able to show that his or her village or area is
                 one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
                 or the like.

                 (5)    A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no
                 significant difficulties, if  going  to  a  low-density  or
                 medium-density area. Whilst the socio-economic situation in
                 high-density areas is more challenging, in general a person
                 without  ZANU-PF  connections  will  not  face  significant
                 problems there (including a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or
                 she has a significant MDC profile, which might cause him or
                 her to feature on a list of those targeted for  harassment,
                 or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to
                 attract the adverse attention  of  ZANU-PF,  or   would  be
                 reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but  for  a
                 fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

                 (6)   A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the
                 adverse  attention  of  ZANU-PF,  including  the   security
                 forces, even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.

                 (7)   The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes
                 of internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact
                 and is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the
                 place a person from Zimbabwe regards as his  or  her  rural
                 homeland. As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person
                 with a well-founded fear of persecution in  a  major  urban
                 centre  such  as  Harare  will  have  a   viable   internal
                 relocation alternative to  a  rural  area  in  the  Eastern
                 provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
                 may be negated by discrimination,  where  the  returnee  is
                 Shona.

                 (8)   Internal relocation from a rural area  to  Harare  or
                 (subject to  what  we  have  just  said)  Bulawayo  is,  in
                 general,   more   realistic;   but    the    socio-economic
                 circumstances in which persons  are  reasonably  likely  to
                 find themselves will need to be  considered,  in  order  to
                 determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh
                 to expect them to relocate.

                 (9)   ...

      28. The appellant's past problems appear inconsistent with the country
      guidance which would suggest  there  would  not  be  'persecution'  as
      claimed. That was  how  things  stood  as  at  January  2011.  I  have
      considered the objective evidence provided by the appellant  which  is
      more recent in nature and from various (generally)  reliable  websites
      etc. I have also considered the expert  evidence.  I  have  considered
      whether I can follow country guidance given that the country  guidance
      appears to be outdated by reason of ongoing human rights  concerns  in
      Zimbabwe. I have considered DSG & Others (Aghan Sikhs: departure  from
      CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148. I am satisfied that  the  appellant
      has provided sufficient credible fresh evidence relevant to the issues
      he relies on that has not been  considered  in  the  country  guidance
      case. I have decided that it is open to me to depart from the  country
      guidance in those circumstances.

      29. I am satisfied that the  appellant  had  previously  been  on  the
      authorities' radar regarding his switch to MDC. That  is  despite  his
      low-level status. I am satisfied that he has been arrested as recently
      as January 2015 in his previous home area. That would tend to  suggest
      that the country guidance is no longer reliable. I note the  objective
      evidence at page 136 of the appellant's bundle which cites a US  State
      Department country report in  2013.  That  tends  to  support  ongoing
      torture and abduction of  MDC  supporters.  Furthermore,  the  reports
      indicate there were further problems after the  2013  elections.  That
      would also tend to undermine reliability on the country guidance as to
      how things stand today and I depart from it for those reasons.

      30. I am satisfied in those circumstances that the appellant is likely
      to be known to the security services albeit not in the capacity as  an
      activist but more likely due  to  his  adverse  criminal  profile  (HS
      (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094).  That  was
      because he was detained on three occasions. The treatment which I have
      accepted as credible that he suffered in January 2015 put  him  in  an
      analogous category because this tends to indicate he is on  the  radar
      of intelligence services. That is particularly so if he is someone who
      has previously rescinded his ZanuPF membership.

      31. In those circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
      previously suffered  ill-treatment  and  his  subjective  fears  about
      facing future  ill-treatment  when  considered  objectively  are  well
      founded.  I  further  consider  that  relocation  in  the   particular
      circumstances of this case is not a reasonable  or  realistic  option.
      Even if he was  able  to  re-establish  himself  economically  with  a
      settlement grant the home areas that the  appellant  previously  lived
      are likely to no longer be safe because he has come  the  authorities'
      attention there. [sic] I am not satisfied that it would be  reasonable
      to move to other areas within the country when he has clearly suffered
      persecution in at least two different areas over a period of  time.  I
      conclude this heightens the risk generally to this appellant  to  make
      relocation ineffective in terms of risk elimination,  unrealistic  and
      unreasonable.

      32. For  all  of  these  reasons  I  have  concluded  that  there  are
      substantial grounds for believing that  the  appellant  is  unable  to
      return to Zimbabwe be reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for
      a refugee convention reason. The risk is acute in his case because  of
      the likelihood that he is on the radar of  authorities  in  a  similar
      manner to MDC activists. That fear is objective and is on the basis of
      change  of  political  affiliation  (as  the  social  group)  and   in
      particular as a person  who  has  been  arrested  and  abused  by  the
      authorities on a number of occasions in different areas. I accept that
      he is unable or unwilling, owing to such fear, to avail himself of the
      protection of  that  country.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  protection
      afforded in the context of the situation for someone in this  position
      is in essence, illusory.  Indeed,  the  state  agents  have  been  the
      perpetrators of violence in his specific circumstances."

5. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal. In ground 1 the Secretary of State contended that  the  Judge's
   positive credibility findings had been inadequately explained  and  that,
   as a specific point in that overall contention,  the  Judge  had  made  a
   factual error in considering the MDC to have been an "emerging party"  at
   the time of the claimant's shift of allegiance bearing in  mind  that  it
   had been formed in 1999. In ground 2 it was contended that the Judge  had
   given inadequate reasons for failing to depart  from  applicable  Country
   Guidance as set out in the case of CM (Zimbabwe)  CG  (2013)  UKUT  00059
   bearing in mind the stringency of the test  for  departing  from  Country
   Guidance as set out in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department (2012) EWCA Civ 940. In ground
   3 it was contended that as to the internal flight alternative, the  Judge
   had failed to consider whether the  claimant  could  safely  relocate  to
   Harare.

6. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission on all grounds.  In
   so doing he said this;

      "Although the first ground  may  appear  to  be  little  more  than  a
      disagreement with the Judge's findings, it is true that  a  number  of
      credibility issues were raised in  the  decision  letter,  and  it  is
      arguable that the Judge has failed to provide adequate reasons, in his
      decision for finding the appellant to be credible. His description  of
      the MDC as an "emerging party" from 2002 - 2012 arguably  ignores  the
      fact that it was established in  1999  and  that  it  contested  every
      election  from  2000  onwards.  It  is  similarly  arguable  that,  in
      paragraph 28 of his decision, the Judge has failed to provide adequate
      reasoning for  his  decision  to  depart  from  the  existing  Country
      Guidance case law. His findings on internal relocation in paragraph 31
      are brief and, arguably, inadequate."

7.    A hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) was convened  so  that
it could be considered whether or not the Judge had erred  in  law  and,  if
so, what should flow from that. Representation was stated  above  and  I  am
grateful  to  each  representative  for  the  careful   and   helpful   oral
submissions which I received. I  have  taken  all  of  what  was  said  into
account and, where necessary or otherwise appropriate, I  have  referred  to
what was said in explaining my decision.

8.    In fact, I have concluded that the Judge did err in law  with  respect
to his favourable credibility assessment and, to an extent, in  the  way  in
which he dealt with the applicable Country Guidance.  I  have  decided  that
the combination of   those  errors  is  sufficient  to  render  the  Judge's
findings unsafe so that it has to be set  aside.  I  set  out  my  reasoning
below.

9.    In general terms credibility is a matter for the First-tier  Tribunal.
Of course, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  perfectly  entitled  to  take
account of oral evidence where such  evidence  is  found  to  be  persuasive
otherwise, as Mr Lane submits, there  would  seem  to  be  little  point  in
having an oral hearing. Nevertheless,  when  explaining  findings  and  when
explaining why a positive  credibility  assessment  or  for  that  matter  a
negative one has been made, a Judge is required to give  adequate  (although
no more than that) reasons as to why such a view has been reached.  I  would
also make the point, at this stage,  that  a  credibility  assessment  is  a
composite assessment which, normally, will not be based exclusively  upon  a
view of  the  oral  evidence  but  will  also  take  into  account  relevant
documentary evidence as well.

10.   I have set out, above, paragraph 20 of the Judge's determination.  The
Judge did refer in passing  to  various  points  made  in  the  reasons  for
refusal letter concerning the veracity of the account.  He  then  said  that
having heard from the claimant and having "considered  all  of  the  further
evidence" he was satisfied to the lower standard that the  claim  concerning
previous membership of Zanu PF and the subsequent change of  allegiance  had
been made out. Mr Mills criticises that  paragraph,  in  particular,  for  a
lack of actual reasoning. I have concluded that he is  right  to  do  so.  I
take Mr Lane's point that the Judge had indicated  that  he  had  found  the
oral evidence to be persuasive. However, paragraph 20 does not  contain  any
explanation of a meaningful  nature  as  to  why  it  is  that  the  various
concerns expressed by the Secretary of State  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter were being rejected. It seems to me that some  form  of  explanation,
even if brief, was required.

11.   Further, at paragraph 21, the Judge indicated his  acceptance  of  the
claimant's contention that he had subsequently become  associated  with  the
MDC. He appeared to accept (or at least he did not  make  it  clear  he  was
rejecting) the contention that there had been  some  inconsistency  in  what
the claimant had indicated as to what he had  done  for  the  MDC  and  that
there had been an inability on his part to name "various  personnel"  within
the MDC. The Judge, however, against the background of his having found  the
oral evidence to be persuasive, decided that since the claimant had said  he
had only operated at a low level for the MDC  such  was  explicable.  I  can
readily see that a low level member or supporter might  not  necessarily  be
expected to be able to name national or local  political  figures  within  a
party. However, as Mr Mills points out,  low  level  involvement  would  not
appear, of itself, to explain inconsistency with respect to any minor  tasks
which were actually undertaken for the MDC. As such,  I  consider  that  the
Judge has failed to adequately explain why it was that he  was  prepared  to
effectively overlook inconsistency in that regard.

12.   At paragraph 23 of his determination the Judge specifically  addressed
the question of the claimant's motivation for changing parties.  As  I  read
that  paragraph,  the  Judge  was  saying  that,  in  part,  the  change  of
allegiance was explained by the fact that the  MDC  was,  at  the  time,  an
"emerging party" which it seemed might have been close to taking  power.  Mr
Mills' contention as to that paragraph was simply to  the  effect  that  the
Judge had wrongly thought that the MDC was "emerging" at  that  time  (2012)
because it had been in existence since 1999 and had contested  a  number  of
elections between 1999 and 2012. So, to put it  a  slightly  different  way,
the Judge's factual error had wrongly informed  his  credibility  assessment
and had wrongly influenced the positive view which had been  taken  in  that
regard. Mr Lane, however, argued that it was clear,  in  context,  that  the
Judge was using the term "emerging" not as akin to something  like  starting
out but more in the sense of a party which had developed to  the  extent  to
which it was now clearly conceivable it could take power. So, on that  view,
there had been no factual error on the part of the Judge.

13.   I appreciate that it is not  appropriate  to  seek  to  interpret  the
words used by the Judge as one would seek to interpret a statute.  In  fact,
I cannot be sure, in looking at the words used  by  the  Judge,  whether  he
mistakenly thought that the MDC was only starting out in or around  2012  or
whether he was using the word  emerging  in  the  somewhat  different  sense
which had been suggested by Mr Lane. However, it is  the  uncertainty  which
gives rise to the problem. Certainly, the  Judge  did  appear  to  link  his
conclusion that the party was emerging at the time  with  his  finding  that
the claimant had properly explained his conversion. In the  circumstances  I
cannot be satisfied  that,  given  the  lack  of  clarity  in  the  relevant
passage, he was basing his finding in that regard on a proper  understanding
of the history and development of the MDC.

14.   There is, of  course,  the  concern  regarding  the  Country  Guidance
decision of CM. Mr Lane urged me to conclude that the Judge, in effect,  had
not been intending to find that what was said in CM in general terms had  to
be disregarded but, rather,  that  there  were  particular  factors  in  the
claimant's case, in particular the change of allegiance, which had not  been
properly considered in CM (or indeed considered at all) so  that  a  limited
departure on the particular facts of this case was appropriate.

15.   It seems to me in looking in particular at  the  closing  sentence  of
paragraph 29 but also in reading what the Judge had to say as a whole,  that
he was deciding that the conclusions in CM  had  been  superseded  by  later
events. That would explain his  reference  to  background  country  material
(the US Department of State report for 2013) which he  suggested  undermined
continued reliance upon the Country Guidance. So he was going  much  further
than Mr Lane says he was. I accept  Mr  Mills  submission  that  if  he  was
saying the Country Guidance should no  longer  be  followed  (which  I  have
decided he was) he was obliged to do very much more by way of  justification
than he did. Further,  it  seems  to  me  that  this  error  did  have  some
influence upon the Judge's positive credibility assessment. That is  because
he acknowledged that the claimant's contentions regarding the past  problems
appeared to be inconsistent with what was said in CM but  then  appeared  to
say that background country material which was "more recent in  nature"  was
sufficient to render it open to him "to depart from the Country Guidance  in
those circumstances". So, the error was material.

16.   It is not necessary for me to say anything  further.  The  credibility
assessment is unsafe and, in consequence, the Judge's decision must  be  set
aside.

17.   At the hearing both  representatives  indicated  that  they  took  the
view, if I were to set the decision aside, that remittal to  the  First-tier
would be the most appropriate course of action. I accept that is so for  two
main reasons. First of all, there  will  have  to  be  a  fresh  credibility
assessment and fresh factual findings on all matters raised by  the  appeal.
That task is best undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal as  an  expert  fact
finding body. Secondly, the Judge did  not  deal  with  separate  Article  8
arguments which had been put on behalf of the claimant  because,  having  to
decided to allow the appeal on international protection  grounds,  that  was
not  necessary.  That  does  mean  there  has  been  no  initial   appellate
assessment at all with respect to those Article 8 contentions.  It does  not
seem to me to be appropriate for such matters  to  be  addressed,  in  these
circumstances, for the first time, by the Upper Tribunal.

18.   In conclusion then,  the  Judge's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors of law and is set aside. The appeal is remitted so that there can  be
a complete re-hearing before the First-tier Tribunal so  that  the  decision
can be re-made. I have, below, set out some directions which will  hopefully
assist with the re-making process.



Directions

A. There will be a complete re-hearing of this appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal. That re-hearing will not involve Judge Shergill.

B. The time estimate for the re-hearing shall be three hours. It shall  take
place at the Birmingham hearing centre. It does not appear  that  there  are
any  interpreter   requirements,   but   if   there   are   the   claimant's
representatives shall notify the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  that,  within
fourteen days of this decision being issued.

C. It appears that all of the documentation previously relied upon is  still
on file. However, should either  party  wish  to  file  further  documentary
evidence (including any further witness  statements  or  background  country
material) that should be lodged with the First-tier Tribunal at  least  five
working days prior to the date which shall be fixed for  the  re-hearing.  A
copy of such material should simultaneously be sent to the other party.

D. The parties should  not  assume  that  any  documentation  not  filed  in
accordance with these directions will be admitted for consideration.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law. That decision is set aside. The case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.


Anonymity-Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
to both the Appellant and  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                             Signed

                                                   M R Hemingway
                                                    Judge   of   the   Upper
Tribunal

                             Dated

To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award.


                             Signed

                                                   M R Hemingway
                                                    Judge   of   the   Upper
Tribunal

                             Dated

