
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12913/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ                                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2016                            |On 18 November 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     AEZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Hena, Counsel, instructed by Virgo Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania and  his  date  of  birth  is  14
    September 1999.  He appealed against the decision of the respondent  of
    9 August 2015 to refuse his application for  asylum.   Because  of  the
    appellant's age he was granted discretionary leave until 14 March 2007,
    but his application for asylum was  refused.   The  appellant  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent and his appeal was dismissed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nightingale in a decision  promulgated
    on 18 August 2016 following a hearing on 3 August 2016.

2.   The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return to  Albania  as  a
    result of a blood feud.  His evidence is that a maternal uncle  of  his
    was blamed for the death of members of the [R] and  [H]  families.  The
    appellant's evidence is that he was raised by his maternal family,  his
    parents having separated and as a result of  this  he  is  at  risk  on
    return.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal  and  the  appellant
    was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer in
    a decision of 16 September 2016.

4.   The appellant  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Nightingale  gave  oral
    evidence as did his uncles,  EL  and  JL.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Higgins allowed EL's appeal on asylum grounds on the basis of  a  blood
    feud on the same facts as those now relied on by the appellant.   Judge
    Higgins found that EL was an impressive witness.

5.   Judge Nightingale made a number of findings as follows:

         "35. In claims brought by minors, it may often  be  the  case  that
             more weight needs to  be  given  to  the  background  evidence
             surrounding a claim which has been made.  The appellant  is  a
             minor who claims to be a target in a blood  feud  in  northern
             Albania.  However, the incident which gave rise to  the  blood
             feud in question involved the appellant's paternal uncle.  The
             background evidence strongly indicates that  it  is  the  male
             relatives of the individual  in  question  who  by  Kanun  law
             become targets of the feud. It  is  said  that  the  appellant
             became a target, contrary to this  law  because  he  had  been
             raised  in  the  household  of  his   maternal   grandparents.
             However, the evidence as to whether or not he  was  raised  in
             that particular  household  is  inconsistent.   The  appellant
             claims that he was raised in that household, but [EL], who has
             been granted asylum on the basis of this  blood  feud,  stated
             very clearly before me in his evidence that the appellant  was
             not raised in that household  but  in  the  same  village  one
             minute's walk away.  In contrast, the second  witness  claimed
             that the appellant was raised in that household, and  that  he
             had spoken to him by Skype at that address.  However,  I  bear
             in mind that the second witness left Albania in  2001  and  in
             his evidence before me he indicated that the appellant had not
             moved back to Albania with his mother at the time that he left
             his family and came to the United  Kingdom.   I  am  therefore
             left in considerable doubt as to whether this  appellant  was,
             in fact, raised in the same household  as  claimed  when  [EL]
             stated clearly that he  was  not  in  the  same  house.   This
             removes one of the central planks of the appellant's claim  to
             be targeted, despite the fact that he is on the maternal line,
             on the basis of being a member of the  household  of  the  [L]
             family.

         36.  There has  also  been  an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
             evidence as to when he became self-confined.   In  his  asylum
             interview and, also, in his most recent witness  statement  at
             paragraph 4, he stated that he was in  self-confinement  since
             2011.  He also states that he was  in  self-confinement  since
             the age of 15, which would have been 2014 and not 2011.  Given
             the severe limitations that are placed upon youngsters who are
             targeted  in  blood  feuds  by  the  need  to  go  into  self-
             confinement, I do not  accept  that  the  appellant  would  be
             confused as to whether or not he had been in  self-confinement
             for one year or  three  years  prior  to  his  departure  from
             Albania.  I find that this, too,  is  an  inconsistency  which
             goes to the heart of  his  claim  and  I  find  that  it  does
             considerable damage to his overall credibility notwithstanding
             his age.

         37.  I have read the decision of Judge Higgins with care in respect
             to the asylum claim of Mr [EL].  Mr [EL] is, of course, a male
             relative of [AL].  That he would become a target  in  a  blood
             feud is, I find, in accordance with the  background  evidence.
             The appellant, of course, is the son of [AL]'s sister  who  is
             not a male relative.  It was claimed  by  the  second  witness
             that there is Skype communication available in the family home
             in Albania and that he has personally used it  to  communicate
             with the appellant at that address.  That does not, of course,
             mean that the appellant was living in that  household  at  the
             time that the communication took place.   Nonetheless,  it  is
             clear that there is technology for both of  the  witnesses  to
             speak regularly to their parents and other family  members  in
             Albania.  I can therefore find no reason whatsoever as to  why
             [EL] would be unaware of the status of the blood feud  and  so
             unsure as to whether it had been abandoned on the part of  the
             [R] family.  Before Judge Higgins, [EL] claimed that  the  [R]
             family were persuaded to abandon their  feud  in  2003.   This
             runs contrary to the appellant's evidence that he was told  in
             2011 that both of these families were still pursuing  a  blood
             feud.  [EL] also stated before me that he thought that the [R]
             family were still pursuing this blood feud, and  it  was  only
             when this discrepancy was put to him  directly  that  he  said
             that he "was not sure" but thought that this might  be  right.
             Notwithstanding his grant of asylum, and the findings made  by
             Judge Higgins, before me I found [EL] to be evasive, vague and
             inconsistent on this particular point.

         38.  I also do not seek to go behind the findings of fact  made  by
             Judge Higgins, but these relate to the male relatives of  [AL]
             at the hands of the [H]  family.   Whilst  I  am  prepared  to
             accept that those in the paternal line may have been  at  risk
             as a result of this blood feud, I do not accept on  the  lower
             standard applicable that this appellant is at such a risk.   I
             also note that he stated clearly on several occasions that  he
             had no passport and that he left Albania illegally smuggled in
             a lorry.  That is clearly contrary to the information provided
             by the British Embassy in Tirana who record that, in fact, the
             appellant left legally using  his  own  Albanian  passport  to
             travel to Montenegro on 20th September 2014.  I find  this  to
             be a clear inconsistency with the appellant's initial  account
             to have boarded a lorry and left illegally in the  company  of
             an agent.  I am unpersuaded  by  the  appellant's  explanation
             that he did not know that his own national passport  was  used
             to depart, and I find it highly unlikely  that  it  would  not
             have been checked on the border.

         39.  Considered in the round, I found the appellant's account to be
             inconsistent with background evidence relating to blood  feuds
             in Albania and the manner in which they are pursued.   I  have
             found a number of internal inconsistencies in the  appellant's
             account.  It has not been established on  the  lower  standard
             applicable that this appellant personally has been the  target
             for a blood feud or that he is at any risk of serious harm  at
             the hands of the [H] family in Albania.  I  would  reject  his
             asylum claim on this basis and also his  claim  on  Article  3
             grounds for the same reason."




6.   The grounds refer to the finding of the judge at [35]  that  there  was
    considerable doubt as to whether the appellant was raised in  the  same
    household as the he claimed because EJ's evidence was  that  they  were
    not in the same house.  It is asserted that the judge misunderstood the
    evidence. There was no inconsistency in  the  evidence.  EL  stated  in
    evidence in chief the following: "Appellant grew up with us ... We  are
    all one family, we live in the same village, all [L]."In any event,  it
    is argued that the nature of Kanun law is such that all males from  the
    family would be the target of a blood  feud  and  it  is  not  material
    whether EL lived with the appellant's maternal grandparents or not.

7.   I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Tufan  conceded  that
    the finding at paragraph 35 relating in issue was not "strong," but  in
    his view it was not material in the light of the findings  as  a  whole
    because there were a number of problems with the  appellant's  evidence
    and a number of adverse findings made.

Conclusions

8.   The evidence of EL was that  the  appellant  was  raised  in  the  same
    village and raised by the maternal family.  It  is  his  evidence  that
    they were not living under the same roof but that he, EL, lived  a  one
    minute walk away.  The evidence of JL was that the appellant was living
    with  his  (JL's)  parents   (the   appellant's   grandparents).    The
    appellant's evidence was that he was living with his grandparents.   To
    this extent there was no inconsistency. Whilst there was some ambiguity
    in the evidence of the appellant.  The  use  of  the  word  "household"
    should have been considered in the  context  of  the  evidence  of  EL,
    namely that the family was all living together  in  the  same  village.
    The evidence was consistent in so far as the appellant lived  with  his
    maternal grandparents.

9.   In respect of materiality, I accept that there were problems  with  the
    appellant's   evidence   generally,   particularly   in   relation   to
    confinement, and I refer specifically to paragraph 36 and the  evidence
    in respect of the appellant's father about which the judge did not make
    findings.  However, having taken into account the final  two  sentences
    of paragraph 35, I cannot conclude that the error is immaterial to  the
    outcome in this case. Particularly in the  light  of  the  decision  of
    Judge Higgins and the evidence that was before him and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to a blood feud concerning  the appellant's  maternal
    family.

Notice of Decision

10.  For this reason I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  and  set
    aside the decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.  No  findings  of
    fact can be salvaged as a result of the nature of the error of law  and
    both parties agreed that in these circumstances the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 16.11.16


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


