
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/12798/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th April 2016                       |On 1st June 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                  Tarek Mohammed Salah Eldin Mohamed Fawzy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on 23rd  November  1963.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 17th  July  2009  with  a
    valid visa and made an in time application  for  asylum  on  11th  July
    2012.  The Appellant's application for asylum was based on a fear  that
    if returned to Egypt he would face  mistreatment  due  to  his  imputed
    political opinion.  It took the Secretary of State some three years  to
    respond to the Appellant's application and it  was  on  30th  September
    2015 that the Appellant was issued with a Notice of Refusal.  It was at
    paragraph 13 of the Notice of Refusal observed that since the Appellant
    had made his asylum application the political situation  in  Egypt  had
    altered significantly and that the Muslim Brotherhood was no longer  in
    power and  had  been  designated  a  terrorist  organisation.   It  was
    therefore considered by the Secretary of  State  that  the  Appellant's
    previous fear of radical Islamists was not one that was well-founded.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Oakley sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th February 2016.   In
    a decision promulgated on 17th February 2016 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed both on asylum and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 24th February 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:

      i) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to take into  account
         and/or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on material matters  in
         particular the  objective  information  from  the  Immigration  and
         Refugee Board of Canada which it was asserted did not indicate  any
         risk to those diplomats hired by the Mubarak regime  on  return  to
         Egypt;

     ii) that the Tribunal made a mistake as to a material fact which  could
         be established by objective and uncontentious evidence,  where  the
         Appellant and/or his advisors were not responsible for the mistake,
         and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a  mistake  was
         made.  To this end it was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  had  mistakenly  relied  upon  evidence  relating   to   the
         imprisonment of Muslim Brotherhood members as being indicative of a
         risk to the Appellant on return to Egypt;

    iii) the Tribunal Judge had made perverse or irrational  findings  on  a
         matter or matters that  were  material  to  the  outcome.   It  was
         submitted that the judge's findings in relation to risk  on  return
         were based  on  largely  speculation  and  did  not  refer  to  any
         objective evidence that was indicative of a risk on return  to  the
         Appellant and that the findings made by the judge were not open  to
         him to make on the evidence.

 4. On 7th March First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison found  that  the
    grounds were arguable and granted permission to appeal.

 5. On 24th March 2016 the Appellant lodged a detailed Rule 24 response.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process Mr Fawzy is referred  to  herein  as  the  Appellant
    albeit that this is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Lee.  Mr Lee is familiar with this
    matter.  He appeared before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  he  is  the
    author of the Rule 24 response.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Walker.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Walker contends that the Secretary of State's grounds are predicated
    on the evidence of the Muslim Brotherhood and that the judge has made a
    speculative finding that the Appellant would be at risk on return.   He
    relies upon the grounds.  He accepts however  that  the  Appellant  has
    been found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to be credible and to  have
    a risk on return but for the reasons set out in the Grounds  of  Appeal
    (as recited above) he contends that the judge has erred in law and that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be set  aside  and
    the matter remitted to the First-tier for rehearing.

 8. Mr Lee takes me to his Rule  24  response.   He  points  out  that  the
    Appellant seeks to argue three matters:

      i) that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  evidence  at
         paragraph 14 of the Notice of Refusal that there were no  risks  to
         diplomats who were part of the Mubarak regime;

     ii) that  mistakenly  the  judge  had  relied  on  evidence  about  the
         imprisonment of Muslim Brotherhood members; and

    iii) that the judge had speculated as to how the courts in  Egypt  would
         view the Appellant's asylum  claim  rather  than  to  consider  any
         objective indicators.

 9. He sets out to address each of these issues specifically.  He starts by
    taking me to paragraph 14 of the Notice of Refusal  pointing  out  that
    all it does is make  reference  to  the  position  of  members  of  the
    Diplomatic Corps generally.  He takes me to paragraph 34 of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision and the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has
    clearly  stated  in  his  evidence  that  he  has  not   discussed   or
    communicated with anyone including the Secretary of State  any  of  the
    matters with which he was  involved  as  a  diplomat  working  for  the
    Egyptian embassy but that he had been advised by a lawyer  friend  that
    it may well be that he would be investigated as a result of leaving the
    embassy and clearly it would be known to the authorities  that  he  had
    claimed asylum.  At the very least therefore the judge had  noted  that
    the Appellant feared that on entry back into Egypt he would be detained
    at the airport and investigated.  Thereafter he goes on to  recite  the
    objective evidence at paragraphs 35 and 36 and  has  gone  on  to  make
    findings that he was entitled to at paragraphs 39 to  41.   He  submits
    therefore that there is no error of law.

10. Secondly he responds to the suggestion that the judge mistakenly relied
    on evidence about the imprisonment of Muslim Brotherhood  members.   He
    submits that the contention  is  entirely  misconceived  and  that  the
    concept in which the judge looked at matters is clear.  He  points  out
    that the evidence refers to people who are anti-government and that  it
    is clear from the decision that the judge knows  what  the  Appellant's
    claim is as set out at paragraph  34  and  that  there  is  information
    available to show excessive use of force and human rights abuses as set
    out at paragraphs 36 and 37.  He consequently submits  that  the  judge
    has done nothing wrong and that no material error of law is  disclosed.



11. Finally he addresses the contention that the judge has speculated as to
    how the courts would view the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  rather  than
    looking at objective indicators.  He submits that the test herein is  a
    very high one and that it would be necessary to  show  perversity.   He
    takes me to paragraph 39 of  the  decision  and  submits  that  nowhere
    within that paragraph, or indeed the decision  generally,  has  such  a
    threshold been approached.  He contends that the  judge  has  logically
    interpreted the evidence and submits that there are in this  area,  and
    throughout the whole of the decision, no material errors  of  law.   He
    asks me to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. This matter was not helped by the fact that it took  the  Secretary  of
    State  over  three  years  to  respond  to   the   Appellant's   asylum
    application.  Such delays can never be helpful  particularly  when  the
    Secretary of State relies effectively on a change of circumstances that
    has arisen during the period of delay as being supportive of its stance
    for refusing the application.  In the light of all of  this  the  judge
    has carried out a very detailed and thorough analysis  and  in  essence
    all the Secretary of State can put forward in reply amounts  to  little
    more than disagreement.  So far as the evidence relating  to  diplomats
    is concerned the judge has looked firstly at the objective evidence and
    then at the facts and assessed the risk.  He has at paragraph 34  noted
    that it is the Appellant's case he would be  investigated  for  leaving
    the embassy and that therefore there is a risk he would be detained  at
    the airport  and  investigated  and  that  it  is  his  case  that  the
    combination of abandoning his post as a diplomat  and  claiming  asylum
    would lead to a real risk  on  return.   It  is  insufficient  for  the
    Secretary of State merely to refer to general objective evidence.  Each
    case is fact specific and the judge has looked at  the  facts  of  this
    case and found that the Appellant would be at risk and  has  thereafter
    gone on to sum up accurately at paragraphs 39 to 41  of  his  decision.
    In particular in paragraph 39 the judge has noted that whilst the penal
    code does not specifically state that by leaving  his  diplomatic  post
    and claiming asylum the Appellant would fall foul of the relevant penal
    codes it would clearly be a matter of interpretation by the  courts  as
    to whether that had happened and the judge was  perfectly  entitled  to
    provide the reasoned findings that he did.

15. Secondly I agree with the submissions made by Mr Lee that it  is  clear
    from paragraphs 35 and 36 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    that  his  references  to  imprisonment  of  members  of   the   Muslim
    Brotherhood and torture are simply to  illustrate  the  nature  of  the
    state and that it cannot be inferred that  the  judge  has  misdirected
    himself as to who the Appellant fears upon  return.   Further  I  agree
    with the contention that it is clear from paragraphs 37 and 38  of  the
    decision that the judge was aware that the government had  changed  but
    was making the point that human rights abuses by security forces remain
    widespread and that prison conditions remain very harsh.   Consequently
    it can be concluded that the judge has done nothing wrong in either his
    analysis of the facts or within  his  thought-making  process  and  his
    findings are sustainable and the objection of the  Secretary  of  State
    amounts to little more than disagreement.

16. Finally at paragraph 39 the judge  has  applied  the  correct  test  of
    reasonable likelihood.  In fact the judge has set out his findings  and
    analysis both well and thoroughly.  It was fully open for the judge  to
    conclude that the fact that the investigation was reasonably likely  to
    lead to ill-treatment even if a prosecution did not necessarily  follow
    and consequently the findings and conclusions made at paragraph 41 were
    open to him.  In such circumstances, throughout and overall, this is  a
    judge who has looked carefully at the evidence and  made  well-reasoned
    findings.  The decision discloses no material  error  of  law  and  the
    appeal of the Secretary of State is consequently dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 1st June 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                                  Date 1st June 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

