


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12499/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2016                    |On 10 October 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                 CHRISTY [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Chipperfield, Counsel, instructed by Jeya and
Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Ross who, in a determination  promulgated  on  9  July
    2016, dismissed the appellant's appeal.



Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who was born on 9 April  1982.
    He first entered the UK as a student with a visa valid until 31 October
    2009.  His visa was extended until 28 August 2011.  He returned to  Sri
    Lanka on 8 June 2010 and returned to the UK on 2 July 2010. On 21  June
    2011 he applied for leave to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  his
    Article 8 rights in respect of his wife.  That claim was refused by the
    Secretary of State. The appellant  then  made  three  other  claims  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his relationship with  his
    wife.  These were all refused.  On 23 March 2015 he claimed asylum.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's asylum claim because she
    did not accept that the appellant had been arrested and detained by the
    Sri Lankan authorities.  It was also not accepted that the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities have any interest in the appellant or  that  the  appellant
    had taken part in any activities or joined any organisations in the UK.
     The Secretary of State also considered the appellant's  claim  that  a
    return to Sri Lanka would breach the appellant's rights to respect  for
    family and private life.  The Secretary of State considered that  there
    would not be very significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration
    into Sri Lanka.

 4. The appellant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  dismissing  the  appellant's   appeal,
    considered that it was not likely that the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka
    would regard the appellant as presenting a  risk  with  regard  to  his
    activities whilst in the UK.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  accept
    that the appellant was  detained  in  2010.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered  that  there  were   no   significant   obstacles   to   his
    reintegration in Sri Lanka bearing in mind that members of  his  family
    lived there and he had lived most of his life in Sri Lanka and that  it
    would be proportionate to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and on 3 August 2016 Judge Saffer granted the appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  The grant of permission sets out that it is arguable that  the
    judge has not made a specific finding regarding a key component of  the
    appellant's claim, namely whether he was detained  and  ill-treated  in
    2005.  The grant of permission also indicates that it is arguable  that
    the judge appears to reject the reason for sur  place  activity  rather
    than the impact  on  the  Sri  Lanka  authorities'  perception  of  the
    appellant.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

Summary of Submissions

 7. The grounds set out that there are no  findings  in  the  determination
    with regard to the 2005 arrest and detention.  Further,  there  are  no
    reasons given as to, if the judge did not accept  those  findings,  why
    the judge rejected that aspect of the appellant's claim.  Reference  is
    made to paragraph 29 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  where  the
    judge states "I do not accept that he  was  detained  in  2010  on  his
    return, because I do  not  consider  he  is  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities". It is asserted that the appellant's detention in 2005 was
    relevant to the overall assessment of the appellant's  risk  on  return
    having regard to his profile and how he is likely to  be  perceived  by
    the Sri Lankan government. Mr Chipperfield submitted that  the  failure
    to make any finding at all on the 2005 incident amounts to  a  material
    error of law. He asserted that it is likely  that  the  government  has
    records and that this would affect the appellant's profile.

 8. Mr Chipperfield submitted that much of the appellant's evidence has not
    been considered by the judge.  He referred to paragraphs 23  to  26  of
    the appellant's witness statement  and  submitted  that  there  are  no
    findings by the judge in relation to the evidence of the appellant.  In
    the determination he submits that the judge  sets  out  in  very  brief
    terms the appellant's evidence but paragraph 22 is the only substantive
    consideration and that it is wholly inadequate.

 9. It is asserted that the judge does not explain why he  takes  the  view
    that it is not credible that the appellant would have been prepared  to
    take a risk in returning to Sri Lanka given that the war in  Sri  Lanka
    had ended and that there had been a significant change in  the  country
    situation since the appellant had left in October  2006  and  that  the
    appellant himself had never had any actual involvement with  the  LTTE.
    Mr Chipperfield referred to the appellant's witness statement where  it
    sets out the reason that he did not travel was  because  he  feared  he
    could be arrested prior to 2010. He submitted that the  appellant  gave
    adequate reasons and plausible reasons as to why he went back in  2010.
    He also submitted that the judge's finding as to  the  likelihood  that
    the appellant would make such a trip must be based only on the  factors
    considered by the appellant not on factors that  the  judge  considered
    would be influential.

10. It is also submitted that the judge  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the
    appellant's evidence relating to his delay in claiming asylum.   It  is
    asserted  that  the  judge  finds  that  the  appellant  has  not  been
    consistent in his explanation as to why he claimed asylum  and  why  he
    did not realise that he could claim asylum until 2015.   The  appellant
    seeks  permission  to  rely  on  extracts  from  Counsel's  Record   of
    Proceedings from the appeal hearing. These are set out in full  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  Mr Chipperfield referred to  paragraph  39  of  the
    appellant's witness statement where it sets out that the appellant  did
    not claim asylum initially because he  was  hoping  that  things  would
    improve.

11. The grounds submit that  the  judge  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the
    expert's psychiatric report. It is also asserted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's finding that the symptoms were incapable of  objective
    confirmation  failed  to  take  into  account  the  following  evidence
    contained within the expert report - page 25(a)(b).

         "He showed a classical  reaction  that  is  associated  with  post-
         traumatic stress disorder when describing his mistreatment  despite
         his flat mood  and  self-control.  This  must  be  seen  as  highly
         significant as it is extremely difficult to simulate this reaction.



12. It is asserted that the judge in essence takes  the  view  that  little
    weight should be  attached  to  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  made  by  the
    psychiatric report because he has based his  diagnosis  on  information
    given to him by the appellant. It is submitted that  this  approach  to
    the expert's  report  was  inadequate  and  incorrect.  The  judge  has
    unfeasibly failed to take into consideration the fact that the expert's
    opinion has clearly been reached not solely from information  given  to
    him by the  appellant  but  also  from  his  own  observations  of  the
    appellant's  presentation  and  demeanour  during  the  course  of  the
    assessment.  Reliance is placed on the case of AM (Angola) [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 521 which was concerned with whether or not there  was  independent
    evidence of torture."

         "As the judge  himself  rightly  stated,  Mrs  Kralj  believed  the
         claimant.   That  belief,  following  an  expert  examination   and
         assessment also constituted independent evidence of  torture.   Mrs
         Kralj's belief was her own independent belief, even if that was  in
         part based on AM's account. However,  the  judge  was  mistaken  to
         suggest  that  such  belief  was  merely  as  a  result  of  taking
         everything she said to face value.  A fair reading of  her  reports
         plainly went very much further than that."

13. The grounds further assert that the judge erred in his consideration of
    the evidence relating to the political activities in the  diaspora.  Mr
    Chipperfield submitted that whether genuine  or  not,  the  appellant's
    involvement in sur place activities are  relevant  in  respect  of  the
    perceived impact.  He submitted that the other  evidence  submitted  by
    the appellant goes beyond joining the BTS  in  2015.   He  referred  to
    paragraphs 34 and 35 of the appellant's witness statement  wherein  the
    appellant lists  some  of  the  activities  going  back  to  2007.   He
    submitted that the appellant's political views are against the  unitary
    government of Sri Lanka.  He asserted that the judge has  not  rejected
    the evidence, he has failed to make any findings in  relation  to  that
    evidence. Mr Chipperfield submitted that  the  judge  has  clearly  not
    considered the appellant's evidence that he was  involved  in  diaspora
    activities prior to 2015.  He submitted that the  failure  to  consider
    the earlier involvement goes to the appellant's general credibility. He
    submitted that it is  the  perceived  picture  that  matters  and  that
    whatever the appellant's motivation it does  not  remove  the  need  to
    assess  the  danger  from  what  the  authorities  might  perceive  the
    activities of the appellant to be.

14. Mr Tufan submitted that there were significant  credibility  issues  in
    this case. He submitted that the appellant did not appear to know about
    asylum until 2015.  This, he indicated, was  extraordinary  given  that
    asylum is commonly in the news and if the appellant was involved in the
    Sri Lankan comminute it would have been a topic that was discussed.  He
    submitted that the appellant had made a significant number of  previous
    applications and that these were relevant to the consideration  of  the
    appellant's credibility with regard to  his  asylum  claim.   Mr  Tufan
    indicated that he accepted that at  first  blush  the  judge  does  not
    appear to have dealt with the claim to have been detained in  2005.  He
    referred to paragraph 21 of the decision where the judge deals with the
    claim to have been involved in an  incident  in  2002.  Mr  Tufan  then
    referred to paragraph 22 and suggested that the judge  must  have  been
    considering the appellant's claim to have been detained and tortured in
    2005.  He submitted that in light of the credibility finding  on  other
    issues that this is not a material error of law if the judge failed  to
    make such a finding.  He submitted that in paragraph 6 of the  decision
    the judge has set out the reasons that the appellant gave as to why  he
    went back to Sri Lanka in 2010. No mention  is  made  that  the  reason
    being because the war had ended.  In any event Mr Tufan submitted  that
    in 2010 the risk was perhaps at its highest as members of the LTTE were
    being rounded up.  He submitted that there is no ring of truth  to  the
    explanation given now as to why the appellant felt safe to go  back  in
    2010.  With regard to the medical reports he submitted that the  weight
    is to be placed on them is a matter for the judge.  He  submitted  that
    even if there is evidence of sur place activities prior to 2015 none of
    the evidence demonstrates that the appellant is in a leading  position.
    He referred to paragraphs 335, 336 and 351 of GJ and Others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  ('GJ')  and
    submitted that it is clear that attendance alone at demonstrations does
    not present a real risk of any interest being shown by the authorities.
     He submitted that the appellant does not come within the categories of
    persons at risk in GJ.

15. Mr Chipperfield in reply submitted that if the reference  in  paragraph
    22 is to the appellant's claim to have been detained in 2005 it is  not
    sufficient.  The judge has failed to engage with the issues.

Discussion

The 2005 arrest and detention

16. In reaching his findings the First-tier Tribunal judge set out:

         "21. I do not consider  that  the  appellant's  evidence  has  been
         consistent and credible. He states that he was arrested in  Columbo
         (sic) and tortured, He was  then  released  on  condition  that  he
         remain in Columbo and then claims that he went to Jaffna, and  that
         he passed through checkpoints on the way without any difficulty. He
         says that the  reason  why  he  went  to  Jaffna  was  to  see  his
         grandmother who was ill. I consider that this it is  unlikely  that
         if he had been arrested and tortured that he would have  flagrantly
         ignored the conditions of his release in the way he has described.

         22.  Similarly, if he had been detained and tortured in the way  he
         describes, I do not consider that it  is  credible  that  he  would
         return to Sri Lanka in June 2010 to get married,  bearing  in  mind
         that his wife was in the UK as well. Although the war was  over  by
         that time. I do not consider that this is a risk he would have been
         prepared to take, if his account is true.

17. The judge considered the appellant's claim to have  been  arrested  and
    detained in 2010 at paragraph 29.

18. These are the only paragraphs where specific findings  are  made  about
    the appellant's claims regarding arrest,  detention  and  torture.  The
    judge clearly found the claimed arrest, detention and ill treatment  in
    2002 to lack credibility. The judge set out in paragraph 5 the evidence
    from his interview regarding the claimed detention  in  2005.  He  also
    recorded  that  the  appellant  had  provided   a   witness   statement
    reiterating his case (paragraph 11). It is possible that the judge  may
    have been referring to the 2005 detention at the beginning of paragraph
    22. However, the judge does not appear to have made  specific  findings
    in relation to the appellant's claim that he was arrested, detained and
    tortured in 2005. This may not amount to a material error of law. As Mr
    Tufan submitted the interest of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  is  now
    focused on those seeking to destabilise the Sri Lankan  State  and  who
    are working for Tamil separatism. Detention and torture in  2005,  even
    if accepted, might not give rise to a risk on return today.

19. The headnote to GJ sets out the current risk categories:

         (1)  This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
         Sri   Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri   Lankan government's concern has changed
         since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The  LTTE  in  Sri    Lanka
         itself is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents
         since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri    Lankan  State  enshrined   in
         Amendment 6(1) to the Sri    Lankan  Constitution  in  1983,  which
         prohibits the 'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri    Lanka.
         Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the  LTTE  or
         any similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b)  the  revival  of
         the civil war within Sri   Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri   Lankan security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri   Lanka for  a
         person at real risk from the Sri   Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole of Sri    Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport. Any risk for those in whom the  Sri    Lankan  authorities
         are or become interested exists  not  at  the  airport,  but  after
         arrival in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by
         the CID or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri   Lanka, whether in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri   Lanka as a single  state  because  they
             are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in  relation
             to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri   Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
             rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri
               Lankan government, in particular its human rights record, or
             who are associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri
             Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
             Learned and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri
             Lankan security forces,  armed  forces  or  the  Sri    Lankan
             authorities in alleged war crimes. Among those  who  may  have
             witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly in  the
             No-Fire Zones  in  May  2009,  only  those  who  have  already
             identified themselves by giving such evidence would  be  known
             to the Sri   Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at
             real risk of adverse attention or  persecution  on  return  as
             potential or actual war crimes witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
              Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8)   The  Sri    Lankan  authorities'   approach   is   based   on
         sophisticated  intelligence,  both  as  to  activities  within  Sri
         Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri   Lankan authorities  know  that
         many Sri   Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and
         also that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
         involvement with the LTTE during the civil  war.  In  post-conflict
         Sri   Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only  to
         the extent that it is perceived by the Sri   Lankan authorities  as
         indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri   Lankan state or  the
         Sri   Lankan Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri   Lankan state or revive the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

20. It is the appellant's case that he has never  been  involved  with  the
    LTTE. It has not been suggested that there is an extant arrest warrant.
    The appellant remained in Sri Lanka for 18  months  after  his  claimed
    detention in 2005.

21. The appellant claims that he returned to Sri Lanka in 2010 and, as  the
    judge recorded, this provides an opportunity to test whether or not the
    appellant is at risk of persecution on return  to  Sri  Lanka.  In  his
    witness statement and in his interview the appellant claims that he was
    asked about his activities and involvement with  the  LTTE  in  London.
    This would be consistent with the objective  evidence  of  the  current
    interest of the Sri Lankan authorities. There was  no  suggestion  that
    the authorities had arrested him as a result of any previous arrests or
    detentions or that any reference was made to them by those  questioning
    the appellant. The focus according to the appellant was his  activities
    in the UK. He claims his wife (who had returned to Sri Lanka  with  him
    from the UK) was also detained at the airport  being  released  on  the
    same day - she had not had any problems in Sri Lanka before she left in
    2006. His wife's claim for asylum is (according to the appellant) based
    on the more or less the same persecution that the appellant  claims  he
    suffered in 2010.

22. The appellant then remained in Sri Lanka for 3 weeks during which  time
    he married his wife. He left Sri Lanka  passing  through  check  points
    using his own passport at the airport without  the  involvement  of  an
    agent. He did not claim to have been ill-treated in detention. Although
    the judge did not accept that the appellant had been detained  in  2010
    the judge considered that even on the appellant's own case 'there is no
    reason to believe he is of interest to the authorities' (paragraph 29).
    The judge had the benefit of hearing all the evidence and being able to
    assess the evidence given directly by the appellant in this case.

23. The grounds of appeal assert that the appellant's claim  to  have  been
    detained and tortured in 2005 was materially relevant when  considering
    the plausibility of the appellant's claim to have been  questioned  and
    detained on return in 2010. The question for the judge was whether  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka today. The failure to
    make a specific finding on  the  2005  claimed  arrest,  detention  and
    torture is not a material error of law as it  would  not  have  made  a
    difference to  the  outcome  because  the  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant was not at risk even on the appellant's own case that he  was
    detained in 2010.

The credibility of the return in 2010

24. The judge found

         "22. Similarly, if he had been detained and tortured in the way  he
         describes, I do not consider that it  is  credible  that  he  would
         return to Sri Lanka in June 2010 to get married,  bearing  in  mind
         that his wife was in the UK as well. Although the war was  over  by
         that time. I do not consider that this is a risk he would have been
         prepared to take, if his account is true."

25. The judge recorded the evidence given in interview (paragraph 6):

         "... He was also asked how it was that he returned to Sri Lanka  to
         get married in 2010  when  he  had  been  repeatedly  arrested  and
         tortured. He said that his mother was elderly and his father  would
         have difficulty getting to the wedding in the UK, in  addition  his
         wife's mother was ill ..."

26. I consider that the judge has explained why  he  did  not  consider  it
    credible that the appellant would return to Sri  Lanka.  He  took  into
    account the explanation that the war was over by that time but  weighed
    that with the explanation  that  the  reason  for  return  was  to  get
    married. Having considered that the appellant and his wife were both in
    the UK and in light of the claims of several periods of  detention  and
    torture the judge found that it was not  credible  that  the  appellant
    would have taken such a risk. However, I accept that the judge ought to
    have given significant weight and viewed the credibility  in  light  of
    the factors  considered  by  the  appellant  not  on  factors  that  he
    considered would be influential.  I  do  not  consider  this  to  be  a
    material error of law  because  it  would  not  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome as the judge  considered,  in  paragraph  29,
    that even on the appellant's claim to have been detained in 2010 he was
    not at risk.

The delay in claiming asylum

27. The grounds assert that the  judge  errs  by  finding  the  appellant's
    evidence inconsistent. Specifically, it is asserted that at no point in
    the appellant's evidence does he suggest that he  did  not  know  about
    asylum before 2015, simply that he did not know much. The  judge  found
    that the appellant's account was inconsistent because he gave a  reason
    for not claiming asylum for very many years as being that 'he  did  not
    know much about asylum' but 'then however stated that he had spoken  to
    people about asylum but they had stated that he could  be  sent  back'.
    This is the inconsistency - not whether or not he did not know he could
    claim until 2015 asylum. The grounds acknowledge that the evidence  was
    that he did not know much about asylum. This ground of  appeal  has  no
    merit.

The psychiatric report

28. It is asserted that one of the key reasons that the judge advanced  for
    not attaching much weight to the psychiatric expert's report is because
    the symptoms of PTSD are incapable of  objective  confirmation  in  the
    sense that the symptoms are described by the patient. It  is  submitted
    that the judge erred by dismissing the opinion of  the  expert  on  the
    grounds that this was based on information provided by  the  appellant.
    Undoubtedly this was one factor but  the  judge  also  considered  this
    evidence in light of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  sought
    treatment until 2015 some 9 years after he  fled  from  Sri  Lanka  and
    after he had claimed asylum. It is a matter for  a  judge  as  to  what
    weight is to be placed on the evidence in light of all the evidence and
    his assessment of the  claim.  Considering  the  evidence  overall  the
    conclusion of the judge that he should not give the report much  weight
    was conclusion that he was entitled to reach.

Evidence of the appellant's activism in the diaspora

29. It is not clear that the judge has fully engaged with the evidence that
    the appellant claims to have attended demonstrations over a  number  of
    years. In his witness statement of 8/6/2015 the appellant refers  to  a
    number of processions he claims to have participated  in  between  2007
    and 2014. The appellant only 'joined' the BTF in 2015 after he  claimed
    asylum and clearly the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  sudden
    interest in supporting the BTF as an organisation  was  an  attempt  to
    bolster his claim. The judge has not made findings in relation  to  the
    appellant's claim to have participated in processions since  2007.  The
    judge does appear to  have  considered  that  the  appellant  has  only
    claimed to have been involved in recent activities (paragraph 26).   He
    has not therefore engaged with the evidence and, if he has done so  but
    rejected the evidence, has not given any reasons for so doing. I do not
    consider however that this is a material error of law for  the  reasons
    given below in relation to risk on  return  as  a  result  of  diaspora
    activities.



Assessment of risk on return

30. It is asserted that the judge erred because he stated  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal (in GJ) considered that attendance at  demonstrations  in  the
    diaspora alone is not sufficient to create a real risk on return.   The
    judge then found that 'even if the appellant had been mistreated in Sri
    Lanka which I do not accept, there would not be a real risk of  further
    mistreatment on return'.  As  the  appellant  points  out  if  it  were
    accepted that the appellant had been mistreated on return then it would
    not be the case that there had been attendance at demonstrations in the
    diaspora alone. It is asserted that the judge has  failed  to  consider
    that the appellant's attendance at  demonstrations  could  well  be  of
    significance when viewed in the context of his past record of detention
    and mistreatment.

31. Although the judge has not expressed the test in GJ as  clearly  as  he
    might have, there is no material error of law.  In  GJ  the  conclusion
    reached regarding diaspora activities was:

         "... Our overall conclusion regarding diaspora activities  is  that
         the GOSL has sophisticated intelligence enabling it to  distinguish
         those who are actively involved in seeking to  revive  and  re-fund
         the separatist  movement  within  the  diaspora,  with  a  view  to
         destabilising the unitary Sri Lankan state. Attendance at  one,  or
         even several demonstrations  in  the  diaspora  is  not  of  itself
         evidence that a person is a committed  Tamil  activist  seeking  to
         promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka. That will be a  question
         of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities  carried
         out by such an individual."

32. Paragraph 8 of the headnote sets out:

         "The Sri Lankan authorities' approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,   an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government."

33. At Paragraph 7(a) of the headnote:

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka." (emphasis added)

34. The test (as  relevant  to  this  appellant)  is  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is perceived as indicating a present risk to the unitary  Sri
    Lankan state as a result of his past history  and/or  current  diaspora
    activates. The judge had considered the risk on return in light of  the
    current categories of risk as set out in GJ.  He notes in paragraph  28
    that 'In post conflict Sri Lanka an individual's past history  will  be
    relevant only to the extent that it is  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as indicating a  present  risk  to  the  state.  I  do  not
    consider that it is at all likely that the authorities would regard the
    appellant as presenting  such  a  risk'.  The  judge  arrived  at  this
    conclusion having considered all the evidence. The appellant was  never
    involved with the LTTE. On the appellant's evidence his involvement  in
    diaspora activities at its highest involves participating in  a  number
    of processions. The judge found that the appellant  'has  virtually  no
    role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism'.  The  appellant
    clearly does not  play  a  significant  role  in  diaspora  activities.
    Therefore, the judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not at risk on return even if he had been  mistreated  in
    the past (which the judge did not. in any event.  Accept  -  a  finding
    that, as I set out above, was open to him).

35. There was no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

36. There was no appeal against the judge's findings on Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 9 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

