
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12598/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Issued          |
|on 16th May 2016                              |on 19th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     AB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate; McAuley McCarthy & Co,
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, aged 60.  His case is subject to an
    anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal, which  remains  in
    place.  He has unsuccessfully sought asylum in the UK  through  various
    proceedings from 2005 to date.

 2. In a decision promulgated  on  20th  January  2016  Judge  J  C  Grant-
    Hutchison took determinations made in 2006 and in 2011 as her  starting
    point; gave further reasons for rejecting the appellant's  contentions;
    declined to find that he is homosexual (paragraph 22);  noted  that  he
    was convicted of lewd, indecent and libidinous practices towards two 12
    year  old  children  in  2006;  declined  to  find  that  the   Iranian
    authorities would be aware of UK  newspaper  reports  mentioning  those
    convictions, published in December 2011; declined to find that  he  had
    any online profile on a gay website; and dismissed his appeal.

 3. In the Upper Tribunal, Mr Forrest advanced  two  essential  grounds  of
    appeal.

 4. The first is that it was perverse to hold on all the evidence that  the
    appellant does not show that he is homosexual.  Mr  Forrest  recognised
    that this represents a high hurdle, but submitted  that  the  appellant
    was convicted in 2007 of offending which is at  least  consistent  with
    his claimed orientation; that  he  has  now  advanced  this  contention
    consistently over a period of many years; that he  sought  in  2012  to
    rely upon video evidence of his engagement  in  homosexual  activities;
    that he submitted evidence of his membership of a gay website; and that
    there was such  a  plethora  of  evidence  over  such  a  long  period,
    consistent with his claimed orientation, that it was  perverse  of  the
    judge to come to any other conclusion.

 5. The second ground of appeal is that the judge erred in relation to  the
    risk to  the  appellant  at  the  "pinch-point"  of  return,  based  on
    information that might be accessed by the Iranian authorities from  the
    internet, as well as the circumstances of his exit from  Iran  and  the
    length of time he has been absent from the country, in the light of  AB
    and Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT
    0257.  Mr Forrest acknowledged AB is not a country  guidance  case  and
    that the present case, unlike AB, does not  have  political  overtones.
    He also accepted the distinction that the alleged risk here arises from
    print media rather than the internet.  However, he submitted further as
    follows: the circumstances are analogous; the Iranian  authorities  are
    unpredictable; they are known  to  research  the  activities  of  their
    nationals abroad, and to be particularly suspicious if  one  has  spent
    some years  in  the  UK;  the  judge  grappled  inadequately  with  the
    combination of factors which might focus on the appellant at the  point
    of his return - the fact  of  his  conviction,  his  assertion  of  his
    homosexuality by production of video evidence, his persistence  in  his
    allegations of his sexuality, his likely perception on return, and  the
    availability of information about him on the internet.

 6. Finally, it was submitted that the errors were  sufficient  to  require
    the decision to be set aside.

 7. Mr Matthews argued as follows.  Although AB  was  relied  upon  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the UT, it was not mentioned in submissions to the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is not reported as a country guidance case  or
    otherwise formally binding upon the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
    correctly noted at paragraph 28 of  her  decision  that  the  appellant
    provided no expert, background or other  evidence  in  support  of  his
    contention that the authorities might use "Google" to  find  out  about
    him.  Not having produced any evidence, and not having cited AB,  which
    had by then been reported, there was no error by the  judge.   This  is
    particularly so as the present case was conceded not to be precisely in
    point.  The appellant was not involved  in  political  polemic  on  the
    internet.  The challenge to the finding on  the  appellant's  sexuality
    fell well short of showing perversity.  The judge was entitled to  take
    previous determinations as her starting point.  She gave clear  reasons
    for not departing from earlier conclusions.  For example, the appellant
    sought to rely upon a profile on a gay dating site,  but  the  evidence
    did not show that the material belonged to the appellant;  it  did  not
    have his correct date of birth (which could easily have  been  changed,
    if, as he maintained, this was an error); the appellant said he visited
    the site daily, yet it  showed  membership  as  having  expired  on  10
    November 2011; and the site recorded 3,254 messages sent,  not  one  of
    which was lodged in evidence.  Those were good reasons for the  judge's
    conclusions against the appellant.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. Broadly, I prefer the submissions for the respondent on  both  grounds,
    for the reasons Mr Matthews advanced, as summarised above.

10. The judge had to decide whether the appellant is  gay.   She  took  two
    previous adverse determinations on that issue as  her  starting  point.
    She gave strong reasons for not accepting much of the further  evidence
    upon which the appellant sought to rely.  His convictions for lewd  and
    libidinous behaviour and the DVD material he created in  2012  did  not
    compel a conclusion to the contrary.  The outcome is far from perverse.
     It was plainly open to the judge,  and  she  gave  several  clear  and
    sensible reasons.

11. The second ground strains the significance of AB.  The  judge  properly
    disposed of such submissions as were made to her about suspicion of the
    appellant arising through enquiries made at the point of  return.   His
    case is not particularly analogous to AB.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude at paragraph 26 that the prospect of his convictions coming to
    light on return were exceedingly remote.

12. Neither of the grounds shows that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.
     Its decision shall stand.

                           [pic]


                           17 May 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
