
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12934/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 11 August 2016                           |On : 16 August 2016          |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     t M
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells of Maliks & Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka born on [  ]  1994,  arrived  in  the
United Kingdom on 10 December 2007, at the  age  of  13  years.  He  claimed
asylum on 12 December 2007. His claim was refused on 7 February 2008 but  he
was granted Discretionary Leave until 11 February 2011 as  an  unaccompanied
asylum seeking child. He  made  an  application  for  further  leave  on  20
January 2011 and was again refused asylum  on  18  March  2011  and  granted
Discretionary Leave until 8 April 2012 on the same basis as  previously.  He
applied for further leave to remain on 27 December 2012, by  which  time  he
was no longer a minor.

The appellant's application was refused on  14  October  2015.  He  appealed
against that decision and his appeal was heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
on 19 April 2016 and dismissed. Following an  unsuccessful  application  for
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, permission was  granted  in  the
Upper Tribunal on 4 July 2016.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil from Jaffna. He claimed that his  father
was a strong supporter of the LTTE and was arrested by the Sri Lankan  army.
His current whereabouts were unknown. The appellant claimed that in  October
2007 he was abducted by an unknown armed group driving a white van  and  was
taken to an army camp. He claimed to have been forced into  sexual  activity
whilst detained in the camp and  to  have  been  released  when  his  mother
sought assistance and paid a  bribe.  When  he  told  his  mother  what  had
happened in the camp she was very upset and arranged for his uncle  to  take
him to Colombo. From there an agent assisted him in leaving the country.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim on 7 February 2008,  noted
significant inconsistencies in his account of his  claimed  abduction  which
undermined his credibility. The respondent considered that, even taking  the
claim at its highest, the appellant was not  of  any  interest  to  the  Sri
Lankan authorities and would be at no risk on return.


In the subsequent refusal  of  18  March  2011,  following  the  appellant's
application for further leave  to  remain,  the  respondent  maintained  the
reasons for refusal, noting that no further information had  been  submitted
in regard to his asylum claim. It was considered that the situation  in  Sri
Lanka had considerably improved in the meantime and that he would be  at  no
risk on return. It was noted that the  appellant  was  now  claiming  to  be
unaware of the whereabouts of his family in Sri Lanka but that  no  evidence
had been adduced of efforts to contact his family.


In the most recent refusal of 14 October  2015,  following  the  appellant's
application  for  further  leave,  the  respondent  again   maintained   the
decision, noting that the  appellant  was  relying  on  the  same  claim  as
previously. His claim was considered in line with the  most  recent  country
guidance and it was concluded that he would not be at any  risk  on  return.
The respondent also considered that his removal would not breach  his  human
right.


The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge A W  Khan.  The  judge  heard  from  the  appellant  and  his
maternal uncle and also had before him a psychiatric report  from  Dr  Robin
Lawrence and  correspondence  from  the  British  Red  Cross  regarding  the
appellant's tracing request. The judge noted  the  appellant's  evidence  of
having attended demonstrations in the UK and of having attempted to take  an
overdose in October 2015. The  judge  also  noted  the  appellant's  uncle's
evidence that his brother was a bodyguard to the LTTE leader,  as  a  result
of which he feared returning to Sri Lanka, and his evidence  about  attempts
to trace the  appellant's  family  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  case  put  for  the
appellant was that he was suicidal and suffering from PTSD as  a  result  of
being subjected to  sexual  assault  in  Sri  Lanka,  as  supported  by  the
psychiatric report, and that he was at risk on return due to  his  links  to
his father and to his maternal uncle  who  was  a  bodyguard  for  the  LTTE
leader and as a result of his attendance  at  demonstrations  in  London  in
which he had shown his support for Tamil separatism.

The judge noted various inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence. He  did
not accept that his father was involved in helping  the  LTTE  and  that  he
would be at risk on the basis of his father's activities for  the  LTTE.  He
did not accept the appellant's uncle's evidence about his  brother  being  a
bodyguard to the LTTE leader. He did not accept that the appellant would  be
at any risk as a result of his attendance at demonstrations in  the  UK.  In
addition he did not accept the appellant's account  of  being  abducted  and
sexually abused. The judge found that the appellant did not come within  any
of the risk factors in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  (Rev  1)
[2013] UKUT 319 and concluded that he would be at no risk on return  to  Sri
Lanka. He  did  not  consider  the  appellant  to  be  a  suicide  risk  and
considered that there were medical facilities available in Sri Lanka  should
he require them. He found that the appellant's removal would not breach  his
human rights, under Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the ECHR,  and  he  dismissed  the
appeal on all grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had erred  in  his  approach  to  the
psychiatric report; and that the judge had erred  in  his  findings  on  the
appellant's sur place activities.

Permission was initially refused, but was subsequently granted on a  renewed
application on 4 July 2016.


Appeal Hearing

It was Mr Wells' submission that Judge Khan had fallen into the  same  error
as identified in the case of Mibanga v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367, by considering the psychiatric report  after
having made his adverse credibility  findings,  rather  than  assessing  the
evidence in the round. He had also wrongly rejected the  psychiatric  report
on the basis that it depended on the appellant's own testimony, whereas  the
psychiatrist had conducted psychometric testing  to  reach  the  conclusions
that he did. He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  rejecting  the
appellant's account of the ill-treatment during detention on the basis  that
he had failed to mention sexual assault in his interview, and had failed  to
take account of the fact that the appellant was only 13  years  old  at  the
time. He  had  ignored  the  relevant  guidance  for  vulnerable  minors  in
rejecting the appellant's evidence. Mr  Wells  submitted  further  that  the
judge had erred in  law  by  finding  that  the  appellant's  attendance  at
demonstrations was self-serving,  contrary  to  the  guidance  in  Danian  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [1999] EWCA  Civ  3000,  and  had
failed to consider whether that would put him at risk,  in  accordance  with
the findings in GJ.

In response, Mr Tufan relied on the case of HH (medical evidence; effect  of
Mibanga) Ethiopia  [2005]  UKAIT  00164,  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
grounds relying on Mibanga and submitted that the  judge  had  given  proper
consideration to the medical evidence. He had had regard to the  appellant's
age throughout his decision. Mr Tufan relied on paragraphs 336  and  351  of
GJ in submitting that the judge had  properly  found  that  the  appellant's
attendance at some demonstrations would not have put him at risk  on  return
to Sri Lanka.


In response Mr Wells reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings

I do not find there to be  any  merit  in  the  appellant's  grounds.  Judge
Khan's decision is a very careful and detailed  one,  including  a  thorough
assessment of all the evidence, with  regard  plainly  being  given  to  all
relevant matters including the appellant's age  and  vulnerability  and  the
psychiatric evidence.

I would agree with Mr Tufan's reliance on HH in relation to the  application
of the principles in Mibanga to the psychiatric evidence, in particular  the
warning given by the Upper Tribunal at [21] of the decision, that  there  is
a  danger  of  Mibanga  being  misunderstood.  It  seems  to  me  that   the
appellant's first ground is a misapplication of the  principles  in  Mibanga
and that Judge Khan undoubtedly did not fall foul of the  approach  set  out
by the Court of Appeal.


It is indeed the case that the judge considered the appellant's account  and
the evidence given by the appellant and his uncle, at [25] to  [32],  before
turning to the psychiatric report. However, it is plainly not the case  that
the judge had made his mind up about the appellant's  claim  before  turning
to the psychiatric evidence. What is clear from his careful analysis of  the
evidence is that he identified various inconsistencies and discrepancies  in
the evidence in those paragraphs before then going on to  consider  them  in
the light of the appellant's psychological  condition  and  the  psychiatric
report, and assessing the evidence as a whole.


At [25] the judge identified significant inconsistencies in the  appellant's
evidence about his father's claimed involvement with the  LTTE  and  arrest.
At [26] he considered, and  gave  reasons  for  rejecting,  the  appellant's
uncle's evidence about his brother's  role  as  a  bodyguard  for  the  LTTE
leader. At [28] he considered the appellant's account of his  attendance  at
demonstrations and whether or not the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  have
monitored his activities. At  [29]  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's
account of his abduction and  identified  various  inconsistencies  in  that
evidence. At [30] to [31] the judge then went on to  give  consideration  to
the appellant's explanation for the  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in
the evidence and, as discussed below, also considered whether  his  age  and
vulnerability could provide an adequate reason for those  discrepancies.  At
[33] he then turned  to  the  psychiatric  evidence  and  at  [33]  to  [36]
considered  the  extent  to  which  the  psychiatrist's  opinion   and   the
appellant's  psychiatric  state  could  provide  an  explanation   for   the
inconsistencies  in  his  evidence.  Taking  all  of  those   considerations
together, he then went on at [37] to  make  an  overall  assessment  of  the
evidence. That is made particularly clear by his comment, "Thus, looking  at
the whole of the evidence in the round", where he took all of  the  evidence
together and made the findings that he did about the appellant's account  of
detention and sexual abuse.

Accordingly it seems to me that there  was  nothing  wrong  in  the  judge's
approach to the  medical  evidence  and  that,  having  considered  all  the
evidence in the round, he was perfectly entitled to place  the  weight  that
he did upon Dr Lawrence's report, not only in assessing the  credibility  of
the  appellant's  evidence,  but  also  in  considering  any  risks  to  the
appellant on return arising as a result of his mental health.


The grounds go on to assert  that  the  judge  ignored  the  guidance  about
evidence from minors concerning issues of sexual abuse  and,  in  so  doing,
wrongly placed weight upon the appellant's  failure  to  mention  the  abuse
when  being  interviewed  by  the  interviewing  officer.  However,  on  the
contrary, the judge was plainly conscious and  mindful  of  the  appellant's
age and vulnerability throughout his decision and took great care to  assess
the evidence in that context. At [30] he addressed the explanation given  by
the appellant for the discrepancies, inconsistencies and  omissions  in  his
evidence which he claimed were because of his age  and  confusion.  He  then
went on, at [30] to [32] to  explain  why  he  could  not  accept  that  the
appellant's age or vulnerability as a possible victim of sexual abuse  could
provide an adequate explanation for the discrepancies and omissions  in  his
evidence. That was a matter that he addressed and considered in detail  once
again at [43] and [44], with clear and cogent reasons given as  to  why  the
appellant's age, lack of maturity and  claimed  vulnerability  simply  could
not explain the problems in the evidence.

I find myself in agreement with Mr Tufan, in  that  there  was  little  more
that the  judge  could  have  done  in  respect  to  having  regard  to  the
appellant's  age  and  vulnerability,  other  than  to  simply  accept   the
appellant's account without more. However he was  clearly  not  required  to
accept the account purely because it came from a 13 year old whose claim  to
sexual abuse was supported by a psychiatric report.  In  any  event  neither
the medical evidence nor  the  appellant's  age  and  claimed  vulnerability
could assist in explaining the significant inconsistencies in  the  evidence
identified by the judge, in particular those relating to the  evidence  from
the appellant's uncle. Accordingly, the judge, having had regard to all  the
evidence  in  the  round,  having  given  careful   consideration   to   the
psychiatric report,  having  considered  the  appellant's  explanations  for
discrepancies and inconsistencies in the evidence, and having had regard  to
the witness's evidence, was entitled to conclude, for the reasons fully  and
cogently given, that the claim was not a genuine and credible one.


As for the appellant's claim to be at risk on the basis of his  "sur  place"
activities, that was a matter considered by the judge at [27] and [28],  and
again at [47]. Whilst the judge considered that the  appellant's  activities
were self-serving, it is clear that that was not the  basis  upon  which  he
concluded that the appellant would not be at risk on return and that he  did
not, therefore, fall foul of the principles  in  Danian.  On  the  contrary,
having regard to the country guidance  in  GJ,  he  considered  whether  the
appellant's activities would have brought him to the attention  of  the  Sri
Lankan authorities, and gave cogent reasons for concluding that  they  would
not. That was a conclusion that he was  entitled  to  reach  and  which  was
consistent with the guidance  in  GJ,  in  particular  with  regard  to  the
paragraphs relied upon by Mr Tufan, namely [336] and [351].


As Mr Tufan properly submitted, GJ  was  determinative  of  the  appellant's
case, since he clearly did not  fall  within  any  of  the  risk  categories
identified in that case, and the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  that
was the case.

For all of these reasons I find that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  do
not disclose any errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.  The  decision
reflects a  very  careful  assessment  of  all  the  evidence  and  contains
cogently reasoned findings based on the  evidence,  leading  to  conclusions
which were fully and properly open to the judge.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I continue that order
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008.











Signed                                  Date 16/08/2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
