
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12440/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2016                          |On 13 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR ZAHID MEHMOOD
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Agnew, who dismissed an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born on 8 November 1987 and is a national of  Pakistan.
    His asylum claim is  based  on  his  membership  of  the  Jammu  Kashmir
   Liberation Front (JKLF), which he joined in 2008.  On  2  March  2011  he
   attended a public meeting of the party which was raided  by  the  police.
   The appellant was injured and taken to  hospital.   While  there  he  was
   informed that there was a First Information Report (FIR)  issued  against
   him by the police.  The appellant went into hiding.  The police  went  to
   look for the appellant at his home and detained his father  for  4  days.
   The appellant's brother was arrested as part of the attempt by the police
   to find the appellant's whereabouts.

3) The appellant already had a visa to come to the UK to study.   His  party
   advised him that as he already had this visa he should leave  and  go  to
   the UK.  The appellant escaped from  Kashmir  hidden  in  a  coffin.   In
   Pakistan he used his own passport to leave because there  was  no  arrest
   warrant against him.

4) The appellant arrived in the UK on 9 April 2011.  He went to college  for
   2 weeks but then ceased attending when the college demanded full  payment
   of his fees.  The appellant was informed that the police in Kashmir  were
   beating up his father and brother to obtain information  about  him.   At
   this time the appellant was staying with his father's brother in the  UK.
   The appellant's father telephoned his brother to say that as  far  as  he
   was concerned the appellant was dead.  A month later the appellant  moved
   out of his uncle's house.

5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe that  the  appellant
   had been involved with JKLF as he claimed.  The judge did not believe the
   appellant had fled to the UK and that it was just a coincidence  that  he
   happened to have a student visa for the UK just at the time he  found  it
   necessary to leave the country.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant's
   credibility was damaged by not having claimed asylum before October 2014,
   when he was arrested for road traffic offences.  The judge noted that the
   appellant had made a human rights application in 2013, at which  time  he
   had the benefit of legal advice.  Nevertheless he did not mention a  fear
   of returning to  Pakistan  at  that  time.   The  judge  also  considered
   documentary evidence lodged on behalf of the appellant and found that the
   documents concerned were not reliable.

6) The application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  on  a  number  of
   grounds.  The first was that the appellant had unfairly been  refused  an
   adjournment.  Secondly, the judge made no finding on whether the incident
   alleged by the appellant on 2 March 2011 when the police raided the  JKLF
   meeting had taken place.  This went to the core of the appellant's claim.
    Without a finding on this the other findings made by her were irrelevant
   or premature.

7) The third ground was that it was irrational to find that the  appellant's
   credibility was adversely affected by his  not  having  claimed  earlier.
   The appellant had leave to enter the UK from January 2011.  There was  no
   reason in his mind why he should complicate matters by making a  separate
   application for refugee status.  This was the position  until  his  human
   rights appeal failed, though his focus was not  so  much  on  what  might
   happen if he returned to Kashmir but what would happen if he had to leave
   the UK.

8) In the grant of permission to appeal it  was  said  that  the  judge  was
   correct to refuse the adjournment application and  this  issue  had  been
   dealt with appropriately.  The appellant had ample time  and  opportunity
   to adduce evidence from Kashmir from 2011.  The judge set out the history
   of adjournment applications made by the appellant.

9) It was nevertheless arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  any  or
   adequate findings upon whether the incident alleged on 2 March 2011  took
   place as claimed by the appellant.  It was at  least  arguable  that  the
   judge failed to make findings on whether the appellant was beaten on that
   date as he claimed.  This incident, as well as  the  appellant's  claimed
   membership of a political party, was at the core of his claim.

10) A rule 24 response was lodged on behalf of the respondent.  This  states
   that  the  judge  identified  issues  of  credibility  and  inconsistency
   relating to the appellant's knowledge of the party he claimed  to  belong
   to and its activities.  The judge  noted  the  appellant's  contradictory
   evidence about giving up teaching in Pakistan to concentrate  on  working
   for the party only to come to the UK in  2011  as  a  student,  where  he
   attended college for only  2  weeks.   The  judge  made  an  unchallenged
   finding that the appellant had been working full time since  his  arrival
   in the UK in 2011.  The judge took into account the  appellant's  delayed
   asylum claim and properly considered the documentary evidence.  The judge
   was clearly aware of the basis of the appellant's  claim  and  considered
   all the evidence in the round.  It was unarguable that the  judge  failed
   to identify, consider and determine the core of the appellant's claim.

Submissions

11) In his submission at the hearing Mr McGlashan said  that  it  should  be
   possible to see  from  the  judge's  decision  why  certain  points  were
   accepted or rejected.  The judge had not commented on the central core of
   the case.  There was no indication whether  the  judge  had  accepted  as
   credible the evidence of the incident alleged to have occurred  in  March
   2011.  This was a fundamental flaw.  Mr McGlashan relied on the  decision
   of the Inner House in Wordie Property Ltd 1984 SLT 345, in terms of which
   the reader must be able to see clearly why their case  was  refused.   In
   addition the  appellant  claimed  to  have  sustained  injuries  at  this
   incident on 2 March 2011.  Although in the rule 24 notice the  respondent
   said that the decision was sufficient, the principle was  so  fundamental
   as to amount to an error of law.  The appeal should be  remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal to be heard anew.

12) Mr McGlashan then turned to the other  points  in  the  application  for
   permission to appeal.  In the grant of permission to appeal it  was  said
   that all the grounds were arguable and this included the judge's decision
   to refuse an adjournment.  In her decision the judge referred to the fact
   that a supplementary bundle had been  lodged  by  the  respondent.   This
   contained information about a telephone call made to a police station  in
   Kotli.  The appellant had at the time of the adjournment application been
   attempting to obtain information from his advocate in Pakistan  regarding
   the FIR against him.  If the police knew this they would say in  response
   to an inquiry on behalf of the Home Office that the FIR produced did  not
   match their records.  In relation to this issue the evidence relied  upon
   by the respondent was of a phone call.  There was no documentary evidence
   in  support  of  this.   The  appellant  should  have  had  a  reasonable
   opportunity to challenge this evidence, especially as at paragraph 58 the
   judge referred to the possibility that  the  police  would  not  want  to
   confirm that any document relating to the appellant was  genuine  because
   they would not want to support his  asylum  claim.   An  adjournment  was
   sought  only  to  obtain  information.   The  judge  was  told  that  the
   appellant's representative had spoken to the advocate in Kashmir  on  the
   telephone  and  the  advocate  was   arranging   for   the   sending   of
   documentation.

13) Mr McGlashan referred to paragraph 3 of the  decision  where  the  judge
   found an inconsistency in the documentary evidence as  to  whether  there
   was one FIR against the appellant or a number of legal cases against him.
    Mr McGlashan submitted that this was not necessary a  conflict  as  such
   matters might not be recorded in the same way as in the UK.  Mr McGlashan
   relied on the decision in Kasolo (13190) AIT, 1st April 1996, unreported.



14) Mr McGlashan continued  that  the  judge  referred  to  the  appellant's
   supposedly vague knowledge of his party.  The judge found  the  appellant
   was vague about his party's aims  and  objectives.   At  paragraph  27  a
   comparison was made between the appellant's evidence  and  the  aims  and
   objectives of the party as published on  their  website,.   Mr  McGlashan
   submitted that this was not a point which was open  to  the  judge.   The
   judge had the appellant's membership card on which it said that  the  aim
   of the party was to  secure  an  independent  Kashmir.   Furthermore  the
   appellant had given detailed responses at  interview,  at  B11  from  Q63
   onwards.  The judge had not given proper reasons for her decision on this
   point.

15) Mr McGlashan continued that at paragraph 34 of the  decision  the  judge
   referred to a speech written by the  appellant  at  the  request  of  his
   representative.  The judge noted that on each page of the speech  drafted
   by the appellant there was an  entry  reading  "chanting  slogans".   The
   judge commented that this was not what she would have  expected  to  have
   seen.  Again this was a comment on what might be expected in the  UK  and
   was inappropriate in terms of Kasolo.  A politician would know how to put
   things across to people.

16) In conclusion Mr McGlashan said that the  judge  was  required  to  take
   into account  the  whole  case  and  not  just  the  points  against  the
   appellant.

17) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien relied  on  the  rule  24  notice.   The
   issue of the adjournment was dealt with in the  grant  of  permission  to
   appeal and by the  judge  at  paragraphs  17-20  of  the  decision.   The
   appellant may have been dissatisfied with the decision not to adjourn but
   it was not unfair.

18) Mrs O'Brien continued that it was argued for the appellant that  reasons
   could not be discerned from the decision.  The reasoning was  clear  when
   the credibility findings at paragraph 26-59 were looked  at.   The  judge
   did not accept that the FIR was reliable.  The judge did not  accept  the
   appellant's evidence about his knowledge of his political  party.   There
   were also section 8 issues.  The judge looked at  all  the  elements  and
   rejected the appellant's claim to have been  involved  in  politics.   It
   might have been better if the judge had said that  for  all  the  reasons
   given in relation to credibility she rejected that the  incident  alleged
   in March 2011 had taken place but even without this it could not be  said
   that  the  judge  had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
   appellant's account.  There was nothing irrational  about  the  decision.
   It was not unclear  why  the  judge  had  not  found  in  favour  of  the
   appellant.  There had been no unfairness by the judge in not acceding  to
   an adjournment.  The judge had made clear and discernible findings on the
   whole of the claim and had rejected the claim.   There was nothing in the
   contention on behalf of the appellant that the judge had  been  wrong  to
   take account of the delay by the appellant in claiming asylum.

19) In response  Mr  McGlashan  returned  to  the  timeframe  in  which  the
   adjournment application was made.  There was a first adjournment  in  May
   2016 owing to a lack of court time.  The second adjournment in June  2016
   was because the respondent had lodged additional documents.  The judge at
   that time gave 2 weeks to the appellant to obtain  information.   Further
   documentary evidence by the appellant was to be lodged 7  days  prior  to
   the next hearing.  The appellant was unable to obtain information  within
   this timescale owing to the absence from his  office  of  his  lawyer  in
   Kashmir.  It might be that there was evidence available on the FIR  which
   was not before the judge.

20) Mr McGlashan further submitted  that  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
   involvement in politics, it could not be  said  the  appellant  had  been
   vague in his responses at interview.

21) Returning to the decision in Wordie Property Ltd, Mr McGlashan  repeated
   that the reader could not see exactly why the decision was refused.   The
   judge had not followed proper legal principles.

22) In relation to the delay in  claiming  asylum,  Mr  McGlashan  submitted
   claims were often made late.  The appellant had gone down  the  route  of
   seeking to change his visa.  Once he had exhausted this route he  claimed
   asylum. He had attended college but was not able to meet the requirements
   for language certificates.  The relevant documents had been sent  to  the
   Home Office.  The delay in claiming asylum was not central to the  claim.



Discussion

23) I will begin by addressing the question of  the  adjournment.   Although
   the judge's decision to refuse the adjournment was described in the grant
   of permission to appeal as correct,  nevertheless  Mr  McGlashan  thought
   this was an issue worth pursuing at  the  hearing  before  me,  observing
   correctly that permission was granted on all grounds.

24) The Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  sets  out  at  paragraph  20  the
   history of the adjournments in this appeal.  The first adjournment in May
   was due to the lack of court time.  The second adjournment  in  June  was
   because the respondent  had  lodged  new  papers  relating  to  the  FIR,
   following inquiries made by telephone of the  police  station  in  Kotli.
   The hearing was adjourned for around 10 days with further documents to be
   lodged no later than 7 days before the hearing.  When  the  next  hearing
   date, 23 June 2016, arrived, an adjournment was sought by  the  appellant
   because his lawyer in Kashmir had "gone away for Ramadan" but  wanted  to
   obtain evidence for the appellant.  A further  adjournment  was  granted.
   There was then a request for an adjournment made in writing on 17  August
   2016 because documents were still awaited from  the  lawyer  in  Kashmir.
   The judge points out it was  then  2  months  since  an  adjournment  was
   granted for the purpose of obtaining these documents.  It  appeared  that
   the lawyer in Kashmir knew that the hearing had  been  re-listed  for  19
   August 2016 but had not sent any documents either by fax or  email.   The
   judge considered that the appellant had had  notice  for  a  considerable
   time about  the  respondent's  concerns  about  the  reliability  of  the
   documents produced.  There had been ample opportunity to obtain  evidence
   in response.

25) The judge records that the application made on 17 August was renewed  at
   the hearing.  Mr McGlashan pointed  out  that  he  was  on  holiday  when
   additional documents were lodged by the Home Office.  He said he had been
   in touch with the appellant's lawyers  the  previous  day  and  had  been
   expecting him to send further documents.  These had not yet materialised.
    Mr McGlashan further stated that a witness from  the  appellant's  party
   had arranged to attend the hearing in  June  but  could  not  attend  the
   hearing on 19 August.

26) In relation to  the  witness  from  the  appellant's  party,  the  judge
   pointed out that in the reply notice submitted on behalf of the appellant
   in May 2016 there was no mention of this witness.  No  witness  statement
   had been provided from him.   His inability to attend was not  raised  in
   the application of 17 August.  The judge considered there had been  ample
   time  to  produce  evidence  from  a  further  witness  and  it  was  not
   appropriate to adjourn again in the hope that he might  attend  a  future
   hearing.   The  judge  took  into  account  the  direction  made  at  the
   adjournment on 10 June for any further being lodged  on  a  date  7  days
   before the hearing on 23 June.  The judge  took  into  account  also  the
   overriding objective in the Procedure Rules and a party's  obligation  to
   co-operate with the Tribunal to  secure  that  proceedings  were  handled
   fairly and justly whilst avoiding delay.  The judge did not consider  the
   arguments advanced by Mr McGlashan  justified  any  further  delay.   The
   adjournment was refused.

27) In my view these reasons speak for themselves.  The  appellant  had  had
   ample time to obtain evidence  from  Kashmir  to  refute  the  additional
   evidence lodged by the appellant on 10 June 2016.   In  relation  to  the
   witness, there had been ample time for the appellant to lodge  a  witness
   statement, as directed in the standard directions issued by the  Tribunal
   but no witness  statement  was  before  the  judge.   There  was  also  a
   significant query as to why there  was  no  mention  of  this  additional
   witness in the written application for an adjournment of 17 August.   For
   all the reasons  given  the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  refuse  the
   adjournment.

28) I turn next to  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  appellant's  delay  in
   claiming asylum and whether she was entitled to take this into account in
   the way she did.  The judge addressed this issue at paragraphs  42-46  of
   the decision.  The judge records at paragraph 42 that the  appellant  was
   asked at the hearing why he did not claim asylum in 2011.   He  said  "he
   was not aware of asylum cases".  It was pointed out  that  the  appellant
   had taken legal advice to make various applications.  The judge had  said
   in a previous appeal in 2014 that in 2011 he had only one FIR against him
   and the case was proceeding without any warrant  of  arrest  having  been
   issued.  The judge did not accept this  explanation.   Once  an  FIR  was
   issued the police could  investigate  and  arrest  the  person  concerned
   without a warrant.  The judge pointed out that the appellant  claimed  he
   had been smuggled out of Kashmir hidden in a coffin  and  he  claimed  to
   have been terrified of being arrested and  killed.   He  further  claimed
   that he had had to leave Pakistan to avoid being imprisoned for life.

29) It was pointed out to the appellant at interview that  in  2012  he  had
   made an unsuccessful application and did not appeal against the decision.
    He then made another application to remain  on  the  basis  of  a  human
   rights claim.  This was refused and a decision was  made  to  remove  the
   appellant.  He was asked after his application was refused why he did not
   make arrangements to return to Pakistan and replied that he was in danger
   there.  The appellant claimed that he had come to the UK because of  this
   danger and could not return in 2013 because of the danger.  He  had  also
   claimed that he did not feel he was in real danger until he heard  of  an
   arrest warrant issued against him in 2014.  The judge did not accept this
   explanation but found it was a belated attempt  to  explain  why  he  had
   failed to claim asylum since his arrival in the United Kingdom in 2011.

30) At paragraph 44 the judge  points  out  that  the  appellant  had  legal
   advice when he made his human rights claim in 2013.  The  judge  did  not
   believe that if the appellant actually  had  any  fear  of  returning  to
   Pakistan he would not have mentioned this during the process even if, for
   reasons which were difficult to comprehend, he chose not to  mention  any
   problems before which made it impossible for him to return  to  Pakistan.
   Claiming that he did not feel he was in real danger until  after  he  was
   notified of the existence of the arrest warrant did not  explain  why  he
   did not claim asylum once he discovered there was an arrest warrant.   He
   claimed to have been notified of this warrant a few days after its  issue
   in June 2014.  At the end of September 2014 the  appellant  was  arrested
   for road traffic offences.  Removal directions were  set  for  8  October
   2014.  The appellant claimed asylum on 10 October 2014.  According to the
   judge all the evidence, "save for the appellant's own claims  which  were
   contradictory and implausible" pointed to  this  late  claim  for  asylum
   being "a last ditch attempt to remain" in the UK when all  other  efforts
   had  failed.   This  significantly  reduced  the   credibility   of   the
   appellant's claims to have been living in fear of what  might  happen  to
   him in Pakistan since 2011.

31) I find it difficult to find  any  fault  in  the  judge's  reasoning  in
   relation to the delay in claiming asylum.  The judge  did  not  make  the
   mistake of relying upon the delay as a  decisive  factor,  or  making  an
   adverse finding in relation to a delay before making adverse findings  on
   other aspects of the evidence.  The judge made the finding in relation to
   the delay in claiming asylum as part of her  overall  assessment  of  the
   evidence, as she was entitled to do.

32) The appellant attempted to use the application for permission to  appeal
   to produce further reasons, seemingly not given at the hearing, as to why
   he did not claim  asylum  earlier.   According  to  the  application  the
   appellant had obtained leave to enter the UK in January 2011  and  "there
   was no reason - in his mind - why he should complicate matters by  making
   a separate application (because that in effect would be what a  grant  of
   refugee status would come to)".  Such  an  explanation,  taken  with  the
   chronology of events set out by the judge, does nothing to  detract  from
   the judge's conclusion that the asylum claim was a last ditch attempt  to
   remain in the UK.  I make no comment on the appellant's attempted use  of
   the application for  permission  to  appeal  for  an  attempt  to  adduce
   evidence which was  not  given  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

33) At the hearing before me Mr McGlashan commented  that  applications  are
   often made late.  This may be so but the judge is always entitled to look
   for reasons or explanations as  to  why  the  application  was  not  made
   earlier.  The explanation Mr McGlashan  sought  to  put  forward  at  the
   hearing, although  this  was  not  quite  the  same,  it  seems,  as  the
   explanations offered by the appellant at the hearing  before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge, was that in effect the appellant  attempted  to  use
   very other possible means to remain in  the  UK  and  only  when  he  had
   exhausted these did he claim asylum.  Again, there is nothing in this  to
   detract from the judge's findings that this was a last ditch  attempt  to
   remain.  There is no error of law in the way in which the judge  drew  an
   adverse inference from the delay in claiming asylum.

34) This leaves the central part of the appellant's  grounds  for  appealing
   to the Upper Tribunal,  which  was  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal made no finding about the alleged incident in March 2011 and the
   related events, such as the beating the appellant claims he incurred, and
   the detention of his relatives.

35) Mrs O'Brien submitted that it might have been better if  the  judge  had
   made a clear finding to the effect that she did not  accept  as  credible
   the appellant's claims that the events of March 2011  took  place  as  he
   alleged. Nevertheless, I agree with Mrs O'Brien that there is  sufficient
   in the judge's findings and in her reasoning to show  that  she  did  not
   accept the appellant's evidence about his reasons  for  claiming  asylum.
   Implicitly the judge's adverse credibility finding included rejecting his
   account of the alleged events of March 2011.  There is  no  ambiguity  at
   all in the decision to the effect that the judge rejected in its entirety
   as lacking in credibility the appellant's account given  by  him  as  the
   basis of his asylum claim.

36) The judge made her adverse credibility findings not by reference to  the
   events described by the appellant in March 2011 themselves, but by  other
   aspects of the appellant's evidence where there were  inconsistencies  or
   discrepancies.  This was something the judge was entitled to do.

37) In particular, the judge considered the appellant's claim  that  he  had
   been involved in political  activity  in  Kashmir  and  rejected  it  for
   detailed reasons, which were given at paragraphs 27-34 of  the  decision.
   Mr McGlashan sought to undermine the  judge's  reasoning  by  saying,  in
   particular, that the appellant had not been vague when  questioned  about
   his party's policies and had properly expressed its aims.   Mr  McGlashan
   further submitted that at paragraph  34  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
   criticise in the way that she did the political speech supposedly written
   by the appellant at the request of his representative.

38) When assessing the appellant's state of knowledge about  his  party  the
   judge took into account  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  been  an
   experienced and prominent member of the JKLF.  The judge was entitled  to
   proceed on this basis.  The judge looked at the  speech  written  by  the
   appellant and commented that she did not attach any weight "to the  claim
   the contents of this document were written by the appellant as  a  speech
   simply because it is in his handwriting".  This was a finding  the  judge
   was entitled to make for the reasons which she gave.  There is no  Kasolo
   point here, as submitted by Mr McGlashan.  The judge in effect was saying
   that it may well be a genuine speech of the sort that might be made by  a
   politician in  Kashmir  but  she  was  not  satisfied  that  it  was  the
   appellant's own work.

39) In considering  credibility  the  appellant  went  on  to  consider  the
   history of the appellant's studies in the UK.  The judge pointed  out  at
   paragraph 35 that according to the appellant he gave up his teaching  job
   because he wanted to concentrate fully on his work for the party.  Yet at
   the beginning of 2011 he decided to come to the UK to  study.   According
   to the judge these claims were contradictory.  Again this was  a  finding
   the judge was entitled to make.

40) At paragraph 37 the judge pointed out that in the evidence given  before
   her the appellant said he studied for 2 weeks after arriving  in  the  UK
   but could not continue because he had no funds.   Earlier,  however,  the
   judge recorded that the appellant had said to the Home Office in relation
   to his human rights application of February 2013 that the course did  not
   meet this expectations.  He informed the Home Office of this and  was  in
   the process of finding an alternative college.

41) At paragraph 40 the judge noted the appellant did not continue with  his
   studies.  He was asked at interview how he had  been  supporting  himself
   since 2011 and replied that he was staying with a cousin so did not  have
   to pay anything.  Sometimes he used to deliver menus door to door and get
   some money for that.  The judge noted that the appellant had been in  the
   UK for 5 years and considered it was far more likely  that  he  had  been
   working full time since his arrival and that his purpose in coming to the
   country was not to study but to work.

42) The judge further pointed out that although  the  appellant  claimed  to
   have been in hiding in Pakistan from 2 March he did not leave the country
   until 9 April, despite having a UK visa since January and funds from  his
   father and from his party.  This was  a  further  matter  the  judge  was
   entitled to take into account.

43) The judge considered that documentary evidence lodged on behalf  of  the
   appellant at paragraphs 47-59.  The judge looked at the evidence  in  the
   round, in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439.  In  relation
   to the FIR the judge took into account the Document  Verification  Report
   from the respondent and the  appellant's  response.   She  described  the
   appellant's response as "they would say  that,  wouldn't  they",  meaning
   that the appellant was contending that  the  police  would  not  want  to
   support his asylum claim by  confirming  the  documents  in  question  as
   genuine.  According to the appellant, the police wanted him to return  to
   Pakistan so they could kill him.  The judge  said  entirely  fairly  that
   this  was  a  possibility.   The  judge  considered  that  despite   this
   contention the evidence of the respondent in  the  Document  Verification
   Report could not simply be put aside.  The judge noted  that  there  were
   details in the  report  of  why  the  numbers  did  not  match  with  the
   documentation the police station held.

44) In a sense this brings me full circle to the  question  of  whether  the
   appellant had an adequate opportunity to bring forward evidence to refute
   the Document Verification Report relied upon by the respondent.   I  have
   already determined that the judge was entitled to find that the appellant
   had had an adequate opportunity to do this and there was no unfairness in
   refusing a  further  adjournment  for  this  purpose.   Furthermore,  the
   appellant's credibility was so severely  damaged  by  the  other  factors
   referred to by the judge in her decision that his  explanation  that  the
   police would deliberately tell  the  respondent  that  the  FIR  was  not
   genuine in order to secure the appellant's return to Pakistan was not  an
   explanation to which any credence was reasonably likely to be attached.

45) I have considered in detail the reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  her
   adverse credibility findings and the submissions made on  behalf  of  the
   appellant why these findings and the reasons for them were inadequate.  I
   am satisfied that the findings made by the judge were findings which  she
   was entitled to make upon the evidence and that  the  reasoning  she  has
   given was adequate and valid.  There is no error of law  in  the  judge's
   findings and accordingly her decision should stand.

Conclusions

46) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

47) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

48) No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have  not
   been asked to make such an order and I see no  reason  of  substance  for
   doing so.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

