
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA130452015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 May 2016                        |On 23 May 2016                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     A P
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Leonard & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and claimed to have been born
    on [ ] 1998, maintained that he had lost contact with  his  family  and
    that a return to Afghanistan would place him at  risk  of  persecution.
    The respondent maintained that he was born  in  1997  and  refused  his
    claim for international protection for a second time  on  26th  October
    2015 (the first being  on  28th  June  2013  although  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave) and he appealed.   There was some  confusion  over
    the date of his age  in  the  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    whereby she dismissed  his  appeal.   The  appellant  challenged,  with
    permission, the First-tier Tribunal decision.

 2. There was, it is stated by both  respondent  and  appellant,  a  Merton
    compliant age assessment which does not appear  to  have  been  served.
    The point being made is that the appellant at the hearing  on  4  March
    2016 was candid in what he was representing about his  age,  not  least
    that the date of birth given  to  the  appellant  after  assessment  by
    social services was 27 March 1997.  He still maintained that  his  date
    of birth was on 27 March 1998 but did not disguise the  fact  that  his
    age as found by Social Services was one year older. There seemed to  be
    some confusion in paragraph 9 of the judge's assessment, not least that
    she referred to him as being born on 27 March 1998 (as he  claimed)  in
    which case he would have been 17, if that was correct, as at  the  date
    of the hearing, but the point being  made  by  his  Counsel  was  that,
    notwithstanding the Merton report, the appellant had not presented  any
    other case than as it was set out in the chronology of  events  and  it
    was a not a matter of contention in the appeal.  He had maintained that
    he was born on 27th March 1998 (but declared that the Home  Office  had
    found him to have been born in 1997 see witness statement).  There  was
    even reference to this date of birth being accepted by the Home  Office
    in the previous Reasons for Refusal letter of 28th  June  2013  and  to
    which the judge refers.  Paragraph 19 of that letter  referred  to  the
    Merton compliant age assessment as having found  the  appellant  to  be
    born on 27 March 1998.   Nevertheless the matter of the contention over
    his age was held against the appellant despite the confusion  over  his
    age, and despite the acceptance by the respondent as  cited  above  and
    despite the fact that the Merton report was not disclosed.  I find this
    an error when assessing credibility.

 3. As Mr Bramble concedes, the judge states that  she  complied  with  the
    Presidential guidance relating to vulnerable witnesses but in  fact  in
    the next sentence, within paragraph 8 she continues  with  regards  the
    credibility assessment and  immediately  pronounced  that  he  was  not
    credible and that he had fabricated his claim and at that point did not
    appear to have appreciated the issues in relation to his age.

 4. There are further issues in relation  to  the  credibility  assessment.
    Part of the assessment by the Judge was that he had been misleading  by
    using aliases and this was held against him. The appellant stated  that
    he had not used aliases and in fact at 2.7 of the  screening  interview
    that is what is recorded. The response when asked about aliases was  in
    the Screening Interview "None".

 5. Case law demonstrates  that  an  effective  credibility  assessment  is
    important when addressing the issue on tracing.  When referring to  the
    tracing requirement the  judge  referred  to  the  appellant  thwarting
    efforts regarding tracing. The judge did not  grapple  with  the  point
    made that women did not have ID cards in Afghanistan.  The judge stated
    at paragraph 16 that 'at no point when he was first interviewed did the
    appellant mention this individual'.  That was incorrect.

 6. There are further issues which suggest that the judge had  not  engaged
    with the country expert reports as served by the appellant,  not  least
    that it challenged the background material as put forward by  the  Home
    Office. There was a lack of engagement with the  appellant's  responses
    to the material used by the Home Office or the  material  presented  by
    the appellant such as Dr Guistozzi's report.

Notice of Decision

 7. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 20th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

