


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13768/2011



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 27 June 2013                             |On : 1 July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              mehmet ali serin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Thirmaney of Trott & Gentry Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 20 August  1973.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 7 November 2011 and claimed asylum on  13  November
2011. Following an interview on 23 November 2011, his claim was  refused  on
5 December 2011 and a decision was made the same day to remove him from  the
United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Jhirad  on  24  January  2012.  The  appeal  was
dismissed. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  to  the
appellant on 26 March 2012.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant's claim, in summary, is that he  fears  being  killed  by  the
Turkish authorities if returned to Turkey. He claims to have been an  active
member of the BDP, the Peace and Democratic Party, from  January  2010,  and
to have been arrested and detained on three occasions.  The  first  occasion
followed his involvement in the Newroz celebrations on  20  March  2010  and
was as a result of his  perceived  involvement  with  the  BDP;  the  second
occasion on 21 June 2011 was as a result of suspected liaising with the  KCK
on behalf of the BDP; and the third occasion was on  6  October  2011  as  a
result of accusations of having  provided  clothing  to  the  PKK  from  his
textile business and taking orders for this from  his  cousin  whom  he  had
recently visited in prison on two occasions.  On  the  third  occasion,  the
police asked him to co-operate with them and provide them  with  information
about the PKK which he agreed to do in order to  stop  them  torturing  him.
The day after his release he went  to  Istanbul  to  stay  with  cousin  and
whilst there was told by his sister that the police  had  raided  his  house
and asked about him and his brother. He then fled the country.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was a member of the BDP since his age was inconsistent  with  his  claim  to
have joined the youth branch of the party. In the light of that finding  the
respondent did not accept that the appellant had undertaken  the  activities
he claimed or that he had been detained  as  claimed.  With  regard  to  the
first detention the respondent in addition did not  accept  that  the  anti-
terrorist branch of the security forces  would  have  specifically  targeted
him and arrested him from his home when he claimed to be  only  an  ordinary
member of the BDP. The respondent considered in  any  event  that  the  fact
that he was released after only three days with no charges and no  reporting
conditions showed that he was of no real interest to  the  authorities.  The
same reasons were given by the  respondent  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
account of his second detention. With regard to  the  third  detention,  the
respondent did not accept that the authorities would have  any  interest  in
monitoring his cousin's visitors or would suspect that his cousin was  still
able to co-ordinate PKK activities, when he had been in prison  since  1995.
For all of those  reasons  the  respondent  also  rejected  the  appellant's
account of his departure from Turkey. The respondent  considered  that  even
if the appellant's account was true, he was not of  a  profile  which  would
give rise to any  risk  on  return  under  the  principles  in  the  country
guidance in IK (Returnees, Records, IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Jhirad  on  24
January 2012. The appellant was represented but there was no  appearance  on
behalf of the respondent. The judge heard from the appellant  and  from  his
representative. She did not accept the appellant's account  to  be  credible
and she found that he  would  be  at  no  risk  on  return  to  Turkey.  She
accordingly dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought on behalf of the appellant  on  the  grounds
that the judge had failed  to  make  findings  on  material  issues  in  the
appellant's case; that there was unfairness in  the  judge's  assessment  of
the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  first  detention;  that   the   judge's
assessment  of  the  documentary  evidence  was  flawed;  that  the  judge's
assessment of the appellant's cousin's links to  the  PKK  was  flawed;  and
that the judge had erred by failing to  consider  the  appellant's  case  in
line with the country guidance in IK.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 26 March  2012  on
the basis of the judge's arguable failure to  make  findings  on  a  crucial
aspect of the appellant's case, namely the three detentions.

In a determination promulgated on  5  October  2012,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Kekic dismissed the appellant's appeal, having considered it  on  the  basis
of the papers before her without an oral hearing and having found  there  to
be no error of  law  in  Judge  Jhirad's  decision.  However,  following  an
application by the appellant for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
Appeal, she subsequently set aside her own decision on 21 November 2012  and
made directions for the matter to be listed for an oral hearing in order  to
determine whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law.

Appeal Hearing

 The appeal came before me on 27 June 2013. I heard  submissions  from  both
parties.

Ms Thirumaney relied and expanded upon the grounds of appeal. She  submitted
that the judge had not undertaken any assessment of the appellant's  account
of the three detentions and that her findings only briefly touched upon  one
detention.  She  did  not  undertake  any  assessment  of  the   appellant's
political activities and had only made findings on the documentary  evidence
and not  the  appellant's  actual  activities.  There  had  been  procedural
unfairness on the judge's part when she raised, in  her  determination,  the
issue of the appellant's failure to depart Turkey after his first  detention
when that was not a matter previously raised or put to the appellant at  the
hearing. Likewise there had been procedural unfairness in  her  findings  on
the family tree when the concerns had not been  put  to  the  appellant.  Ms
Thirumaney  submitted  further  that  the  judge   had   misunderstood   the
appellant's evidence about the last arrest and that he was not  claiming  to
have been arrested because of his relationship  to  his  cousin  but  rather
because of his recent visit to him in prison. There had also been  an  error
in the judge's failure to give proper consideration to the guidance in IK.

Ms Horsley produced the decision in Gheisari v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1854 in submitting that the judge  had  done
an  adequate  job  in  determining  the  appeal.  Her  findings  had  to  be
considered alongside the refusal letter which  she  explicitly  referred  to
and relied upon. She had rejected the core facts of the case and  had  given
reasons for placing no weight upon the BDP  documents.  The  judge  had  not
misunderstood the appellant's evidence about his cousin as that was  clearly
set out in the refusal letter which the judge  had  considered.  Whilst  the
judge had not put to the appellant the point raised  about  his  failure  to
depart after his first detention, that was not sufficient  grounds  for  the
decision to be set aside, when paragraph  35  of  the  refusal  letter  gave
other reasons for rejecting the appellant's account. The judge gave  reasons
why she rejected the family tree and she  was  entitled  to  rely  on  those
reasons. The burden of proof lay upon the appellant and she was entitled  to
find that he had not met it. In  any  event,  the  judge  went  on  to  make
alternative findings even if the appellant was related to Kemal as  claimed.
Specific reference to IK was irrelevant given  the  adverse  findings  made.
The judge did not make any errors of law.

In response, Ms Thirumaney submitted  that  the  judge  should  have  raised
concerns about the family tree at the hearing. It  was  not  sufficient  for
her to merely state that she had considered the refusal letter.

DECISION

There is no doubt that Judge Jhirad's determination  could  have  benefitted
from more detailed and comprehensive reasoning. Indeed, in the light of  her
somewhat  limited  reasoning,  my  preliminary   view,   having   heard   Ms
Thirumaney's submissions and before hearing from Ms Horsley, was that  there
may well be some merit  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  However,  having  now
considered Ms Horsley's submissions and undertaken a closer  examination  of
the determination, it is  my  view  that  her  findings  and  reasoning  are
adequate and that her decision ought not to be set aside.

In so concluding, I have taken into consideration the views of the Court  of
Appeal in Gheisari, as well as the findings of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
more recent case of Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT
00085, where the Tribunal stated in their  head-note,  albeit  in  different
circumstances:


    (2)  Although a  decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
    requirements to give adequate reasons are not met, the  Upper  Tribunal
    would not normally set aside a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    where there has been no misdirection of law, the  fact-finding  process
    cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has  been  taken
    into account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from  the  primary
    data were not reasonably open to him or her."

It seems to me that the conclusions drawn by Judge Jhirad from the oral  and
documentary evidence were indeed reasonably open to her and  that,  contrary
to the assertions made in the grounds of appeal,  and  despite  the  limited
reasoning, it  is  clearly  discernable  from  her  determination  what  her
findings were.

The grounds of appeal assert, in the first instance, that the judge made  no
findings on the appellant's three detentions and his  political  activities.
However, that is  not  the  case.  Although  she  did  not  go  through  the
appellant's account of each individual detention  and  give  fully  reasoned
findings for each incident, it is clear from her findings  at  paragraphs  9
and 10 that she did not accept any of his claim, including that relating  to
his political activities and his periods  of  detention.  She  rejected  the
core of his claim, for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  at
paragraphs 31 and 52, which she found to be cogent and sustainable, and  for
the reasons she subsequently set out herself, albeit such reasons  referring
explicitly to only the first and last detention  but  clearly  including  by
implication the second detention. She found, at paragraph 10.4,  that  there
was no medical evidence to support  his  claim  to  have  been  tortured  in
detention and at paragraph 10.6 she did not accept the letter  from  his  GP
with regard to his psychological state as evidence of  torture.  Those  were
conclusions that she was entitled to reach.

With regard to the appellant's political activities the judge gave  reasons,
at paragraph 10.5, for attaching  no  weight  to  the  documentary  evidence
relating to his claimed membership of the BDP and those  reasons  were  open
to her on the evidence before her. Paragraph 12 of the grounds asserts  that
the judge's rejection of that evidence was irrational, but that  is  clearly
not the case and the grounds in that  respect  amount  to  no  more  than  a
disagreement with the judge's findings. Ms  Thirumaney  submitted  that  the
judge had only considered the documentary evidence relating to the  BDP  and
not the appellant's activities for the BDP.  However  her  findings  on  the
documentary evidence relied upon by the appellant  to  support  his  alleged
activities were clearly relevant to her findings  on  his  involvement  with
the party overall, in particular when considering her comment  at  paragraph
10.5 that they had been produced "only to gild  the  lily  of  incredulity".
Such findings, when taken together with the judge's reference  at  paragraph
9 to the cogent reasons  given  in  the  refusal  letter,  provide  adequate
reasons for reaching the conclusion that she  did,  such  conclusions  being
reasonably open to her on the basis of the  findings made  at  paragraph  33
of the refusal letter. Although the judge made no explicit reference to  the
appellant's response, in his witness  statement,  to  paragraph  33  of  the
refusal letter, it is  clear  from  her  comments  at  paragraph  6  of  her
determination and her record of the evidence that she  had  that  mind  when
concluding that the respondent's reasons were sustainable.

The grounds assert that there was procedural unfairness on the part  of  the
judge in that she raised a point against the appellant, namely  his  failure
to leave Turkey after his first arrest, without it having been  put  to  him
first as an issue of concern. However whilst, as Ms  Horsley  accepted,  the
judge ought arguably not to have relied upon a new issue without giving  the
appellant an opportunity to address  it,  I  do  not  consider  that  to  be
material to her adverse findings, given that other reasons  were  given  for
not accepting his account of his first detention  at  paragraph  35  of  the
refusal letter  which  the  judge  clearly  endorsed  as  being  cogent  and
sustainable.

 It is asserted in the third  ground  that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
family tree produced by the appellant was irrational and  flawed  since  her
concerns were not put to the appellant at the hearing and since  the  source
of such evidence was referred to extensively in IK. However in my  view  the
judge's findings in that regard cannot be said to be  irrational  or  unfair
and that they were open to her. She was entitled to place  the  weight  that
she did upon the family tree for the  reasons  she  gave  and  it  does  not
appear to be the case that she was referred  to  the  provisions  in  IK  in
which mention was made as to the source of such information. In  any  event,
nothing material arises from the judge's findings  in  that  respect,  given
that she went on to make findings in  the  alternative  if  the  appellant's
relationship to Kemal was accepted.

Those findings, at paragraph 10.2, are the subject of the fourth  ground  of
appeal, where it is asserted that the  judge  misconstrued  the  appellant's
case. The appellant's case, it is claimed, was that he was  of  interest  to
the Turkish authorities, leading to his arrest in October 2011,  because  of
perceived links to the PKK arising out of his visit to his  cousin  in  June
and July 2011, and not simply because he was related to Kemal.  However  the
appellant's claim in that respect was specifically dealt with  and  rejected
by the respondent at the end of paragraph 38 of  the  refusal  letter,  such
reasoning then being endorsed by the judge, as cogent  and  sustainable,  at
paragraph 9 of her determination. The findings she specifically set  out  at
paragraph 10.2 were supplementary to those in the refusal  letter  and  were
in any event not entirely  irrelevant  to  the  scenario  described  by  the
appellant. She did not find it credible that the authorities would not  have
known about Kemal's relatives and questioned them in  the  preceding  years,
had they  had  any  concerns  about  their  links  to  the  PKK.  The  clear
implication from those findings being that  she  did  not  accept  that  the
authorities would have suspected the appellant of links to  the  PKK  simply
by reason of him visiting his cousin in July 2011.  That  was  a  conclusion
that was open to  her  to  make  on  the  evidence  and  was  one  that  was
reasonably drawn from the information and evidence before her.

Finally, the fifth ground  asserts  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
consider the appellant's case in line  with  the  country  guidance  in  IK.
However  the  judge  had  regard  to  that  case  at  paragraph  5  of   her
determination and, given the adverse credibility findings  she  made,  there
was  nothing  in  the  appellant's  profile  that  could  have  led  to  any
conclusion other than the one  she  reached  in  assessing  risk  on  return
within that guidance.

Taking the judge's decision as a whole, I find that it  contains  adequately
reasoned and sustainable findings of  fact  on  all  relevant  and  material
issues,  based  upon  an  assessment  of  the  evidence  going  beyond  mere
endorsement of the refusal letter. Whilst it  may  not  be  the  most  well-
reasoned and  well-written  determination,  it  adequately  deals  with  the
relevant issues and contains conclusions reasonably open  to  the  judge  on
the evidence before her. It does not contain errors of law  and  accordingly
I do not set aside the  decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.



                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
