
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13696/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2017                   |On 25 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     EH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms J Blair, Counsel instructed by Islington Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 28 August 1997 who
      entered the UK on 27 July 2014 and shortly thereafter claimed asylum.
      On 11 December 2015 the respondent refused his application.  The
      appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge O'Flynn. In a decision promulgated on 16 March 2016 Judge
      O'Flynn dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now appealing against
      that decision.

   2. The basis of the appellant's claim to asylum is that he is at risk in
      Albania from men to whom his father owes money. He claims that:

   a. In early 2014 three armed and masked men came to his house, located in
      Kamez which is a part of Tirana, demanding repayment of the debt from
      his father. When his father said he was unable to give them money they
      ransacked the house, beat his father, and threatened to kill him or
      his father.

   b. He gave up school to help earn money for the family. He initially
      worked as a waiter locally but gave up the job as he feared being
      recognised by the money lenders.

   c. He began working in a car wash located about half an hour's bus ride
      from where he lived. About a month after commencing work he was
      approached by some men in a car, whilst walking home from work, who
      threatened to kill him if he did not repay his father's debt. Whilst
      he was being threatened police passed by but did nothing.

   d. Three or four months after starting to work in the car wash the men
      came to his home again where they threatened him and his father.

   e. The appellant took his siblings to stay with a maternal aunt in
      Tropje, which is where he was born. He then left Albania as he feared
      his life was in danger.

   3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant experienced any
      problems in Albania as a result of his father's debt. Moreover, the
      respondent stated that even if the appellant's claim was accepted at
      its highest he would still not be entitled to a grant of asylum or
      humanitarian protection because (a) the Albanian state is able to
      provide him with sufficient protection; and (b) it would not be
      unreasonable for him to relocate to another part of Albania. The
      respondent also considered, and rejected, the appellant's claim that
      his removal would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   4. The judge found that the appellant was telling the truth and accepted
      his account as set out above in paragraph [2]. However, he dismissed
      the asylum appeal for two reasons: firstly, he found that there was
      sufficient protection for the appellant in Albania; and secondly, he
      found that the appellant could relocate internally.

   5. In respect of sufficiency of protection, the judge quoted from the US
      Overseas Security Advisory Council Report on Albania (2015) and a 2010
      Home Office report and then stated, at paragraph [33], that:

         "Taking into account all the background information, I am of the
         view that there is a functioning police service present in Albania,
         although they are susceptible to corruption, However, whilst it is
         true that some corruption, inefficiency and incompetence on the
         part of individual members of the police, prosecution or justice
         system does exist, it does not demonstrate a systemic or
         institutionalised unwillingness to afford protection to the victims
         of persecution by non state actors."

   6. The judge noted, at paragraph [34], that the appellant had not
      approached the authorities and found that the incident the appellant
      described of the police not intervening when he was threatened was not
      illustrative of a lack of protection as it was not clear what the
      police saw and he had not reported an incident.

   7. The judge concluded at paragraph [35]:

         "I am satisfied that the appellant has failed to reach the standard
         to  satisfy me that there is not a sufficiency of state protection
         particularly in view of the fact that he has failed to approach
         them"

   8. The judge then briefly considered internal relocation. At paragraph
      [36] he stated that:

         "according to the appellant's own evidence, the only part of
         Albania he fears returning to is his home area in Kamez,
         Tirana....Indeed, he specifically said that he gave up working in
         the coffee shop in Kamez because he felt safer working at the car
         wash, some half an hour away, in Tirana. In the circumstances, I am
         satisfied that the appellant has not demonstrated that internal
         relocation is not a viable option. "

   9. Having found that the appellant could not succeed in his protection
      claim, the judge turned to consider Article 8 of the ECHR. He found
      that the appellant was unable to meet the requirements of Appendix FM
      or Paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules "for the perfectly valid
      reasons advanced by the Secretary of State in the letter of refusal."



  10. The judge then considered whether there were compelling reasons to
      allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.
      He noted the appellant has a girlfriend but that she did not give
      evidence at the hearing. He also considered the medical information
      before him about the appellant's mental and physical health
      (paragraphs [54-56]).  Having applied Section 117 of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the judge concluded that the
      appellant had not shown circumstances that were sufficiently
      compelling to warrant a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

  11. The appellant makes three arguments. These are set out in the grounds
      of appeal and in Ms Blair's skeleton argument.

  12. The first argument concerns the judge's finding that there would be
      sufficiency of protection. Ms Blair contends that the judge placed
      significant weight on the appellant's failure to approach the police
      without taking into account that as a child at the time it was
      understandable he did not do so. She argued that, as the appellant was
      a child, greater weight should have been placed on objective
      indicators of risk rather than his conduct. She also argued that the
      judge had failed to take into account relevant Country Guidance case
      law on the issue of whether there is effective state protection from
      organised criminals in Albania: EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]
      UKUT 00348 (IAC) and AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010]
      UKUT 80 (IAC).

  13. The second argument concerns the judge's finding that the appellant
      could locate internally. Ms Blair maintains that the judge failed to
      apply the correct test, which is whether internal relocation would be
      unreasonable or unduly harsh, and failed to consider the objective
      evidence about the difficulties of relocating within Albania, as
      highlighted, inter alia, in EH and AM and BM.

  14. The appellant's third argument is that the judge erred in his
      assessment of the appellant's claimed private life in the UK by not
      making specific findings about the obstacles the appellant, who has
      health and other difficulties, would face on return, which is the
      relevant consideration under Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
      Immigration Rules.

  15. Mr Nath argued that the judge took into account that the appellant was
      a child, gave proper consideration to the objective country evidence
      and applied the correct legal tests in respect of sufficiency of
      protection and internal relocation.

Consideration

  16. For the reasons set out below, I am satisfied that the judge has not
      made a material error of law and that the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal should stand.

Sufficiency of Protection

  17. The test of whether there is sufficient protection is that set out in
      the well known House of Lords judgment of Horvath 2000 UKHL 37 and as
      summarised by Auld LJ in Bagdanavicius v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1605
      where he stated:

         "55.(2) An asylum seeker who claims to be in fear of persecution is
         entitled to asylum if he can show a well-founded fear of
         persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that there would be
         insufficiency of state protection to meet it; Horvath.

         3) Fear of persecution is well-founded if there is a "reasonable
         degree of likelihood" that it will materialise; R v. SSHD, ex p.
         Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per Lord Goff at 1000F-G;

         4) Sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents or
         non-state actors, means a willingness and ability on the part of
         the receiving state to provide through its legal system a
         reasonable level of protection from ill-treatment of which the
         claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear; Osman, Horvath, Dhima.

         5) The effectiveness of the system provided is to be judged
         normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent the
         form of persecution of which there is a risk, not just punishment
         of it after the event; Horvath; Banomova. McPherson and Kinuthia.

         6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in the
         receiving state, a claimant may still have a well-founded fear of
         persecution if he can show that its authorities know or ought to
         know of circumstances particular to his case giving rise to his
         fear, but are unlikely to provide the additional protection his
         particular circumstances reasonably require; Osman."

  18. The objective evidence about Albania that was before, and available
      to, the First-tier Tribunal supports the judge's finding that there is
      sufficient state protection for an individual in the appellant's
      circumstances.

  19. The judge cited and relied on reports of The US Overseas Security
      Advisory Council Report on Albania (2015) and the UK Home Office (July
      2010), both of which are consistent with the conclusion that there is,
      generally, Horvath level state protection in Albania.

  20. Ms Blair argued that Country Guidance cases on Albania indicate there
      may not be sufficient state protection for the appellant. I disagree.
      In AM and BM, the panel found, at paragraph [182], that

         "We accept that there is considerable corruption in Albania but we
         conclude that the steps taken by the Albanian authorities are
         sufficient to meet the standard of a sufficiency of protection from
         re-trafficking from "new" traffickers as set out in the judgment of
         Lord Clyde in Horvath".

  21. The panel proceeded to consider the risk faced by woman at risk from
      former traffickers and family members, in light of societal attitudes
      about woman who have been trafficked, where individual factors, such
      as whether the trafficked woman has an illegitimate child, would need
      to be taken into account. The factors that would inhibit access to
      state protection for a woman at risk of re-trafficking are far removed
      from those of the appellant and there is nothing in AM and BM that
      indicates there would not be sufficient state protection for a person
      in the appellant's circumstances.

  22. The case law on blood feuds also does not help the appellant. The
      guidance in EH is that the Albanian state has taken steps to improve
      state protection but those steps do not provide protection in areas
      where Kanun law predominates (particularly in Northern Albania). Even
      if, by analogy, it could be argued that the threat to the appellant is
      analogous to a blood feud, the finding in EH is that there is,
      generally, sufficiency of protection in places where Kanun law does
      not predominate, such as Tirana.

  23. Ms Blair argues that the judge placed too great an emphasis on the
      appellant failing to approach the police given that he was a child at
      the time. It does seem that the judge placed significant emphasis on
      the appellant's failure to contact the police and there is some merit
      to Ms Blair's criticism of this. However, if the judge has made an
      error it is not a material one. The objective evidence about Albania,
      both in the reports referred to by the judge and in the extant
      Albanian Country Guidance cases, supports the view that there is
      sufficiency of protection for a person in the appellant's position.

  24. Accordingly, it is irrelevant that the appellant did not go to the
      police or that his decision to not do so might be because he was a
      minor at the time. Whatever action the appellant did or did not take
      does not change the fact that, applying the Horvath standard, there is
      sufficient state protection in Tirana for a person in the appellant's
      circumstances.

Internal Relocation

  25. The applicable test where internal relocation is considered is
      whether, taking all of the circumstances relevant to the appellant
      into consideration, it is reasonable to expect him to relocate or
      whether it would be unduly harsh for him to do so. See AH (Sudan)
      [2007] UKHL 49.

  26. The judge reached the conclusion that internal relocation was a
      "viable option" on the basis that the appellant could relocate safely.
      That is a necessary finding, but it is not sufficient - the judge must
      also consider whether relocation would be unduly harsh.  By failing to
      apply the correct legal test the judge has made an error of law.

  27. There is also an error in the judge's approach to the evidence. The
      judge concludes internal relocation is viable because the appellant
      felt safer working at a car wash half an hour from his home. However,
      the appellant's evidence, which was accepted by the judge, was that he
      was threatened on his way home from the car wash.

  28. A proper consideration of internal relocation would have explored
      whether it would have been both safe and not unduly harsh for the
      appellant to relocate to another area in Albania outside of Tirana,
      such as (for example) Tropje, where he took his siblings and where it
      might be thought that he would be beyond the reach of the men/gang
      owed money by his father. No such assessment is included in the
      decision.

  29. Although the judge has made an error of law in his assessment of
      internal relocation, the error is not material because if there is
      sufficient state protection for the appellant in Albania (which, for
      the reasons I have given, the judge was entitled to find) then there
      is no need for him to relocate.

Article 8 ECHR

  30. In order for the appellant to succeed under the Immigration Rules he
      would need to show that there are very significant obstacles to his
      integration into Albania (Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)).

  31. The test of "very significant obstacles" is a stringent one. As the
      Upper Tribunal recently stated in Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002
      Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) "Mere
      hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and mere
      inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test
      of "very significant hurdles" in paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration
      Rules."

  32. Given my findings above about the availability of state protection to
      the appellant, there are not significant, and certainly not very
      significant, obstacles to his integration into Albania. The appellant
      speaks Albanian, has spent most of his life in Albania and is familiar
      with Albanian culture and society. He has some medical problems (panic
      disorder, anxiety, depression and some physical symptoms such as
      increased heart beat and sweaty hands) but there was no evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest these could not be managed
      in Albania. Indeed, the judge refers at paragraph [54] to the WHO-AIMS
      Report on Mental Health Systems in Albania as indicating suitable
      treatment is available.

  33. Nor is there merit to the argument that the judge erred by finding the
      appellant could not succeed under Article 8 outwith the Immigration
      Rules. The judge has carried out a proportionality assessment having
      regard to the mandated factors set out in the Nationality, Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 and has given clear reasons why he finds there are
      not compelling circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the
      Rules.

  34. I am satisfied that removing the appellant to Albania would not
      contravene Article 8 ECHR and that the judge, for the reasons given in
      the decision, was entitled to so find.

Summary

  35. Although judge made an error of law in his consideration of whether
      the appellant can be expected to relocate internally within Albania
      this error is not material because the judge did not make an error of
      law in finding that there is sufficient protection for the appellant
      in Albania. If there is sufficient protection, then there is no need
      for the appellant to relocate, internally or otherwise.

  36. For the reasons set out in paragraphs [30] - [34] I have found that
      the judge did not make an error of law in the assessment of the
      appellant's human rights claim made pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.



Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

B. The appeal is dismissed.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 24 January 2017               |






























