

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13254/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 11 August 2016                           |On : 15 August 2016          |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  neli [u]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Georgia born  on  [  ]  1983,  arrived  in  the
United Kingdom on 8 August 2014 with a tourist visa expiring on  14  January
2015. On 23 February 2015 she made an appointment to claim  asylum  and  did
so formally on 4 March 2015. She was  interviewed  about  her  asylum  claim
which was then refused  on  13  November  2015.  She  appealed  against  the
refusal decision. Her appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on  3  May
2016 and dismissed. Following an unsuccessful application for permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal, permission was granted in the  Upper  Tribunal
on 11 July 2016.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant is a Yazidi Kurd. Her claim is that her  father  had,  several
years previously, agreed with his brother that she would marry his son  [Y],
who was a convicted murderer and had been sentenced to 15  years  in  prison
in Georgia. She was unaware of  the  arrangement  until  the  day  of  their
engagement, in June 2014, when her father told her about  it  and  told  her
that she had no say in the matter.  She  also  referred  to  the  engagement
party being in June 2013. She was due to get married to [Y] in October  2014
after he came out of prison. In the meantime the appellant met  her  current
partner and father of her child, [ON], in 2003 (or 2007) and  they  kept  in
touch secretly and continued to keep in touch after [ON] came to the  UK  in
2010. After the engagement party she was  so  depressed  that  she  took  an
overdose of tablets and had to have her  stomach  pumped  in  hospital.  Her
sister then made arrangements for her to leave Georgia and come  to  the  UK
and she went to the British Embassy to have her photograph and  fingerprints
taken. She did not return home  to  her  father  after  that  and  she  left
Georgia on 8 August 2014 on her own passport with a visitor visa.  When  she
arrived in the UK, [ON], who was in the UK as an asylum seeker, took her  to
live with his friends. His family did not know about her, but when  she  was
pregnant with his child he told his family who were  initially  unhappy  but
were subsequently supportive. Since coming to the UK  her  sister  had  told
her that her family was looking for her. She could not return to Georgia  as
she would be killed by her father for dishonouring the family  by  having  a
child and not marrying her cousin.

The respondent, in refusing the  appellant's  claim  on  13  November  2015,
accepted that the appellant was in a relationship with [ON] in  the  UK  and
that they had a child together, [C], born on [ ] 2015, but  did  not  accept
that she had met [ON] in Georgia in  the  circumstances  claimed,  owing  to
various inconsistencies and discrepancies in  her  account.  The  respondent
did not accept the appellant's account of her  engagement  to  her  paternal
cousin, as it was inconsistent with the background information which  stated
that Yazidi girls usually married at the age of 13 whereas she was 30 or  31
when she was told about the proposed marriage.  The  respondent  noted  that
the appellant's passport was issued  in  April  2014,  which  pre-dated  her
claim of having been told of her engagement in June 2014. It was noted  that
she had used a previous passport to travel to Bulgaria in  August  2009  for
tourism, but that was inconsistent with her  claim  that  her  parents  were
traditional and that  she  led  an  unsheltered  and  uneducated  life.  The
respondent noted that the appellant had given  inconsistent  dates  for  her
engagement, that she had named a different person  as  her  partner  in  her
visa application form and that her Facebook profile indicated that  she  had
a good relationship with her brother and that her  sister  openly  supported
her family in the UK contrary to her claim. As  such  it  was  not  accepted
that she was engaged to her paternal cousin or  that  she  was  at  risk  of
forced marriage or honour killing in Georgia.


The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by  Designated  Judge
Manuell and First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego sitting as a panel. The  panel
heard from the appellant, her  partner  [ON]  and  [ON]'s  father  [GN]  and
considered a country expert report from Mr William  Dunbar.  The  panel  did
not find the appellant's claim to be credible. The panel  found  that  parts
of the appellant's evidence were inconsistent with the expert  report;  that
it was implausible that she would put herself at risk by communicating  with
her sister and sister-in-law through Facebook on her  father's  computer  if
she feared her father and  brother;  that  she  had  given  an  inconsistent
account of her journey to the UK and the arrangements made for the  journey;
that the evidence indicated that the appellant's relationship with [ON]  was
well-established in  Georgia;  and  that  the  appellant's  account  of  her
engagement was inconsistent with the objective evidence as  to  the  age  of
Yazidi community arranged marriages.  The  panel  also  relied  on  numerous
other  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  and   rejected   the
explanations given by the appellant for  those  inconsistencies.  The  panel
concluded that the appellant had arrived on a visit visa  not  intending  to
return to Georgia but intending to live permanently in  the  UK  with  [ON].
They rejected the remainder of her account and found that she would  not  be
at risk in Georgia and could return there with  [ON]  and  their  child  and
that their removal would not breach their human rights.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the panel had  failed  fully  and  properly  to
consider the expert report which found the appellant's claim  to  be  wholly
plausible,  and  had  failed  properly  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
appellant and the witnesses.

Permission was initially refused, but was subsequently granted on a  renewed
application on 11 July 2016.


Appeal Hearing

Mr Murphy submitted that the fact that the  expert  had  said  that  "honour
killings" were unknown in Georgia did not mean that the appellant's  account
was untruthful, as was the  panel's  conclusion  at  [67].  The  expert  had
otherwise confirmed that the situation regarding violence against  women  in
Georgia was dire and that the appellant's account, of having  brought  shame
on her family and risked being beaten by her father, was credible.  Although
the panel relied upon the expert's view that  the  police  in  Georgia  were
trustworthy, the report also highlighted the fact that there was  inadequate
protection offered by the police in the  case  of  violence  against  women,
which the panel failed to take into account.  The  panel  had  also  wrongly
found the evidence to be contradictory in regard to the appellant's  marital
status, whereas the expert had properly found that  the  appellant  and  her
partner were unmarried and would be at  risk  in  Georgia  as  an  unmarried
couple with a child. The panel had been wrong to  find  that  the  witnesses
had exaggerated the risk. The panel had  relied  upon  a  list  of  negative
factors  in  rejecting  the  appellant's  account,  some   of   which   were
unsustainable, whereas the core of her account was credible, as  the  expert
had accepted.

In response, Mr Tufan submitted that it  was  not  for  the  expert  to  say
whether the appellant's account was credible. The panel had  considered  the
expert report at several points in their decision and were not  required  to
accept everything that the expert said. There were  significant  credibility
concerns in the appellant's case and the panel had  been  entitled  to  make
the adverse credibility findings that they did.


In response Mr Murphy reiterated the points previously  made  and  submitted
that the expert had been entitled to find  the  appellant's  account  to  be
credible to the extent that it fitted within the  background  evidence.  The
panel had been wrong to find that the appellant had exaggerated her  account
and had wrongly directed themselves.

Consideration and findings

The grounds take issue with the panel's conclusions on the expert's  report,
submitting that the expert's views that  honour  killings  were  unknown  in
Georgia,  that  there  was  no  risk  of  physical  violence   towards   the
appellant's child and that the police were trustworthy were  wrongly  relied
upon  by  the  panel  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's   account   was
untruthful.  It  is  asserted  that  in  fact  the  expert  had  found   the
appellant's  account  of  the  threat  of  violence  from  her  father   and
inadequate police protection to be consistent with the country  information,
particularly where the affairs of an  ethnic  minority  group  such  as  the
Yazidis was concerned.

However all three witnesses, in  their  statements,  clearly  described  the
risk to the appellant  in  terms  of  honour  killing,  with  the  appellant
stating at [7] of her statement that her  family  would  kill  her  and  her
daughter if she did not marry her cousin since she had brought dishonour  on
them. At [9] of his statement, the appellant's partner also spoke of  honour
and tradition, as did his father at [6] of his statement. Whilst it  is  the
case that the expert considered the appellant's  account  to  be  consistent
with the prevalence of violence against women in  Georgia,  the  panel  were
entitled to consider the witness's emphasis on  the  question  of  tradition
and honour and the suggestion that the appellant's daughter would be  killed
as being to some extent inconsistent with the country information  described
by the expert.


It is also asserted on behalf of the appellant that the panel were wrong  to
criticise the expert at [67] for considering  that  the  appellant  and  her
partner faced a risk on return as an unmarried couple when they were  indeed
unmarried. However it seems to me that the  panel  were  entitled  to  place
weight upon the fact that the appellant described  herself  as  married  (Mr
Tufan referred to  question  72  of  the  appellant's  interview  where  she
described [ON] as her husband) and that all three witnesses  considered  her
to be married in the eyes of  the  Yazidi  and  to  therefore  consider  the
expert's conclusions in that context.


In any event, what is clear from the panel's  decision  is  that  they  gave
full and careful consideration to the expert report. It is also  clear  that
the expert report went no  further  than  concluding  that  the  appellant's
account was plausible and  consistent  with  the  country  information.  The
report did not address the many other concerns which  the  panel  had  about
the appellant's account.


At  [68]  to  [85]  the  panel  referred  to  numerous   discrepancies   and
inconsistencies in the appellant's account and in the evidence of the  three
witnesses. At [68], [69] and [85] the panel considered  the  evidence  about
the appellant communicating with her partner and her sister  and  sister-in-
law via Facebook on her father's computer to be entirely  inconsistent  with
the background information on  literacy  and  gender  roles  in  the  Yazidi
community and inconsistent with her claim to be in fear of  her  father  and
brother.  At  [70]  to  [73]  and  [75]  to  [79]  the  panel  referred   to
inconsistences in the evidence about  the  appellant's  travel  arrangements
and journey to the UK, and her communication with her sister.  At  [80]  the
panel referred to the appellant's account of  her  arranged  marriage  being
inconsistent with the background information about marriages in  the  Yazidi
community. Other adverse points were made at [83] and [84].  None  of  these
matters are addressed in the expert report or  challenged  in  the  grounds,
but they were all matters which the panel were  entitled  to  rely  upon  as
giving rise to serious concerns about the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
claim.


In addition the panel, at  [74],  identified  specific  inconsistencies  and
direct contradictions in the accounts given by the  appellant.  The  grounds
address some of these inconsistencies and attempt to provide an  explanation
for them, and rely also upon the  explanations  offered  by  the  appellant.
However the panel considered the explanations given  by  the  appellant,  at
[74], and gave cogent reasons for rejecting them.


In  light  of   these   numerous   and   significant   inconsistencies   and
discrepancies in the evidence the panel were entirely entitled  to  conclude
that the appellant's claim was not a credible  one.  At  [87]  to  [89]  the
panel set out the only facts that they were able to accept.  They  concluded
that it had always been the intention for the appellant to join her  partner
in the UK and to remain here permanently and that the  rest  of  the  claim,
namely the account of her engagement to her cousin and the threats from  her
family, were simply not  true.  They  concluded  that  the  appellant  could
return to Georgia with her partner and child and would  be  at  no  risk  on
return. Those conclusions were entirely and properly open  to  them  on  the
evidence before them, took full account of the expert report and  background
country  information,  and  were  fully  supported  by  clear   and   cogent
reasoning.

For all of these reasons I find that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  do
not disclose any errors of law in the panel's decision.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.






         Signed                                  Date 15/08/2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
