
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13338/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 24 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     A N
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and  it  publicity
    might create a risk for her that would not otherwise exist.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Uganda  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing her asylum, humanitarian  protection  or  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal was given by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson,  who
    said:

  "The claim is based upon a real risk on return as a lesbian.

  The grounds assert the Judge 'closed his mind' to the credibility of  the
  claim in  relation  to  sexual  identity  as  a  result  of  the  adverse
  credibility findings made in relation to the claim relating to events  in
  Uganda.  It is also  asserted  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
  evidence from Ms Jo Foster and failed to give adequate reasons."

 4. In order to explain my decision, I summarise Ms Peterson's arguments as
    being the contention that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding  that
    the appellant is not in fact gay showed unlawfully  little  regard  for
    apparently credible and informed independent  evidence  supporting  her
    case.

 5. With that introduction in mind I now consider the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.

 6. He began by noting that the appellant had applied for  entry  clearance
    as a visitor in March 2004.  She said that  she  wanted  to  visit  her
    brother N... M... and when she listed her family members at  an  asylum
    interview N... M... was not mentioned.

 7. On 16 January 2006 she applied for admission as the family member of an
    EEA national when she identified her brother as M... B...  She produced
    correspondence purportedly from her brother in which he signed  himself
    Uncle M.  She made a further application for a family  visitor  in  May
    2012 when M... B... was again identified as her  brother  and  sponsor.
    In support of that application she said that she was  a  married  woman
    with two children who would remain  in  Uganda  when  she  visited  her
    brother.

 8. She supported the application with a  marriage  certificate  and  birth
    certificates for the two children.   Her  appeal  against  refusal  was
    supported by an argument in which she asserted that she had a  job  and
    family in Uganda.  This claim was expressly supported  by  her  brother
    M... B... in a statement relied on at the appeal.  A witness identified
    as M... B... gave evidence at an appeal hearing and repeated  that  the
    appellant had a husband, children and a  job  in  Uganda.   He  had  an
    explanation for being known as "Uncle M" which the Tribunal doubted but
    the appeal was  allowed  because  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had a family life and a job in Uganda.

 9. Her alleged brother was unable to explain in answer to explain why  the
    applicant had said  untruthfully  that  she  had  not  previously  been
    refused a visa.

10. In her claim for asylum she said that she feared serious  ill-treatment
    because she is a lesbian.

11. She explained how she had become attracted to women  as  an  adolescent
    and had her first relationship with one H... S... while studying at  an
    educational institute.

12. She told her mother about her feelings.  The news  was  received  badly
    and relationships within the family began to break down.  She explained
    how her brother M had encouraged her by  providing  a  home  where  she
    could stay for a while and suggested that she  should  run  away.   She
    removed with her lover to a  village  but  was  traced  and  they  were
    attacked and beaten.  She was threatened with  death  if  she  did  not
    renounce her relationship.  Her documents including  her  passport  and
    photographs were destroyed.  She and her lover  ran  away.   They  lost
    contact on the night they ran off.   The  appellant  got  a  job  as  a
    housemaid for three years.

13. Her claim was supported with a statement from  her  brother  M...  B...
    that he had invited her to the United Kingdom to help her escape.

14. The appellant relied on an expert report  (curiously  described  as  an
    'Expert' Report in the Decision and Reasons) by one Dr Phyllis  Turvill
    prepared under the auspices of the Helen Bamber Foundation.

15. It was Dr Turvill's opinion that there were marks  on  the  appellant's
    body "consistent with" that attribution given to them by the appellant,
    and certain  others  were  "highly  consistent"  with  the  appellant's
    attribution."  The  Judge  noted  that  this  led  the  doctor  to  the
    conclusion that the overall scarring "accords with the account" given.

16. The Judge noted that in the account given to the doctor  the  appellant
    had said that she was the youngest of a large family consisting of four
    sisters and four brothers.  During  her  screening  interview  she  had
    referred to only three brothers and two sisters.  She had been asked to
    set out their names and dates of birth.

17. The Judge then noted the appellant's  bundle  of  documents  comprising
    witness statements.  The Judge did not believe that the appellant was a
    lesbian or that she had been persecuted for being a lesbian in Uganda.

18. The Judge noted that it was the essence of the  appellant's  case  that
    with the person known as M...  B...  and  described  variously  as  her
    brother and uncle she had conspired to, and did, obtain entry clearance
    as a visitor as a consequence of a very detailed application  supported
    by a range of forged documents  purporting  to  show  that  she  had  a
    husband and children in  Uganda.  One  of  the  documents  is  a  sworn
    statement that the appellant intended to return to Uganda at the end of
    the visit.  It was also an apparently clear  fact  in  the  case  that,
    notwithstanding the claim now made that the basis  of  entry  into  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor was an  application  devised  for  her  own
    protection, the appellant did not claim asylum on arrival in the United
    Kingdom in February 2013 but she waited until April 2013.

19. Additionally the Judge noted what he described  as  the  appellant  not
    being "consistent in the account that  she  has  given  of  her  sexual
    history".  She had said  in  her  asylum  interview  that  she  had  an
    intimate relationship when she was at school with a  girl  called  S...
    and had said in her statement that her first relationship  was  at  the
    vocational institute with one H...  The girl S..., allegedly her  first
    intimate partner, was not mentioned in  either  her  statement  or  her
    interview with the Helen Bamber Foundation.

20. The Judge also found the appellant incredible  because  she  could  not
    remember when she was attacked and beaten.  It  was  the  Judge's  view
    that she would have been able to remember at least  approximately  when
    such a significant event took place.

21. He also found parts of the account  of  her  attack  to  be  inherently
    unbelievable and he explained this view.

22. The Judge then found an inconsistency between the appellant  saying  in
    her witness statement that her family had disowned her because she  had
    "come out" at a time when,  according  to  the  appellant,  her  "Uncle
    Michael" was in contact with her.

23. The Judge then considered the appellant's alleged relationship with one
    H... R...  The appellant said that she had met H... R... when  she  was
    at Yarl's Wood and that they had had a sexual relationship  "it  turned
    out from the Appellant's oral evidence, that she had only spent a  long
    weekend with H".  The appellant had referred to  staying  in  the  same
    house as H... R... for four days but in H... R...'s statement H... R...
    had said that the relationship had lasted for more than six months  and
    they did spend four days together.

24. The Judge accepted that some sexual relations had taken place  but  did
    not accept that the appellant was a lesbian.  The Judge clearly thought
    it possible that the appellant had staged a sexual encounter with  H...
    R... to bolster her case.

25. The Judge then considered the evidence of one Jo Foster, who works as a
    counsellor with a lesbian support group known as "Women  on  Women"  or
    "WoW".  He was impressed with Jo Foster, describing her as  a  "totally
    genuine witness" and according to the Judge's note she had said  "I  am
    not aware of any relationship the appellant has had  with  women  other
    than friendship within the group".

26. This was clearly used as one  of  the  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant had not shown herself to be a lesbian.

27. It is the main contention of  the  appellant  that  this  part  of  the
    decision does not consider properly the evidence of Jo Foster.  It will
    not be possible to ascertain now precisely what Ms Foster  may  or  not
    have said in answer to questions but her written statement is before me
    in  the  form  of  a  letter.   She  refers  there  to  the   appellant
    contemplating killing herself "because  she  is  a  gay  woman".   Read
    strictly, this could be no  more  than  Ms  Foster  recording  how  the
    appellant described herself.  It does not strictly show that Ms  Foster
    endorsed that description.  However, later in the statement  Ms  Foster
    said: "I hope too that she will be able to fully be herself  as  a  gay
    woman and allow some part of these wounds she has experienced to heal".
     I cannot read that without concluding that Ms  Foster  identified  the
    appellant as a gay woman and formed  that  view  after  some  prolonged
    detailed contact.

28. Further, she says in the statement that she understood the appellant to
    have gone to a "LGBT Positive Church in Manchester when she went  there
    with her girlfriend in November 2013, who she had met in Yarl's Wood."

29. The Judge said at paragraph 66 of his decision:

  "I find it significant that the appellant does not  necessarily  remember
  certain other members of the group with whom she has  been  photographed,
  and that the witness, Miss Jo Foster, did not  actually  state  that  she
  knew the appellant to be a lesbian."

30. It is not immediately clear to me how anyone can "know"  the  sexuality
    of another human being.  At the very highest a person might be able  to
    comment on part of it.  Ms Peterson emphasised, and she was right, that
    Ms Foster is an apparently credible and experienced witness and  it  is
    impossible to read her statement without seeing it as an endorsement of
    the appellant's claim to be gay.

31. It was also a generally supporting statement signed by  several  people
    from WoW.  This has not been mentioned expressly.

32. The essence of the appeal before me is  that  although  the  Judge  has
    given many reasons for disbelieving the appellant he has not had proper
    regard to the potentially crucial witness evidence from Jo Foster.   He
    has misunderstood that evidence.  Contrary to the  decision  Jo  Foster
    did know that the appellant had a gay girlfriend outside the friendship
    group at WoW and did endorse her claim to be gay.

33. It is trite law that the appellant might be both a liar and a  refugee.
    Without wishing to bind any future decision maker, if the appellant  in
    fact is gay her claim to be at risk of persecution in Uganda will  have
    to be taken very seriously.

34. Although I have listened carefully to Mr  Armstrong's  submissions  and
    read the determination carefully because that is the key to it  all,  I
    have to find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in  law.   Although
    there are lawful reasons given for disbelieving the appellant  in  many
    respects the evidence that matters here, arguably, is not the  evidence
    of the appellant at all but the evidence  of  Jo  Foster.   Jo  Foster,
    contrary to the findings of the Judge, as  I  read  her  evidence,  did
    state that she knew the appellant to be a lesbian.  She  had  not  used
    those words but she described  her  as  being  "gay"  and  one  of  the
    references, as I read the evidence, was not  simply  quoting  what  the
    appellant had said but indicating her own view.  Jo Foster is not  only
    credible but also experienced.  I am satisfied that the  Judge  mangled
    her evidence and the consequence is that the decision is unsound and  I
    set it aside.

35. It will have to be heard again.  The fact that the First-tier  Tribunal
    has, in my judgment, given proper reasons for  making  general  adverse
    credibility findings is not binding.  Credibility assessments  need  to
    be made in the round and when the case  is  heard  again  none  of  the
    existing findings will be carried forward.

36. I make it clear that if Ms Foster is called to give evidence the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge will not have to find her a credible witness and it
    is entirely rational to find a witness to be truthful but  wrong.   The
    difficulty here is that she has not been found to be wrong but she  has
    been misunderstood and I cannot avoid finding that this undermines  the
    determination as a whole.

37. Having found an error of law I cannot remedy it.  The case  has  to  be
    heard again and as the effect of my decision is that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was unfair it needs to go back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be decided again.

Notice of Decision

38. The appeal is allowed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 November 2016               |







