

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13864/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2016                            |On 5 January 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                 Hamida [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms G. Loughran, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 3  June  1983.
       She is now 33 years old. She appealed against the  determination  of
       First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P.J.M.  Hollingworth  promulgated  on  7
       January 2011 following a hearing in December of the  previous  year.
       This is the re-making of the decision now nearly 6 years  later,  in
       relation to which it is  accepted  and  has  been  found,  that  the
       Judge's determination was legally flawed.


    2. It is unnecessary to deal with the procedural history of this appeal
       since the First-tier Tribunal determination. Suffice it to say  that
       it was complex and time-consuming. The remaking of the  decision  by
       me is on the basis that there were no preserved findings of fact.


    3. In order to avoid further unnecessary complexity, I  shall  set  out
       only those parts  of  the  evidence  which  are  necessary  to  this
       determination. There are two principal findings of fact  which  form
       the basis of my decision making.

Working for an NGO


    4. First, the appellant has established (and the  respondent  does  not
       materially disagree) that  the  appellant  received  her  degree  in
       economics from the University of Mogadishu. Thereafter,  she  worked
       for  a  series  of  NGOs;  the  American  Centre  for  Research  and
       Development (which conducted the research  about  the  situation  in
       support Somalia), the Adventist Development  and  Relief  Agency,  a
       Christian organisation whose ethos is contrary to the workings of Al-
       Shabbab and finally for Save the Children. This latter  organisation
       had an office in Beledweyne (Belet Weyne) to which the appellant was
       attached. She produced copies  of  a  letter  of  appointment  [145,
       numbers in square brackets referring to the appellant's bundle]  and
       a Contract of Employment [150-152]. It appears that the  actions  of
       Al-Shabbab against Save the Children resulted in the  organisation's
       staff being placed at risk resulting in the closure of its office in
       Beledweyne.

    5. The background material, supported by Country  Guidance  establishes
       that Al-Shabbab targeted NGOs and other national organisations  such
       as those three for whom the appellant worked.

    6. In AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
       Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445  (IAC),  the  Tribunal  summarised  its
       assessment of risk in these terms, selectively  extracted  from  the
       italic words:


         9)  On the assumption that Al-Shabbab's likely  behaviour  towards
         those who transgress its rules is as found in  this  determination,
         the position is as "extreme" as the factual basis in RT  (Zimbabwe)
         [2010] EWCA Civ 1285. In the light of RT,  a  person  from  an  Al-
         Shabbab area who can show they  do  not  genuinely  adhere  to  Al-
         Shabbab's ethos will  have  a  good  claim  to  Refugee  Convention
         protection, once outside Somalia (subject  to  internal  relocation
         and exclusion clause issues),  regardless  of  whether  the  person
         could and would "play the game", by adhering to Al-Shabbab's rules.


    7. In MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442
       (IAC), the Tribunal stated:


                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE


        i) The country guidance issues addressed in this determination  are
           not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in  AMM  and
           others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia
           CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has
           been given by the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not
           addressed in this determination then the  guidance  provided  by
           AMM shall continue to have effect.
       ii) Generally, a person who is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
           associated with the security forces; any aspect of government or
           official   administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
           organisation) on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
           such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. [The  emphasis  is
           mine.]

        (iv) The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
           casualties that clearly fall within  Al  Shabbab  target  groups
           such as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and
           those associated  with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
           cannot be precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence
           which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it  is  established
           by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
           reduction in  the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
           largely due to the cessation of confrontational  warfare  within
           the city and Al-Shabbab's  resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
           carefully selected targets.  The  present  level  of  casualties
           does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such
           as to represent an Article 15(c) risk. [The emphasis is mine.]


    8. The appellant relies upon a report dated October 2013 provided by Dr
       Joseph Mullen in which he said in paragraph 39 [173] that the routes
       northwards from Mogadishu through to Beledweyne fell into Al-Shabbab
       administered territory, with the exception of the  urban  centre  of
       Beledweyne.  Virtually all the Hiran region (in which Beledweyne  is
       located) fell under  the  influence  of  Al-Shabbab.   It  is  worth
       mentioning that Dr Mullen's evidence was accepted by the Tribunal in
       MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) when, in paragraph 372, he  asserted
       that Al-Shabbab targeted those linked to international aid agencies,
       probably the source for the Tribunal's conclusions set  out  in  the
       preceding paragraph.


    9. The Secretary of State did not seek to  assert  that  the  applicant
       could return to her home area.


   10. There are two significant consequences of this concession.    First,
       whilst there are a number of factual issues raised by the respondent
       about the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account,  (principally
       revolving around the attack upon her home which  took  place  on  29
       March 2010 and the decision to move  to  Hamar  and  then  to  leave
       Somalia on 1 August 2010), the relevance of these issues is of no or
       only marginal significance given the fact that the appellant  worked
       for Save the Children and organisations such as  Save  the  Children
       are targeted by Al-Shabbab.  Further, she lived  and  worked  in  an
       area under the influence of Al-Shabbab even if parts of  the  centre
       of Beledweyne were in government hands.

   11. Second, once the respondent has conceded that the  appellant  cannot
       return to her home district, the focus immediately moves to  whether
       it is reasonable for the appellant to relocate in Mogadishu were she
       to return to Somalia, a factor which is largely divorced from issues
       related to credibility.


Family life


   12. The second major fact-finding  relates to her relationship with  her
       Mr Jialow with whom she and you went through an Islamic ceremony  of
       marriage in February 2014.


   13.  He  gave  evidence  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  they  were
       accompanied by their daughter, born on 6 February 2015  and  who  is
       now 21 months old.


   14. There was an issue as to the nature of this relationship  but  which
       apparently commenced in 2013 notwithstanding the fact that  in  July
       2013 Mr Jialow was  pursuing  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
       decision to refuse his wife (not the appellant) entry  clearance  to
       join him in the United Kingdom, a  situation  which  undermined  his
       relationship with the appellant and hers with him. The appeal of  Mr
       Jialow's wife was unsuccessful and was followed, six  months  later,
       by his marriage  to  the  appellant.  Whatever  may  have  been  the
       position in 2013, I am satisfied that the appellant  and  Mr  Jialow
       are engaged in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  They  have  a
       daughter. A report, dated 3 September 2016, of an independent social
       worker, Ms Dymphna Pearce, speaks of the  relationship.  Neither  he
       nor the appellant was cross-examined on the basis that  this  was  a
       sham relationship. That said, their decision to have a child,  Luul,
       who was born on 6 February 2015, was plainly made at a time when the
       appellant's  immigration  status  was  obviously   precarious.   The
       respondent relies upon it as an attempt by the couple to present the
       Tribunal with a fait accompli.


   15. Mr  Jialow  was  recognised  as  a  refugee  and  has  been  granted
       indefinite leave to remain. As a result of his settled status,  Luul
       became a British citizen at birth. Accordingly, when considering the
       reasonableness of internal relocation  to  Mogadishu,  the  Tribunal
       would normally be required to consider  both  the  prospect  of  the
       appellant returning  alone  to  Mogadishu  and,  alternatively,  the
       prospect of returning to Mogadishu with Luul.


   16. The respondent, however, realistically conceded that it would not be
       reasonable to expect Luul to return  with  her  mother  to  Somalia.
       Instead, the respondent's position  is  predicated  upon  the  child
       remaining in the United Kingdom with her father as sole carer.


   17. This is set against the background that (i) Mr Jialow is, by  reason
       of his status, unable to visit  either  the  appellant  or  Luul  in
       Somalia and further, (ii) if contact is to be resumed, it would have
       to take place in a third  country,  such  as  Kenya  and  (iii)  the
       separation created  is  likely  to  be  permanent,  there  being  no
       realistic prospect of a successful application for  entry  clearance
       made by the applicant if only because her  conviction  prevents  her
       satisfying the  suitability  requirements  of  the  public  interest
       criteria set out in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1).


   18. Conversely, a consideration of the appeal on the basis that Luul, as
       a British citizen,  will  remain  with  her  father  in  the  United
       Kingdom, is predicated upon his being the full-time carer  of  Luul,
       who will be permanently separated from her mother.  Mr  Jialow  will
       be required to stop his work as a taxi driver or will be required to
       set in place child care arrangements which will prevent  him  making
       realistic contributions to support his wife in Mogadishu.


The Supplementary Decision of 26 April 2016


   19. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom one 29 August 2010.  She
       was then aged 27. In order to facilitate her arrival in  the  United
       Kingdom, the appellant used false documents.. She was detained by an
       immigration officer. She was subsequently convicted and sentenced to
       a period of 12 months imprisonment. Steps were taken to remove  her.
       However,  no  deportation  order  was  made  and  this  was  not   a
       deportation appeal. Accordingly, when the respondent came to make  a
       second decision in the form of a Supplementary Notice  of  26  April
       2016, the respondent misunderstood the nature of the decision making
       she was required to conduct and treated the matter as a  deportation
       appeal and proceeded to consider the case under Article 8 as if  she
       were applying paragraphs A398 to 399D and sections 117A to  117D  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002 as inserted by the
       Immigration Act 2014,  section  19.  The  decision  maker  therefore
       considered whether the appellant's deportation was conducive to  the
       public good having been convicted of an offence for  which  she  had
       been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months. In
       this way, the decision-makers skewed the decision-making process. In
       particular,  the  respondent  concluded  in  paragraph  21  of   the
       decision:


         It is not accepted that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  Luul  to
         remain in the United Kingdom even  though  your  client  is  to  be
         deported. It is expected that on your  client's  deportation,  Luul
         would live with her father. Luul is a British citizen,  her  father
         has acquired ILR in the United Kingdom and consequently they  would
         have access to all public  services,  such  as  education,  health,
         social services, welfare, housing etc  if  they  were  required  to
         assist Luul and her father. It is considered that your  client  can
         remain in contact with Luul via modern forms of communication  such
         as Skype, e-mail and telephone. As a British citizen, Luul would be
         free to visit your client when circumstances allowed and  when  she
         reaches adulthood she can decide for herself whether she wishes  to
         join your client in Somalia or remain in the United Kingdom."


   20. This was a particularly bleak assessment of the fate  awaiting  Luul
       bearing in mind she was just 14 months old  when  the  supplementary
       decision was made on 26 April 2016. In the  previous  paragraph  the
       respondent had accepted that  Luul's  father  could  not  return  to
       Somalia, having been granted international protection in the  United
       Kingdom in 2008 on the grounds he would be at risk if he returned to
       Somalia. Since it was also  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  her
       husband had a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with
       Luul, and each other, the prospect of maintaining communication with
       a 14 month-year-old by Skype, e-mail and telephone appears to me  to
       be particularly unrealistic.  Nor  does  it  seem  to  me  that  the
       prospect of periodic contact in a third country provided a  suitable
       method of maintaining links between the appellant and her  daughter,
       barely one year old, the cost of which to a taxi-driver might  prove
       challenging. The respondent's considered conclusion that Luul  would
       be free to visit the appellant when circumstances allowed,  suggests
       her ability to travel to Somalia in perhaps 14 years time when, as a
       16-year-old, she might have face-to-face contact  with  her  mother.
       Frankly, the prospect is worryingly ill-considered.  I  notice  that
       the decision maker is described as coming from the Criminal Casework
       Liverpool Team. Although this was not pursued by me in the course of
       the hearing, I darkly suspect that he would not normally  have  been
       involved in non-criminal cases, although he may have  the  technical
       authority to make such a decision. Furthermore, since  it  is  based
       upon the wrong  application  of  the  wrong  statutory  regime,  the
       decision is  doubly  wrong.    It  reaches  its  climactic  peak  in
       paragraph 34 by concluding:


           Very compelling circumstances


           As the exceptions to deportation do not apply  to  your  client,
           consideration  has  been  given  to  whether  there   are   very
           compelling circumstances such that your  client  should  not  be
           deported. There is significant public interest in deporting your
           client. This is because


                - your client was convicted of  a  serious  offence,  namely
                possession and all use of a false instrument.


   21. There was clearly a reason why the Secretary of State chose  not  to
       follow the deportation route.  It could not properly be regarded  as
       mere  happenchance.   A  decision  to  deport  the   appellant   was
       apparently made on 28 September 2010 but  wiser  counsels  prevailed
       and it was left, unserved, on the file. The  decision  of  26  April
       2016 went flatly contrary to that earlier decision  making  process.
       Its application was all the more unfortunate  because  by  then  the
       circumstances  gravitating  against  deportation  had  significantly
       advanced: the genuine and subsisting marriage to a  refugee  settled
       in the United Kingdom, the  birth  of  a  British  citizen  and  the
       inevitable prospect of severing links between the child and  one  or
       the other parent.

   22.  The  supplemental  decision  would,  in  my  judgment,  have   been
       unhesitatingly struck down as being unlawful had it  been  subjected
       to the scrutiny of judicial review. This has the effect of requiring
       me by way of a statutory appeal to look  completely  afresh  at  the
       appellant's appeal  without  the  insight  normally  afforded  by  a
       decision letter which operates as the prism through  which  I  might
       assess  the  operation  of  the  public  interest  criteria  in  the
       Immigration Rules against the foil of a wider assessment of  Article
       8 expressed in the form of exceptional circumstances.

   23. I have therefore gone on to consider whether the Secretary of  State
       should be required to make a lawful decision in accordance with  the
       practice established pursuant to the decision of the Court of Appeal
       in Abdi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1996]  Imm  AR
       48 (Court of Appeal). I have decided not to do so. First, it was not
       suggested by Mr Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State that this
       was the appropriate course.  Second,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  a
       decision  under  Article  8  contains  the  necessary  discretionary
       element which only the Secretary of State  herself  is  entitled  to
       make. Although Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) contain  a  large
       number of criteria upon which the Secretary  of  State  may  take  a
       different view from a judicial  decision  maker,  the  operation  of
       these provisions is not essentially discretionary.  Indeed,  in  the
       past at least, the Tribunal  has  readily  assumed  jurisdiction  to
       decide for itself Article 8 proportionality. Third, the  immigration
       history, although unspoken by me, does not merit further delay.

Relocation to Mogadishu

   24. At a theoretical level, the consideration of the  reasonableness  of
       the appellant  relocating  to  Mogadishu  requires  the  alternative
       prospects of the appellant returning alone to Mogadishu leaving Luul
       to be looked after by her father on the one hand and, on the  other,
       the appellant and Luul returning together without,  of  course,  the
       appellant's partner.  However, the latter prospect of the  appellant
       and Luul travelling together  has  properly  been  excluded  by  the
       respondent as realistic given the circumstances of this  appeal.  It
       is not, therefore, necessary to further analyse the basis upon which
       this is done and whether this  is  the  result  of  the  limitations
       imposed by law upon the removal of British children, notwithstanding
       the presence of a parent in the United Kingdom.


   25. Accordingly, a feature of this appeal which has been relied upon  by
       the appellant no longer requires consideration. In paragraph  10  of
       the skeleton argument, the appellant relied upon the dictum found in
       paragraph 560 of AMM to the effect  that  FGM  is  so  prevalent  in
       Somalia that,  even  where  parents  are  opposed  to  it,  parental
       opposition may well not be enough  to  eliminate  the  risk  to  the
       appellant's daughter that others will at some point inflict FGM upon
       her. As a result of the respondent's  concession,  that  is  not  an
       issue upon which I am required to reach a conclusion.

Lone women

   26. Instead, I am only required to consider the risks faced  by  a  lone
       woman in Somalia which  has,  once  again,  been  in  identified  in
       Tribunal case law.


   27. MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) was a case  concerning  male  asylum
       seekers.  Thus, any consideration of the risk  faced  by  women  is,
       strictly speaking, obiter dictum but the rule relating to statements
       made obiter cannot strictly apply in Country  Guidance  cases  which
       are designed to offer guidance in a spectrum of circumstances  which
       go beyond an assessment of the specific facts of the cases or  cases
       which have generated the decision.  Hence, I am required  to  follow
       the guidance set out in paragraph 406 unless evidence is adduced  to
       modify it:

           We consider, in the light of the evidence as a whole,  that  the
           position as set out by UNHCR  in  its  report  published  on  25
           September 2013 continues  to  reflect  an  appropriate  starting
           point today, upon which to build in the light of our  review  of
           the up to date evidence:


           "With regard to Mogadishu,  the  personal  circumstances  of  an
           individual need to be carefully  assessed.  UNHCR  considers  an
           IFA/IRA [internal flight or relocation] as reasonable only where
           the individual can expect to  benefit  from  meaningful  nuclear
           and/or extended family support and clan protection mechanisms in
           the  area  of  prospective  relocation.   When   assessing   the
           reasonableness of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu in an individual case,
           it should be kept in mind that the traditional  extended  family
           and community structures of Somali society no longer  constitute
           as strong a protection and coping mechanism in Mogadishu as they
           did in the  past.  Additionally,  whether  the  members  of  the
           traditional networks are able to genuinely offer support to  the
           applicant in practice also needs  to  be  evaluated,  especially
           given the fragile and complex situation in Mogadishu at present.


           For the following categories of Somalis,  UNHCR  would  consider
           that an IFA/IRA will not be reasonably available in the  absence
           of  meaningful  nuclear  and/or  extended  family  support   and
           functioning clan protection: ...single women and  female  single
           heads of households  with  no  male  protection  and  especially
           originating from minority clans."


   28. The appellant is from the Hawiye clan which is not a minority  clan.
       However, the clan does not emanate from Mogadishu although there  is
       a sizeable  population  present  there.   Ms  Loughran  points  out,
       however, that in the case of relocation to Mogadishu, the individual
       is not returning to a place with which she is familiar and in  which
       support mechanisms may  be  more  readily  accessed.  I  treat  this
       submission with some reservation as the appellant obtained a  degree
       at the University of Mogadishu.


   29. The risk faced by  lone  women  has  also  been  identified  in  the
       respondent's own policy on "Somalia: Women fearing gender-based harm
       and violence" of 2 August 2016 in which it is  said  that  effective
       state protection is, in general, unlikely to be available for  women
       fearing sexual or gender-based violence. Whilst internal  relocation
       to Mogadishu to avoid risk from gender-based violence may be  viable
       in some cases, in the particular where  the  person  has  a  support
       network, single women are unlikely to be able to relocate.


   30. It amply supports my conclusion that the appellant has established a
       case that it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  her  to  relocate  to
       Mogadishu.

Article 15 (c) serious harm.

   31. It is not necessary for the proper determination of this  appeal  to
       consider whether conditions in  Mogadishu  are  such  as  to  engage
       Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive which defines a risk of
       serious harm as including a 'serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
       civilian's life or person by reason of  indiscriminate  violence  in
       situations of international or internal armed conflict.'  I  am  not
       so satisfied but, by reason of my findings elsewhere, this ground of
       appeal has become academic if only because  humanitarian  protection
       is an alternative not a successive remedy.

The public interest

   32. Mr Clarke, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  identifies  two
       significant factors which favour removal. First, the fact  than  the
       appellant has received a sentence  of  12  months  imprisonment  for
       documentary offences. This is a  proper  factor  to  be  taken  into
       account. For my part, a sentence of 12  months  imprisonment  should
       not be marginalised by seeking  to  assert  that  the  offences  are
       minimal or that the effect upon immigration control is  not  gravely
       damaged  by  the  use  of  false  documentation   to   seek   entry.
       Nevertheless, like all material  considerations,  they  have  to  be
       assessed in the context of the case is a whole. The  appellant  used
       deception, albeit this was deception  that  was  engineered  on  her
       behalf by an  agent.  This  does  not  reduce  the  appellant's  own
       personal responsibility, as the sentence  of  imprisonment  properly
       reflected. She should not be treated as a victim.   Nor  can  it  be
       used in mitigation that there must be many other  people  who  enter
       the United Kingdom using false documents provided by  an  agent  who
       are not detected or that there are many other entrants who enter the
       United Kingdom evading immigration control, perhaps in the back of a
       lorry. The fact that there are many others who escape detection does
       not reduce this appellant's culpability. Indeed, it may explain  why
       a sentence of this length is required to deter those others who  may
       attempt to enter the United Kingdom unlawfully.


   33. The context, however, in which this offending should  be  placed  is
       that the background material I have identified  which  places  those
       with connections to NGOs at risk  of  persecution  is  derived  from
       sources  which  in  some  instances  pre-dated  the  latest  Country
       Guidance set out in MOJ & Ors (Return to  Mogadishu).  Consequently,
       whilst it is impossible to speculate  with  any  accuracy  upon  the
       outcome of an application for asylum  were  it  to  have  been  made
       lawfully by this applicant on arrival at port, there is at least  an
       arguable case that she was in fact a refugee at the time  of  entry.
       We know that the original decision made in 2010 was  not  sanctioned
       by the  subsequent  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       because  his  decision  has  been  set  aside  as  flawed.  I  hope,
       therefore, to instil a certain sense of realism in relation  to  the
       appellant's criminal offending, without thereby condoning it.

   34. The second element relied upon by the respondent as  identifying  an
       element of the public interest favouring removal  is  that  we  must
       nowadays assume that the  birth  of  a  child  is  a  conscious  and
       voluntary decision of a couple. The birth of Luul was classified  by
       Mr Clarke as presenting the Secretary of State with a fait accompli.
       There may be many cases where, even if it  cannot  be  affirmatively
       established, the birth of children in the  course  of  a  protracted
       process of appeal against a removal decision  is  a  natural  though
       calculated decision to better a human rights claim. With that  said,
       the mere fact that a child is born  requires  a  decision  maker  to
       afford that child due and lawful consideration in the appeal. In the
       context of this case, whilst it is clear that the decision to  start
       a family was made at a time when the appellant's immigration  status
       was 'precarious' (to use conventional terminology), the Tribunal has
       to deal with the situation as it is. Once again, taken  in  context,
       the child  was  born  as  a  result  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship; the child became a British  citizen  by  operation  of
       British law; the child's father was a refugee  with  settled  status
       and, whilst it is not possible to dismiss  the  forensic  advantages
       that the birth of this child has created, neither can it properly be
       regarded as a cynical attempt to prevent the appellant's removal.


   35. As Mr Clarke conceded, there  were  significant  arguments  opposing
       these considerations which he accepted were advanced by Ms  Loughran
       in her skeleton argument.

Article 8 and the Immigration Rules

   36. Absent a decision letter which sets out the various requirements  of
       Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1), I do not have the fortitude  to
       attempt the task myself.  (Nor, thankfully, did Mr  Clarke  who  did
       not  invite  me  to  consider  the  various  heads  of  suitability,
       eligibility, exceptions, partner route or child route.)  However,  I
       am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
       requirements of the public interest criteria within the  Immigration
       Rules.  More accurately, perhaps, that the appellant did no seek  to
       argue that she met the requirements of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
       276ADE(1), the burden being placed upon her to do so.  At  the  very
       least, I envisage that the appellant would not meet the  suitability
       requirements  of  S-LTR.1.3  namely,  that  'the  presence  of   the
       applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public good because they
       have been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
       in the to imprisonment for less than four  years  but  at  least  12
       months.'  Nor can she claim to be the sole carer of Luul in order to
       establish the relationship requirements under E-LTRPT 2.3,  although
       my decision is not dependent upon my having correctly identified the
       applicable requirements in Appendix FM.


   37. It follows that the crucial decision is whether, notwithstanding the
       failure to meet the public  interest  criteria  in  the  Immigration
       Rules, there are circumstances  that  merit  a  departure  from,  or
       exception to, the normal application of due weight  being  given  to
       those criteria.

   38. I am satisfied that a proper application  of  the  balance  required
       pursuant to the due exercise of proportionality, the result operates
       decisively  in   favour   of   the   appellant   and   her   family,
       notwithstanding the serious conviction and  the  substantial  prison
       sentence.   The reasons will already be apparent from  what  I  have
       said before but  may now be summarised as follows:

          a) Proportionality operates in the context of the public  interest
             considerations which I have discussed above at paragraphs 31 to
             33.
          b) The appellant's young daughter is best cared for by her mother.
          c) Luul cannot be expected to accompany her mother.
          d) Luul's father is not reasonably likely to be able to   continue
             to work as a taxi-driver, working  long  and  irregular  hours,
             without the presence of Luul's mother if he has  sole  care  of
             Luul.
          e) If Luul's father is unable to work he will be  unable  to  send
             remittances to the appellant.
          f) Luul's father cannot be expected to travel to Mogadishu to have
             contact with Luul's mother; nor probably could he afford to  do
             so.
          g) For similar reasons, contact in a safe third country  is  ruled
             out.
          h) This is not a case whether it  is  even  arguable  that  Skype,
             email or telephone act as an appropriate substitute for face-to-
             face interaction on a daily or even hourly basis.
          i) It is far too late to await Luul reaching an age when  she  can
             travel independently of her parents - some 14  to  16  years  -
             before re-establishing meaningful contact.
          j) The solution offered by the respondent in her  decision  making
             is that this child must be required  to  be  severed  from  all
             effective links with her mother.  The solution is to be  either
             a durable or a permanent one, not a temporary one as  envisaged
             in a case where the person removed is  expected  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom in order  to  regularise  her  presence  in  the
             United Kingdom by making an application for entry clearance  in
             relation to which there is a prospect of success.
          k) The dissolution of this family unit was not adequately explored
             in the decision letter.


   39. These considerations (which I do not profess to be  exhaustive)  are
       sufficient for me to conclude that removal is disproportionate.


   40. These considerations have been conducted so far without reference to
       Parliament's own gloss in s. 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 into the
       Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  2002.   As   I   shall
       demonstrate, the application of  s.117A-D  establishes  conclusively
       that the public interest in removal is outweighed by the private and
       family life consideration of the appellant and her family.


Section 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002

   41. Sections 117A-D prima facie the 2002 Act provide:


           117A Application of this Part
           (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
           (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
           life under Article 8, and
           (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
           Rights Act 1998.
           (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
           and
           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.
           (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
           question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified under Article
           8(2).


           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases
           (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
           public interest.
           (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
           established by a person at a time when the person is in the
           United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established
           by a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
           precarious.
           (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.


           117C Article 8 additional considerations in cases involving
           foreign criminals.
           (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
           interest.
           (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
           the criminal.
           (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
           Exception 2 applies.
           (4) Exception 1 applies where-
           (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
           of C's life,
           (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
           Kingdom, and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
           (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
           subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
           unduly harsh.
           (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to
           a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
           interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2.
           (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
           into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
           to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason
           for the decision was the offence or offences for which the
           criminal has been convicted.


           117D Interpretation of this Part
           (1)  In this Part-
           ...
           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-
           (a) is a British citizen, or
           ...
           "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
           ...
           (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of
           the
           Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
           (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
           (a) who is not a British citizen,
           (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
           and
           (c) who -
           (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
           12 months,...


   42. The appellant is a foreign criminal, as defined,  because  she   has
       been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months and
       on its face, s.117C is directed towards foreign criminals   However,
       on examination, subsections 117C (1), (2) and (3) (which bring  into
       play  Exceptions  1  and  2)  are   exclusively   directed   towards
       deportation, not removal.  Furthermore according to subs. 117C  (7),
       and this is  determinative  of  the  point,  the  considerations  in
       subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into account where a court or
       tribunal is considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal.


   43. Hence there is no room for the application of s.117C of the 2002 Act
       notwithstanding the fact that the section  is  entitled  'Additional
       considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign  criminals'  and   the
       appellant is a foreign criminal.


   44. The Secretary of  State  was  therefore  required  to  consider  the
       provisions of s. 117B and in particular, s. 117B(6)


           In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying    child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.


   45. This effectively precludes the appellant's removal.  The  respondent
       accepts that the child cannot accompany the appellant to  Mogadishu.
       This must be on the basis that it would not be reasonable.  There is
       no issue as to whether the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationship with Luul who is a qualifying child.


   46. I am fortified in this conclusion by my finding  that  the  decision
       not to serve the deportation decision was not a mere oversight but a
       considered judgment as to whether  the  strict,  perhaps  draconian,
       provisions associated with deportation should be  visited  upon  the
       appellant.  It is accepted that the statutory  provisions  enable  a
       more severe approach to be adopted to those sentenced to  12  months
       imprisonment but do not require it.  The decision not to follow  the
       deportation route was an implicit, if not  explicit,  acknowledgment
       that the public interest  did  not  merit  such  an  approach.   The
       respondent is not now permitted  to  go  behind  the  thinking  that
       generated that approach.


DECISION

The Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the decision in the
following terms:
          1) The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds;
          2) The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             19 October 2016

Amended pursuant to Rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (clerical mistakes and accidental slips or omissions - 'the slip
rule').


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                              5 January 2017
