
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/13012/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18th September 2017                   |On 29th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Following a hearing which took place on 4 July 2016, I previously found
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  that  it
    was set aside.  A copy of the decision is  appended.   The  appeal  was
    adjourned for a resumed  hearing  which,  for  one  reason  or  another
    eventually took place on 18 September 2017.  The purpose of the resumed
    hearing was to call further evidence in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    appeal which was commenced before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  upon
    which errors of law that were material to the  findings  of  fact  were
    found by  me,  consequent  to  which  the  findings  and  reasons  from
    paragraph 69 onwards of the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Lang were set aside.  In respect of the issues on appeal, they  are  as
    they therefore appear in First-tier Tribunal Judge Lang's decision  and
    reasons,  and  I  do  not  repeat  the  immigration  history  nor   the
    Appellant's account as set out  in  that  document  from  paragraphs  1
    through to 25 but hereby acknowledge the same.

 2. The documents before me in this appeal consisted of the  following.   I
    had before me a supplementary bundle from  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    which as I understand it was to replace the core bundle that was before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  That bundle contains some fourteen items  and
    numbers 82 pages.  I also had before  me  an  additional  bundle  which
    numbers some 41 pages and contains six items which is  self-titled  'an
    additional bundle'.  I was also given a loose letter from  the  British
    Red Cross dated 3rd  April  2017.   For  the  Respondent  the  original
    Respondent's bundle was before me  on  file.   That  contained  annexes
    ranging from A to E and the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  23rd
    October 2015 which the Appellant is appealing against.

 3. The Appellant was called  and  gave  evidence  in  English  by  way  of
    adopting her witness statements and was cross-examined by Ms Ahmad  for
    the Respondent.  Similarly the Appellant's daughter was also called and
    adopted  her  witness  statement  and   was   cross-examined   by   the
    Respondent's Presenting Officer.  I asked a  handful  of  questions  in
    clarification through Mr Mahmood.  A full record of  these  proceedings
    and the evidence given is contained on file and I do not  seek  to  set
    out that evidence other than I see it as relevant  to  my  findings  of
    fact which shall follow in due course.



Issues on Appeal

 4. The agreed issues on the appeal  before  me  are  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum based upon her political  opinion  and  in
    relation to her alleged sexuality as  a  lesbian  and  a  member  of  a
    particular social group, both of those  independently  giving  rise  to
    risk on return to Zimbabwe.

 5. The Appellant also pursued a family life claim and a private life claim
    on the basis of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules pursuant to the
    European Convention on Human Rights.



Closing Submissions

 6. In closing, Ms Ahmad relied upon the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and
    upon the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wood promulgated on
    7th July 2009, in particular paragraph 35  (specifically  subparagraphs
    2, 3, 4 and 8 of paragraph 35) and paragraphs 36 and  37.   Ms  Ahmad's
    position was that Judge Ford had not found the Appellant  credible  and
    only believed her to be a local organiser.  This, Ms  Ahmad  submitted,
    was the starting point for consideration of her  political  claim.   Ms
    Ahmad accepted that the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 23rd October 2015
    now made clear that it could not be argued  that  the  Appellant  could
    safely re-enter or  return  alternately  to  South  Africa  instead  of
    Zimbabwe as she no longer held any  valid  leave  to  enter  or  reside
    there.

 7. In relation to the secondary aspect of the Appellant's asylum claim, Ms
    Ahmad submitted that the determination  of  Judge  Ford  reflected  the
    starting point given that her determination  promulgated  on  17th  May
    2012 was the last word on this matter as it was found at paragraphs 27,
    29, 30, 46 and 50 that the Appellant's sexuality claim  and  membership
    of a particular social group was not accepted  on  that  occasion.   Ms
    Ahmad made reference  to  an  inconsistency  in  the  cross-examination
    between the Appellant's evidence and that of her daughter,  in  essence
    as to whether the daughter had ever met the Appellant's former  partner
    known as Cheryl Simmons.  Ms Ahmad further submitted that  in  relation
    to the country guidance case of CM (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) that ratio  of  CM  was  contained  at
    paragraph  215  which  made  clear  that  according  to  the   European
    Commission there are very few, if any, gross violations of human rights
    in terms of assaults, murders etc but there is a threat  of  repetition
    if the violence remains.  It also further confirms that the police have
    not generally taken steps to protect victims  and  in  some  cases  the
    police  have  been  perpetrators  themselves  and  further   that   the
    Zimbabwean human rights' objective information shows that the police do
    nothing  to  protect  victims  and  there  are   regular   reports   of
    discrimination.  It is also said that there are signs  of  hate  speech
    and continued reports of beatings and torture by MDC supporters  around
    the country.  Ms Ahmad further highlighted paragraph 9 of CM and  noted
    the decision of RN in 2008  and  the  Supreme  Court  Authority  of  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the  conclusion  that  EM  is  no  longer
    generally applicable.  Ms Ahmad submitted that the  Appellant  is  from
    Bulawayo and is not broadly at risk and does  not  have  a  significant
    profile such that she would be at risk on return.

 8. Ms Ahmad also submitted that the Appellant's daughter was aware of  her
    sexuality but not her grandchildren and to  that  extent  it  would  be
    relevant as to whether she would live openly as a lesbian on return  to
    Zimbabwe if I were to accept her sexuality as claimed.

 9. In relation to Article 8 Ms Ahmad submitted that the starting point was
    whether a family life was engaged or not and as to whether  there  were
    more than  ordinary  adult  emotional  ties.   In  her  submission  the
    dependency was not strong and was not more than might  pertain  between
    an adult child and a mother.

10. In terms of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 Ms Ahmad relied on Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138
    (IAC) which confirms that precariousness is relevant to family life  as
    well as it is to private life.  She highlighted that the Appellant  was
    not financially independent and that she was not working  and  as  such
    this factor would fall against her in terms of Section 117B also.

11. In respect of the public interest Ms Ahmad confirmed  that  the  public
    interest  was  quantified  by  a  firm  and  fair  immigration  control
    alongside the Section 117B factors already noted.

12. In terms of pre-empting the Appellant's  reliance  on  UE  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975 Ms Ahmad
    relied upon paragraph 36 and stated that  even  if  paragraph  35  made
    clear that it is open to the court  to  find  that  loss  of  a  public
    benefit  is  capable   of   being   the   relevant   consideration   to
    proportionality it would only make  a  difference  if  there  was  very
    significant contribution to the country as was said by Lord  Bridge  in
    the case of Bakhtaur Singh.

13. For the Appellant,  whilst  making  formal  submissions  regarding  the
    protection claim, it was pragmatically acknowledged by Mr Mahmood  that
    even if the Appellant's  claimed  sexuality  and  her  MDC  connections
    independently and/or through her daughter were to be  accepted  by  the
    Tribunal the protection claim might still not  be  established  on  the
    current authorities concerning risk on return to Zimbabwe.  However, Mr
    Mahmood still pursued the  protection  claim  and  submitted  that  the
    Appellant and her daughter had given credible evidence  and  that  even
    accepting Judge Wood and Ford's determinations as a starting point  for
    the protection claims pursuant to Devaseelan, a great deal had  changed
    in the evidence before the Tribunal in that the Appellant had now given
    evidence about her previous relationship with Ms Simmons.

14. The Tribunal heard the evidence from the Appellant's daughter  and  the
    evidence in the bundles at pages 45 to 47 from the UK Gay  and  Lesbian
    Group dated 11th October 2011, specifically at paragraph 6. Mr  Mahmood
    submitted that times had moved on since those  determinations  and  the
    relationship which the Appellant had enjoyed and which  had  now  ended
    was such that she had established her sexuality which would  place  her
    at risk on return.  Mr Mahmood  further  submitted  that  taking  Judge
    Wood's decision, particularly at paragraphs 36 and 37 into  account,  a
    key distinction to be drawn between the previous status quo at the date
    of the First-tier Tribunal decisions in 2009  and  2012  was  that  the
    Appellant had now established, and the Respondent  had  accepted,  that
    she could not return to South Africa contrary to the previous  findings
    in the First-tier Tribunal which  were  errors  in  fact.   Mr  Mahmood
    submitted that as the Appellant had left in January 2006 and given that
    she was absent for three years or more, by January 2009 she would  have
    not been able to return to South Africa and thus Judge Wood's  decision
    in June 2009 following her appeal was factually  incorrect,  one  could
    see, in hindsight.

15. Mr Mahmood further made submissions upon the delay  between  the  fresh
    claim which was made on 19th December 2012 and the  decision  which  is
    the subject of this appeal issued on 23rd October 2015 which took  just
    under three years  to  come  about.   Mr  Mahmood  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had suffered injustice in that she was unable  to  rely  upon
    the former positions which prevailed at the time of RN in 2009 and 2012
    and consequently the errors made in the previous determinations of  her
    status would have an effect on the  proportionality  outcome  alongside
    the delay in the fresh claim decision being issued.  To this extent  Mr
    Mahmood relied upon the judgment of EV (Kosovo).  Mr Mahmood  submitted
    that the delay had strengthened the bond between the Appellant and  her
    daughter and  her  grandchildren.   Mr  Mahmood  highlighted  that  the
    Respondent had failed  to  perform  a  Section  55  assessment  of  the
    children's best interests and submitted that there  was  strong  cogent
    evidence regarding the way in which the boys were being looked after by
    the Appellant and drew my attention to the letter from the older  child
    who had framed his view on his grandmother's situation in his own words
    (see pages 24 to 26 of the supplementary bundle).  Mr Mahmood submitted
    that this was a case where there was more than normal  adult  emotional
    ties and that the removal of the Appellant would have a massive  impact
    on the daughter's life as well as the grandchildren's  and  that  their
    lives would be infinitely worse  without  the  Appellant.   Mr  Mahmood
    submitted that the effect on the British daughter and the  two  British
    grandchildren was not required in respect of the public interest as  on
    the evidence before me the Appellant would have been granted asylum  in
    2009 and 2012 and she could not return to South Africa as the  Tribunal
    believed.

16. Finally, in terms of UE (Nigeria) Mr Mahmood submitted that the British
    Red Cross letter of 3rd April 2017 was significant in terms of evidence
    in the Appellant's private life and the evidence  of  participation  in
    that charity from  2013  onwards  and  also  in  terms  of  the  bundle
    substantiating her service  to  Oxfam  since  2011  onwards.   Thus  Mr
    Mahmood  submitted  that  albeit  the  Appellant  was  not  financially
    independent and was not entitled to  work  she  was  still  nonetheless
    undertaking voluntary work and  was  of  service  and  benefit  to  her
    community.

17. At the close of those submissions I reserved my decision, which I shall
    now give along with my reasons.



Findings

18. Having  already  read  and  adopted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    uncontroversial summary at paragraphs 1 through to 25 of that decision,
    I also comment that I have noted the evidence in the hearing before the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  paragraph  29  through  to  57.    The
    applicable  law  as  set  out  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
    paragraphs 58 to 61 was not the subject of challenge and is  of  course
    correct in respect of the burden of proof. The Appellant needs to  show
    at the date of hearing that there are substantial  grounds  or  a  real
    risk that she meets the requirements of the Refugee or Person  in  Need
    of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  or  that
    she is entitled to be granted  humanitarian  protection  in  accordance
    with paragraph 339C of HC 395 and that returning her to Zimbabwe  would
    cause the United Kingdom to be in breach thereof.

19. The Appellant must also establish that  she  enjoys  a  private  and/or
    family life in the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 8 ECHR which will
    be interfered with by the decision of 23 October 2015 under  appeal  in
    respect of which any consideration of Article 8 issues outside  of  the
    Rules are to be gauged by virtue of a fair balance and  proportionality
    assessment as espoused  in  the  House  of  Lords'  case  of  Razgar  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.

20. In respect of the Appellant's protection claim, my starting point as  I
    have previously rehearsed is that set  out  in  the  determinations  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ward dated 29th June 2009 and that of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  dated  15th  May  2012  in  accordance  with
    Devaseelan UKIAT [2002] 000702 Starred principles.  I  confirm  I  have
    taken the determination of the previous two judges as a starting  point
    for my findings of fact and  I  have  taken  account  of  the  evidence
    submitted by the Appellant and the evidence  which  is  now  before  me
    before making the following findings.

21. I acknowledge that at paragraph 46 of Judge Ford's determination he did
    not accept that the Appellant is a lesbian and at paragraph  47  stated
    that he did not accept that the entire family rejected her because they
    believed her to be a  lesbian.   He  found  that  the  reason  for  the
    Appellant coming to the UK was to give support to his daughter who  was
    unwell at the time in September 2008 and  that  the  Appellant  made  a
    false claim in relation to being a lesbian purely in order to justify a
    fresh claim for asylum.

22. In respect of the Appellant's  evidence  before  me  today  I  note  Ms
    Ahmad's criticism that the Appellant and  her  daughter  conflicted  in
    whether the  daughter  had  met  Ms  Simmons,  the  Appellant's  former
    partner.  However, to my mind the Appellant's daughter was  not  giving
    evidence that  there  was  a  formal  meeting  accompanied  by  a  full
    introduction and acquaintance being established between Ms Simmons  and
    her but moreover that the former partner had been seen by the  daughter
    at the daughter's house.

23. Furthermore, I also note the new evidence in terms of  the  UK  Lesbian
    and  Gay  Immigration  Group  letter  which  states  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 6 and 7 that the Appellant  fears  if  she  is  returned  to
    Zimbabwe or South Africa she would live a life of fear and would not be
    able to live life as she chooses to and that it has taken her years  to
    admit she is a lesbian and she says she could not return to live in the
    closet, amongst other matters.  It is also  said  that  since  February
    2011 Ms Moyo has been part of the women's discussion  group  and  their
    meetings were set up to  offer  peer  support  for  women  clients  who
    experience  different  attitudes  towards  the  experiences  they  have
    suffered.  This evidence by itself is adequate,  however  having  heard
    the evidence of the Appellant's daughter I am  just  persuaded  to  the
    lower standard of proof that the Appellant is a lesbian and a member of
    a particular social group  notwithstanding  the  previous  findings  of
    Judge Ford.  I say this primarily  due  to  the  manner  in  which  the
    Appellant's daughter delivered her evidence in respect of the shock and
    mixed feelings she experienced when learning  that  her  mother  was  a
    lesbian.  My interpretation of the Appellant's daughter's evidence  was
    that she was uncomfortable discussing this matter and although appeared
    to have come to terms with  it  was  still  unable  to  understand  her
    mother's choice of sexuality.  Equally, there was no  effective  cross-
    examination from Ms Ahmad to this aspect of the claim such that  I  was
    not given sufficient reason now  to  doubt  her  word  other  than  the
    solitary discrepancy in cross-examination that  I  have  already  dealt
    with.  However, even if the Appellant is a member  of  that  particular
    social group owing to her sexuality, that does not of itself  establish
    that the Appellant will necessarily be at risk on return to Zimbabwe as
    accepted by Mr Mahmood. Indeed, Mr Mahmood stated candidly that even if
    the entirety of the protection claim were accepted,  she  arguably  may
    not be  at  risk  on  return  due  to  the  current  country  guidance,
    authorities and objective evidence.

24. In respect of the Appellant's claim to be at risk due to  her  own  MDC
    connections and those of her daughter, having considered  Judge  Wood's
    decision in this regard I note that at paragraph  36  of  his  decision
    Judge Wood accepted that persecution  may  be  possible  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe but did not consider that asylum  should  be  granted  as  the
    Appellant had a residence permit in South Africa at the time which  led
    to the consequence  of  the  appeal  having  failed.   I  have  already
    discussed this matter at length in my previous error  of  law  decision
    and reasons but for the sake of completeness I note that  the  position
    now is beyond question that the Appellant cannot return to South Africa
    having obtained the letter from the  South  African  Embassy  dated  20
    September 2012 confirming that she does not have a right of  residence.
    This is an important matter which I will return to later in the context
    of the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

25. In respect of the Appellant's return to Zimbabwe  (not  South  Africa),
    and her own links, the starting point must be  that  she  is  merely  a
    supporter as found by Judge Wood even if she were to be at risk.  There
    is an associated risk that  would  attach  to  her  by  virtue  of  her
    daughter's own  connections  to  the  MDC  pursuant  to  NN  (teachers:
    Matabeleland/Bulawayo: risk) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00198 (IAC)  which
    confirms that a teacher will generally not face a  heightened  risk  on
    return on account  of  her  occupation  or  former  occupation  if  her
    destination is rural  Matabeleland  or  north  or  south  or  Bulawayo.
    However, as I summarised previously, the consequence of NN  is  that  a
    person is not automatically able to return  if  a  teacher  is  not  at
    heightened risk and the Tribunal will need  to  assess  the  individual
    risk that an applicant may face notwithstanding that a teacher  is  not
    at a heightened risk.

26. I do accept that the daughter is at risk having previously been granted
    asylum and having obtained refugee status (Nota  Bene:  thereafter  she
    became a British citizen).  Thus I do find that the Appellant may be at
    a somewhat elevated risk  due  to  her  daughter's  previous  grant  of
    refugee status.  However, from the evidence before me,  I  do  not  see
    that the Appellant has a heightened  risk  in  her  own  capacity.   My
    reason for finding that the Appellant has an indirect elevated risk  as
    a consequence of her daughter is due to the  grant  of  asylum  to  the
    daughter which was noted in a minute  from  a  subject  access  request
    dated 29 July 2012 that was on file and which stated as  follows  under
    the heading 'consideration':

         "Applicant was very credible at interview and her entire appearance
         was that of a person who had  endured  some  bad  experiences.   At
         interview she had a walking frame to help her as she  had  recently
         tried to commit suicide by jumping from a window, this resulted  in
         breaks to both of her legs.  She was very softly spoken and subdued
         throughout the interview.  Although it is very  easy  to  disregard
         her claims to have been an MDC member, it would not be so  easy  to
         dispute what had happened to her.  Given  the  high  percentage  of
         rapes that occur in Zimbabwe I found the applicant to  be  credible
         and had no reason to disbelieve what she  was  saying.   Basically,
         the only reason why she was raped, criminality aside,  was  due  to
         her MDC membership.  Minor  credibility  issues  but  nothing  that
         would sustain a refusal of her application."

27. This is followed by a decision which states based on political  opinion
    the Appellant's daughter was granted full  asylum  in  line  with  then
    current guidelines on MDC members in Zimbabwe in 2002.

28. However, where does that leave the Appellant?   Having  considered  the
    matter at length and in light of the evidence before me it is  my  view
    that the Appellant has not established against the current authorities,
    in particular in respect of CM from 2013.  As mentioned  earlier,  even
    if the Appellant were to be accepted to be an MDC member or  supporter,
    she would be highly unlikely to face  significant  difficulties,  given
    that the evidence does  not  point  to  her  being  an  MDC  member  or
    supporter with a significant profile.  I find that she would not be  at
    risk on return to Zimbabwe on this basis.   Similarly,  even  though  I
    accept the Appellant's claim as to her sexuality and her being a member
    of a particular social group, the  current  authorities  and  objective
    evidence dictate that her appeal cannot succeed on this  basis  either,
    nor can her  protection  claim  succeed  taken  cumulatively  with  her
    indirect MDC  connections  through  her  daughter  and  her  daughter's
    previous grant of asylum and status as a former teacher in Zimbabwe.



Article 8

29. Turning to the Article 8 issues and following the Razgar approach, I do
    find however  that  Article  8  family  life  has  been  quite  clearly
    established between the Appellant, her daughter and  her  grandchildren
    on  the  premise  that  I  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  her
    daughter's evidence and find that the Appellant has  been  living  with
    her daughter in Milton Keynes and  supporting  her  for  several  years
    past, since approximately 2008, I am told.  There is to  my  mind  more
    here than normal adult emotional ties.  That is clear to me because the
    Appellant's evidence is that she looks after her daughter and she takes
    care of her when  she  is  unwell  which  is  said  to  be  a  seasonal
    occurrence, but one which is still frequent enough that it occurs often
    enough for the Appellant's daughter to only work part-time.

30. The source of the daughter's health concerns is connected to  lumps  in
    her breast for which she has undergone multiple surgeries to have those
    tumours removed to avoid their becoming  cancerous.   More  importantly
    and of far more concern than that is the  fact  that  the  daughter  is
    suffering from depression and has been  for  many  years  past  and  is
    currently taking medication in the form of Zopiclone to help her  sleep
    and Mirtazapine for her anxiety and depression.  As  already  noted  by
    way of the grant of protection status to the  daughter  she  previously
    tried to commit suicide in 2002 due to her  rape  having  been  an  MDC
    member; and having noted the daughter's oral evidence  and  her  manner
    and tone and the medical evidence before me, I accept that the daughter
    is suffering from anxiety that emanates in the form of  depression  and
    results in hallucinations which render her unable  to  look  after  her
    children.  Indeed, I  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  she  is
    responsible for looking after and caring for the  grandchildren  on  an
    almost daily basis.   This  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant takes the grandchildren to and from school and often  attends
    parents' meetings in her daughter's stead.  I  also  note  the  nuanced
    evidence that the Appellant's daughter stated that  her  children  will
    approach the Appellant for advice before considering turning to her  at
    all.  Thus it appears to me from the evidence that the Appellant is the
    primary carer of her British grandchildren  and  is  an  essential  and
    intrinsic part of their daily lives.

31. Thus having found that family life is engaged as there  are  more  than
    normal adult emotional ties between the Appellant and her daughter  and
    pursuant to Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012]
    UKUT 160 (IAC) and Marckx v Belgium (1979) 2 EHRR 330, as  there  are
    family ties more than one might  normally  expect  from  a  grandparent
    between the Appellant and her two grandchildren, it is clear  that  the
    removal of the Appellant from this status quo will result in more  than
    a technical interference in the family  life  between  this  frail  and
    unusual family unit.

32. As to what the public interest demands that question must be engaged by
    virtue of firm and fair immigration control as Ms Ahmad accepted.  This
    is confirmed by section 117B(1) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and I indicate that I have paid due regard  to  all  of
    the sections cited below in reaching my decision:

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


33. To my mind,  the  above  subsections  of  117B  of  the  2002  Act  are
    applicable to this Appellant and fall  in  favour  of  her  removal  in
    respect of the public interest. Furthermore, I  accept  and  take  into
    consideration that the Appellant is not financially independent,  given
    that she is not working and is unable to work.  The public interest  is
    further fortified by the fact  that  the  Appellant  has  a  precarious
    status and that status affects her family life that she enjoys as  well
    as her private life pursuant to Rajendran (s117B - family life)  [2016]
    UKUT 138 (IAC).  Little weight should be given to her private  life  in
    the above regards.

34. On the other side of the balance, the public interest  is  tempered  by
    the fact that the Appellant performs community work as I  have  already
    noted in the form of her voluntary work with both the British Red Cross
    and Oxfam which has continued for, in the latter case, some six  years.
    Pursuant to the authority of UE (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975, albeit that it was stated  by  Sir
    David Keene in his judgment  at  paragraph  36  that  it  will  make  a
    difference to the outcome of cases in a relatively few instances, I  do
    consider that it will make a difference not  to  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal but to the weight to be given to the public interest in  respect
    of the potential loss to these  charities  and  the  community  of  the
    benefit that the Appellant  has  brought,  which  is  relevant  to  the
    consideration of my assessment of the public  interest  when  assessing
    the proportionality of the decision taken.  I pause to  note  that  the
    letter from the British Red Cross is framed  in  what  one  could  only
    describe as 'glowing' terms in respect of the Appellant's  contribution
    to the charity.

35. The public interest is also to be tempered by virtue of factors such as
    delay as espoused in the judgment of EB (Kosovo) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 wherein Lord Bingham  stated  at
    paragraph 16 that delay may be relevant in reducing the  weight  to  be
    accorded to the requirements of firm and fair immigration control if it
    was the result of a dysfunctional system which  yielded  unpredictable,
    inconsistent or unfair outcomes.  In my view the outcome that has beset
    the Appellant in a historical sense  is  what  one  could  describe  as
    unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair in several respects.

36. Firstly, in respect of Judge Wood's determination in 2009 it  is  clear
    from Judge Wood's decision at paragraph 36 that he stated that "it  may
    be that (the Appellant) is identified as the mother of a  teacher.   In
    light of the regime in Zimbabwe, that might well lead to  the  kind  of
    treatment that she has described  in  her  account",  but  due  to  the
    Appellant being able  to  return  to  South  Africa  in  his  view  his
    determination promulgated on 3 July 2009  resulted  in  the  conclusion
    that  there  was  no  reason  why  she  required  refugee   status   or
    humanitarian  protection.   However,  as  I  have   already   rehearsed
    previously, according to the submissions of Mr Mahmood which I  accept,
    on the basis of the letter from the South African Embassy, her  ability
    to return to South Africa would have expired in January 2009  by  which
    time the First-tier Tribunal would have been confronted with the desire
    that she would have had  to  return  to  Zimbabwe  and  may  have  been
    identified as the mother of a teacher and given the  authorities  which
    prevailed at that time the Appellant may have been given refugee status
    and humanitarian protection in accordance with RN (Zimbabwe) CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00083.  However, that evidence was  not  before  Judge  Wood  and
    consequently the appeal was dismissed; but nonetheless the fact remains
    that the Appellant may have obtained  refugee  status  or  humanitarian
    protection such that she would not have been an  Appellant  at  today's
    date had her inability to enter South Africa been known to Judge  Wood.



37. Secondly, as Mr Mahmood submitted, the Appellant's  application  was  a
    fresh claim which resulted in the decision of 23 October 2015  made  on
    19 December 2012 such that the delay in processing her fresh claim  was
    almost three years in length.  This  in  my  view  contributes  to  the
    appearance of an  administrative  and  dysfunctional  system  that  was
    described by Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo).  Thus, for those  reasons  it
    is my view that the delay is relevant alongside the historic inaccuracy
    in Judge Wood's conclusion such that the requirements  of  a  firm  and
    fair immigration control are moderately reduced in this appeal.

38. Taking all of the above factors into consideration  I  also  take  into
    account the best interests of the children which have remained  at  the
    forefront of my mind when making this assessment.  I note the letter in
    particular from the Appellant's  grandson,  Quincy,  which  appears  at
    pages 24 and 25 of the Appellant's supplementary bundle which describes
    the fact that the Appellant has been there for  the  grandchildren  for
    most of their lives, and reflects the evidence which I have heard today
    and which I have accepted, that  the  Appellant's  daughter  could  not
    attend certain events and thus the Appellant attended in her stead as a
    parent figure and also assists the grandchildren as a parent  might  do
    with their homework etc.  The letters also confirm and corroborate that
    the Appellant's daughter is often sick and that  the  grandmother  does
    look after the grandchildren and puts them to bed also.   This  day-to-
    day routine of looking  after  the  children  in  every  way,  such  as
    cleaning their bedrooms, ironing,  taking  them  to  and  from  school,
    making food and  putting  them  to  bed  alongside  looking  after  the
    daughter whenever she is ill, demonstrates that the  Appellant  is  the
    linchpin to this family unit and it is clearly in the best interests of
    her grandchildren that she remains in that place  holding  this  family
    together.

39. Given that the children's father only sees them a handful  of  times  a
    year and has not demonstrated any support for the children  other  than
    that infrequent contact, it is clear that there is no alternate  person
    whom the daughter and grandchildren can turn to  for  support  even  if
    that were to be a sufficient remedy for this scenario, which it is not.



40. Taking all of the above factors into consideration, I conclude that the
    decision of the Respondent to remove the Appellant would  result  in  a
    disproportionate interference in the family life  enjoyed  between  the
    Appellant, her daughter and her grandchildren.   As  I  have  said  the
    Appellant is essential to the day-to-day operation of this family  unit
    and also provides  essential  emotional  support  for  the  Appellant's
    daughter  as  well  as  ensuring  the  continued   wellbeing   of   her
    grandchildren.  As such the absence of the Appellant  would  jeopardise
    the lives of  the  daughter  and  the  grandchildren,  and  the  public
    interest in removing her is outweighed by the  disruptive  effect  that
    her removal would have upon all members of this family unit.



Notice of Decision

41. The Appellant's appeal  in  respect  of  her  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claims is dismissed.

42. The Appellant's appeal in respect of her human rights claim is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.








Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
