
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/13044/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 January 2019                        |On 19 March 2019                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SAR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mair, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated on 20 June 2017, I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

    1.   The appellant, SAR, was born  in  December  1983  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Iran.  He first claimed asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2009 but his claim was refused and an appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed on 25  November  2009.   There  was  no  onward
    appeal.  The appellant made further representations to the Secretary of
    State in February 2013 but the respondent maintained the refusal of the
    decision dated 22 October 2015.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Moxon), which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    December 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    2.   The three grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  concern  the
    appellant's sur place activities in  the  United  Kingdom.   I  am  not
    invited to interfere in any way with the other findings by Judge  Moxon
    and by the previous  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  2009  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility and his past activities in Iran  made.   Having
    said that, the ground of appeal concerning procedural  unfairness  also
    touches upon the appellant's claim to have left Iran  illegally.   That
    claim was rejected by Judge Moxon:

    I also note that within the refusal letter it is not expressly accepted
    that the appellant did leave Iran illegally, it being stated that  this
    aspect is only "claimed".  The only evidence that  the  appellant  left
    Iran illegally and is known by the name he has provided to the  British
    authorities, is from the appellant himself.  He  has  not  adduced  any
    documentation  to  this  effect.    Given   the   significant   adverse
    credibility findings of Judge Lambert and myself, as outlined below,  I
    do not accept, upon the appellant's word alone, that  he  did  in  fact
    leave Iran illegally and that he is known by the name he has  used  for
    these proceedings.

    3.   Ms Smith, for the appellant, submitted that the  question  of  the
    appellant's claimed illegal exit from Iran had never been raised by the
    respondent beyond the reference in a  refusal  letter  to  which  Judge
    Moxon in turn refers in the passage which I have  just  quoted.   Given
    that I will set aside Judge Moxon's decision, I am prepared  to  accept
    that the question of the appellant's illegal exit may be considered  at
    the resumed hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal.   However,  only  that
    issue and sur place activities and the effect these activities may have
    on increasing the appellant's risk on return to Iran  remain  the  only
    issues in this appeal to which the Upper Tribunal will have  regard  at
    the resumed hearing; all other  findings  by  both  previous  Tribunals
    shall stand.

    4.   As regards sur place activities, the grounds deal principally with
    the appellant's Facebook postings. I  have  to  say  that  I  find  the
    judge's findings at [50]  regarding  an  anti-government  demonstration
    which the appellant claims to have attended in 2014 and a further event
    in October 2015 to be entirely sound.  The judge did  not  accept  that
    the appellant had attended these events, a finding with  which  I  will
    not interfere.

    5.   At [51], Judge Moxon did  not  accept  the  appellant  had  posted
    political messages on Facebook.  The appellant claimed to  have  posted
    these messages from 2013.  The judge wrote:

    Whilst I have seen printouts that appear to be  from  Facebook  I  only
    have the appellant's evidence that these are  actual  screenshots  from
    the Facebook page.  Given the general adverse  findings  and  the  fact
    that the Facebook postings have not been disclosed previously I am  not
    satisfied that the documents purporting to be Facebook messages are  in
    fact true representations of what  has  been  posted  on  line  by  the
    appellant.  I also take into account the  inadequate  explanation  from
    the appellant as to why he would post such things if he  believed  that
    it would increase his risk of harm if returned.

    6.   Ms Smith submitted  that,  had  the  judge's  concerns  about  the
    Facebook postings been brought to  the  appellant's  attention  at  the
    hearing, he would have been in a position to have  shown  the  Facebook
    pages to the judge on his mobile phone.  The judge  acted  unfairly  by
    denying the appellant the opportunity to explain and possibly allay the
    judge's concerns regarding the Facebook postings.  Further, the  actual
    reliability of the Facebook pictures and postings had not been  brought
    into doubt by the representative of the respondent  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Ms Smith also submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    apply the case of AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 in particular at [467]:

    The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom  for  a  prolonged  period
    does not lead to persecution. However it may lead to scrutiny and there
    is clear evidence that some  people  are  asked  about  their  internet
    activity and particularly for  their  Facebook  password.  The  act  of
    returning someone creates a "pinch point" so that a person  is  brought
    into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both the time
    and inclination to interrogate them. We think it likely that they  will
    be asked about their internet activity and  likely  if  they  have  any
    internet activity for that to  be  exposed  and  if  it  is  less  than
    flattering of the government to lead to at the very least a  real  risk
    of persecution.

    7.   At [56], Judge Moxon wrote:

    I therefore do not accept that the purported  Facebook  messages  would
    come to the attention of the Iranian authorities if [the appellant] was
    to be returned.  Even if they had been genuine.  I do not believe  that
    he would be  identified  as  someone  upon  images  of  anti-government
    demonstration in the United Kingdom (sic) I  do  not  accept  that  his
    activities have been monitored.

    8.   I accept Ms Smith's  submission  that  the  judge  appears  to  be
    dealing here only with  the  monitoring  of  the  appellant's  Facebook
    account prior to his return; in other words,  in  circumstances  where,
    before his arrival in Iran, the Iranian authorities would be  aware  of
    his activity on Facebook.  This ignores the  observation  made  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in AB that the appellant  is  likely  to  be  questioned
    about Facebook activity and that he should not be expected to lie about
    that activity but to state the truth, namely  that  he  had  posted  on
    Facebook.  As I discussed with the  advocates  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, this gives rise to a number of issues  which  require  further
    examination.  First, there needs to be an assessment of the appellant's
    own character and likely conduct if he is  returned  according  to  the
    principles of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31. If the appellant is found to be
    a genuine political opponent of the Iranian regime and fearless in  the
    face of any possible persecution at their hands, then he is  likely  to
    inform those interrogating  him  on  arrival  that  he  has  posted  on
    Facebook so as to allow those officials  to  find  the  anti-government
    postings.  However, as Judge Moxon observed, it  is  unlikely  that  an
    individual who is not genuinely opposed to the Iranian regime would, if
    he were returned to Iran, be likely to seek to obliterate  any  records
    on  the  internet  which,  having  proved  useless  in   securing   his
    immigration  position  in  the  United  Kingdom,  might  put   him   in
    difficulties upon return.  Internet postings, therefore, differ in kind
    from, for example, photographs which embassy officials  might  take  of
    those attending a demonstration; once taken, the subject  is  powerless
    to prevent a photograph being published  to  third  parties.  Secondly,
    this, in turn, gives rise to the question of whether or not one is able
    to remove postings on Facebook and, even if they are  removed,  whether
    they leave on the internet any form of "trace".  I accept that, if  the
    postings cannot be removed, then the appellant cannot  be  expected  to
    lie in order to protect himself if  he  is  asked  about  his  Facebook
    account.  Equally, however, if the appellant  is  able  to  remove  the
    Facebook postings then it is necessary to consider whether he would  be
    likely to do so before he returned to Iran so that he would not need to
    lie to his interrogators.

    9.   Save for the issue of illegal exit and sur place  activities,  all
    the findings of the previous Tribunals including that  of  Judge  Moxon
    shall stand.  However, I set aside the decision and  shall  remake  the
    decision in the Upper Tribunal following a resumed hearing.  The issues
    which I have indicated in paragraph [8] above will be  the  subject  of
    the resumed hearing.  It would be helpful if the Tribunal were to  have
    the advantage of expert opinion  regarding  the  question  of  internet
    postings, dealing, in particular, with Facebook postings and whether or
    not these may be removed and, if they  can  be  removed,  whether  they
    would leave  any  form  of  'trace'  which  would  enable  the  Iranian
    authorities, if they are  given  access  to  the  appellant's  Facebook
    account, to retrieve the postings.  If the appellant's internet profile
    may be extinguished by  him  prior  to  returning  to  Iran,  then  the
    Tribunal will need to consider (having  regard  to  the  views  of  the
    previous Tribunal as to his credibility) whether he would  indeed  seek
    to remove his profile in order to  protect  himself  and  in  order  to
    prevent the need to lie during any interrogation.

    10.  I direct that any evidence on which either party may seek to  rely
    at the resumed hearing should be served on the other party and filed at
    the Upper Tribunal in no less  than  ten  days  prior  to  the  resumed
    hearing.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  6
    December 2016 is set aside.  Save for the issues of  (i)  illegal  exit
    from Iran and (ii) sur place activities namely the appellant's Facebook
    postings, all the findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    preserved.  The remaining  issues  will  be  determined  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal at a resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane at
    Manchester on the first available date after 1 August 2017.

 2. The resumed hearing took place at Bradford  on  28  January  2019.  The
    appellant gave evidence in Kurdish Sorani with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter. He was cross-examined by Mr Bates, who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary  of  State.  Having  heard  the  oral  submissions  of   both
    representatives, I reserved my decision.

 3. The burden of proof is on the  appellant.  The  standard  of  proof  is
    whether the appellant has shown that there are substantial grounds  for
    believing that he would be at real risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
    which would breach Article 3 ECHR if he is  returned  to  Iran.  I  had
    regard to all the evidence both written and oral and I have  considered
    the expert evidence upon which the appellant relies. I have  considered
    the evidence as a totality before reaching  any  findings  of  fact  or
    reaching  conclusions  as  to  the  credibility  of  any  part  of  the
    appellant's account. I have sought to identify the 'core' issues in the
    appellant's claim and  to  distinguish  those  issues  from  peripheral
    matters.

 4. Mr Bates submitted that the appellant's account of how he had left Iran
    was not credible. He reminded me that the appellant did  not  claim  to
    have any form of profile with the Iranian authorities  before  he  left
    that country. He submitted  that  the  appellant  had  spelt  his  name
    differently on his Facebook page, omitting the 'i' from his surname. He
    submitted that the appellant is likely to have done  that  so  that  he
    would be able  to  distance  himself  from  the  Facebook  account,  if
    challenged. Mr Bates submitted that the  appellant's  Facebook  account
    would never, in any  event,  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities. Those authorities would have no reason  to  look  for  the
    appellant, an individual without profile, on social media and, if  they
    did come across him, the difference in  the  spelling  of  his  surname
    would enable him to escape detection. Even if  the  authorities  became
    aware of the Facebook account, the  appellant's  activities  on  social
    media were not of a high level. The account had been opened in 2011 yet
    the appellant accepted that he had never raised it with the Home Office
    before 2014. Such conduct  indicated  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    genuine asylum seeker. As regards  the  photographs  of  attendance  at
    demonstrations upon which the appellant relies, there was  no  evidence
    at all that the appellant's name was connected with the photographs. It
    was also not credible that the appellant did  not  contact  his  family
    through Facebook. He had been in contact with them between 2011 - 2014.
    There was no evidence at all that the family had been put  in  fear  in
    Iran on account of the appellant's Facebook activity.

 5. Mr Bates submitted also that the Tribunal still did not  have  detailed
    technical expert evidence regarding the posting of material on Facebook
    or other social media portals. It remained unclear whether  an  account
    could be wholly deleted. However, it did seems to  the  case  that,  if
    deleted, an account could not be resurrected. The important  point  was
    whether the appellant, returning as a failed  asylum  seeker  from  the
    United Kingdom, would be able to pass  through  the  'pinch  point'  of
    interrogation at Teheran airport. The authorities would  not  have  any
    reason to identify the appellant from the passenger manifest  prior  to
    his arrival.

 6. Mr Bates submitted that the appellant's name never been  taken  at  any
    demonstration and that his participation would  not  lead  the  Iranian
    authorities to identify him or take an interest  in  him.  Because  the
    appellant did not genuinely hold  the  political  views  which  he  had
    espoused during the course of his claim and appeal, he would delete his
    Facebook account if he believed he was  to  be  returned  to  Iran.  In
    consequence, he would be able to pass through the 'pinch point' of  the
    airport and return to live without risk in his home area of Iran.

 7. Ms Mair, who appeared for the appellant, invited me to accept that  the
    appellant had exited Iran illegally in  2009.  She  told  me  that  the
    appellant accepted that his Facebook activity had begun  in  2011.  She
    submitted that country guidance indicated that the Iranian  authorities
    had a 'hair trigger' when faced with returning individuals who  may  be
    opponents of their regime.

 8. I have considered the evidence of the appellant very  carefully.  I  am
    aware that before the appellant lost his appeal before Judge  Moxon  an
    earlier appeal had also been dismissed  November  2009.  The  appellant
    given an account at that stage of involvement with the KDPI  which  the
    judge (Judge Lambert)  had  rejected  as  untruthful.  Judge  Lambert's
    decision was never successfully  appealed  by  the  appellant  and  her
    findings remain relevant as a starting point for my own (see  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702 *).

 9. I do not find the appellant to be a truthful witness. He was unable  to
    explain in any way which I found rational or credible why  he  had  not
    informed the United Kingdom authorities of his Facebook activity  until
    2014. I do not accept his claim that he does not have contact with  his
    mother, sister and brother who continue  to  live  in  Iran.  He  said,
    variously, that he had no means of contacting them but also that he had
    refrained from doing so because he did not want not to 'get  them  into
    trouble.' I did not accept that explanation  as  truthful.  I  find  it
    reasonably likely that the appellant is in contact with his  family  in
    Iran, as he acknowledges he had been in the period 2011 -2014.  I  find
    that he has been untruthful about this contact because  does  not  want
    the Tribunal to be aware that his  family  in  Iran  have  suffered  no
    adverse effects from his activity on Facebook. They have  not  done  so
    because the Iranian authorities are, in my opinion, wholly  unaware  of
    the appellant, his social media account or his sur place activities  in
    the United Kingdom.

10. I have to consider whether the appellant's claimed opposition  politics
    are genuinely held by him. Judge Lambert found that the  appellant  had
    lied about his political  beliefs  and  activities.  I  find  that  the
    appellant does not hold any genuine opposition political views and  his
    claim to do so is simply an attempt to  extend  his  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom. I find that it is significant that  the  appellant  has
    raised the matter of his Facebook account and his sur place  activities
    at demonstrations only after previous unsuccessful attempts to persuade
    the respondent and  a  judicial  decision-maker  that  his  views  were
    genuine.  I  find  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  surname  is
    incorrectly spelt on his Facebook account is no accident but a ploy  by
    him to ensure that the Iranians authorities would  never  link  him  to
    posts on that account (even assuming that the authorities  ever  became
    aware of the account which I consider unlikely).

11. Moreover, I find it reasonably likely that,  if  the  appellant  became
    aware that he was to be removed from the United  Kingdom  to  Iran,  he
    would immediately delete the Facebook account. In her analysis  of  the
    technical expert evidence regarding social media which is contained  in
    her helpful skeleton argument, Ms Mair records that deletion is delayed
    by Facebook for a few days after a request is made to  delete.  It  may
    take up to 90 days from the beginning of the deletion process to remove
    all posts but, crucially, from the point of deletion process posts  are
    not viewable by third parties.  I  find,  having  regard  to  the  past
    conduct of the appellant, his  wholly  cynical  deployment  of  claimed
    opposition political views in support of his asylum claim and the  fact
    that he does not genuinely hold any of the  political  views  which  he
    claims to espouse, that the appellant would take steps  immediately  to
    delete his Facebook account  if  faced  with  removal.  The  effect  of
    deletion would be that, by the time he reached  Teheran,  none  of  the
    past postings on the account would  be  visible  unless  the  appellant
    cancelled the deletion by logging back into his account. I find that he
    would not do that and I find that there are no  reasons  for  supposing
    that officers of the  Iranian  government  who  might  interrogate  the
    appellant at the airport would ask him to  log  back  into  an  account
    which they did not even know existed. I find there is  no  evidence  to
    show that the appellant would even be asked whether or  not  he  had  a
    Facebook account.

12. Ms Mair's  skeleton  argument  also  raises  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant may have been tagged in the Facebook account of another user.
    The deletion of the appellant's account would not remove  such  'tags.'
    There is no evidence that the appellant is tagged in the third  parties
    account or, even if he has  been  tagged,  that  the  account  contains
    material which might  be  of  interest  to  the  Iranians  authorities.
    Moreover, given that the appellant himself is not of interest to  those
    authorities, it is difficult to see what  circumstances  third  parties
    account containing references to the appellant would ever come to their
    attention.

13. As regards the appellant's sur place activities  at  demonstrations,  I
    agree with Mr Bates that there is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    presence has been recorded by the officials at the Iranian Embassy.  By
    the appellant's own evidence, there were many demonstrators taking part
    in the events and their names were not taken Iranian  officials.  Given
    that he has no profile, I do not find it  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant's attendance would come to the attention of interrogators  at
    Teheran airport. There is no evidence to show that those  interrogators
    would ask the appellant directly if  he  had  attended  demonstrations.
    Given that he is not a genuine political activist, I find that,  if  he
    were asked, he would explain that he had attended  not  to  oppose  the
    Iranian government but only in order to support his claim for asylum.

14. In summary, I find that the appellant is not  a  truthful  witness.  No
    part of his account past events can be relied upon whilst I  find  that
    he does not genuinely hold any of the  political  views  which  he  has
    claimed to possess in support of his application  for  asylum.  He  has
    deliberately used a false name on a Facebook account. I find that  that
    account would, in any event, not  of  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities  nor  are  those  authorities  likely  to  ask  the
    appellant if he ever had such  an  account.  Moreover,  if  faced  with
    removal, I find the appellant would delete the account forthwith.  This
    would have the effect of preventing third parties from viewing  any  of
    the posts on the account unless the appellant resurrected it by logging
    back into the account which I find he is not reasonably likely to do or
    to be asked to do by Iranian officials in Tehran who would have no idea
    that the account existed  in  the  first  instance.  I  find  that  the
    appellant will pass safely through the 'pinch point' of Teheran airport
    and he will not be at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment  either
    at the point of arrival or whilst living subsequently in his home  area
    of Iran. Accordingly, his appeal is dismissed.







Notice of Decision

15. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 3 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






