
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/14934/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 26 January 2016                   |on 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     FB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Senegal, born on 15 December  1979.   She
    made an asylum claim on 20 September 2010, based on the risk of FGM  to
    her daughters,  born  on  23  January  2002  and  20  June  2006.   The
    respondent refused her claim on 15 October 2010.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    by determination promulgated on 13 December 2010.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Neuberger refused  permission  to  appeal  by
    decision dated 4 February 2011, on the view that although the judge was
    said to have misunderstood the evidence there was no  specification  of
    the  alleged  misunderstanding,  and  no  contradiction   between   the
    background evidence and her conclusions, which did take account of past
    alleged persecution of the appellant.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey refused  permission  by  decision  dated  8
    March 2011, finding no arguable merit in any of 4 grounds  proposed  by
    the appellant.

 5. The appellant petitioned the court for judicial  review  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision.

 6. A letter from the appellant's solicitors (addressed to the "Immigration
    and Asylum Tribunal Scotland", a non-existent body) dated 7  July  2015
    states that when the appellant's "appeal" reached the Court of  Session
    "the Home Office withdrew their  opposition,  on  14  May  2013."   The
    letter says that the appellant is awaiting a fresh  decision  from  the
    Upper Tribunal on her application for permission to appeal.

 7. While the letter narrates that the solicitors have been in  touch  with
    the "IAT" and with the Upper Tribunal asking  for  a  progress  report,
    this appears to have been the first occasion on which the  interlocutor
    of the Court dated 15 May 2013 was drawn to the attention of the  Upper
    Tribunal by any party.

 8. The interlocutor is to the  effect  that  the  Lord  Ordinary,  on  the
    unopposed motion of the petitioner, reduces the decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal dated 18 March 2011.

 9. The delay in dealing further with the case  is  because  neither  party
    advised the Upper Tribunal of this further development (or at least did
    not do so promptly and clearly).

10. The appellant has provided a copy of her petition to the  Court,  which
    states at paragraph 8:

         "The grounds [on which the Upper Tribunal  refused  permission]  do
         identify arguable errors  in  law.   These  include  (but  are  not
         limited to) that returning  the  petitioner  to  Senegal  with  the
         serious,  irreversible  and  traumatic  sequelae  of  her   genital
         mutilation  amounts  to  a  permanent   and   continuing   act   of
         persecution, that gives rise to qualification as a refugee."

11. That ground is in essence ground 4 of the applications  for  permission
    made to the FtT and then to the UT.

12. On 19 November 2015 Mr C M G Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, decided thus:

         "Permission is granted in light of the interlocutor of the Court of
         Session in this case.  The parties  are  reminded  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal's task is that set out in section 12 of the 2007 Act."

13. On 29 December 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  grant  of
    permission as follows:

         "3 The appellant asserts in the grounds of appeal dated 21  January
             2011 [the application to the UT] that the judge  misunderstood
             the evidence of the appellant; that the findings of the FtT in
             respect of sufficiency of protection were  contradicted  by  2
             extracts from reports; that the FtT did not take into  account
             the past FGM in assessing the future  risk  of  the  daughters
             being similarly subjected to FGM in the future; and  that  the
             FtT has not addressed the significance of ongoing harm to  the
             appellant resulting from FGM.

          4. ... The grounds ... fail to identify any material error of law
             ...

          5. It is unclear  from  the  grounds  ...  exactly  how  the  FtT
             misunderstood the evidence of the appellant and how this would
             have made a material difference ...

          6. The FtT appears to have considered all  the  documents  before
             it, including the objective evidence, and reached  sustainable
             conclusions.

          7. The FtT did take into account the past  FGM  in  reaching  its
             conclusions."

14. I asked the Presenting Officer if he could explain why  the  respondent
    decided not to resist  the  appellant's  petition  to  the  Court.   He
    advised that as far as he was aware this was on the view that ground  4
    might raise an important point of principle, although the  respondent's
    position now is that the  ground  has  no  good  legal  basis,  and  is
    contrary to the clear law of the UK.

Grounds argued for appellant.

15. Ms Loughran advised that she wished to argue grounds 2 and  4  of  both
    applications (these make the same two points, although stated  somewhat
    differently).

16. Ground 2 is that the judge erred in holding that there  is  sufficiency
    of  protection  against  the  risk  of  FGM  being  inflicted  on   the
    appellant's 2 daughters because (a) protection after the event, by  way
    of prosecution or  other  recourse,  is  no  real  protection  and  (b)
    although the law forbids FGM, it is  not  enforced  and  there  are  no
    prosecutions.

17. Ground 4 in the first application is that the judge failed to take into
    account the  evidence  of  past  persecution  of  the  appellant  (FGM,
    corroborated by a medical report) in assessing ongoing harm to her  and
    future risk to her daughters.  Demirkaya [1999] Imm AR 498 is cited:

         "Where  evidence  of   past   maltreatment   exists   ...   it   is
         unquestionably an excellent indicator of the fate that may await an
         applicant on return to her home.  Unless there  had  been  a  major
         change of circumstances ...  past  experience  under  a  particular
         regime should be considered probative of future risk ...  in  some,
         evidence  of  individualised  past  persecution  is   generally   a
         sufficient,  though  not  a  mandatory,   means   of   establishing
         prospective risks."

18. Ground 4 of the second application puts the issue in the form that  the
    judge failed to  deal  with  the  submission  that  the  appellant  had
    "suffered a type of harm ... irreversible and  so  severe  [as  to  be]
    viewed as a permanent and  continuing  act  of  persecution  where  the
    presumption of well founded fear cannot be rebutted."

19. The quotation in ground 4 is from Mohammed  v  Gonzales,  US  Court  of
    Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, opinion of Circuit  Judge  Renhardt,  10
    March 2005.

Further submissions for appellant.

20. On ground 2, Ms Loughran referred to paragraph 39 of the determination.
     The judge says that even taking the appellant's  account  at  highest,
    there is sufficiency of protection,  and  that  complete  efficacy  can
    never be guaranteed.  She goes on:

         "An important element of sufficiency of protection is the existence
         of laws banning FGM and the willingness of the state to  prosecute.
         The background evidence all clearly indicates this to be  the  case
         in Senegal."

21. Ms Loughran accepted that there are laws  banning  FGM,  but  she  went
    through the background  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  there  are  no
    records of prosecutions.

22. On ground 4, it was accepted that US authority is not binding on  a  UK
    tribunal.  She submitted, however, that  the  judgment  in  Mohammed  v
    Gonzales illustrates a sound principle which ought to  be  followed  as
    such, not because it is a precedent.  Various passages are  highlighted
    in the copy filed of Mohammed v Gonzales.  The principle is  summarised
    thus at paragraph 11 on page 3088:

         "In  sum,  because  Female  Genital  Mutilation  is,  liked  forced
         sterilisation, a "permanent and continuing" act of persecution, our
         precedent dictates the conclusion  that  the  presumption  of  well
         founded fear in such cases cannot be rebutted. Cf. Qu ... "

Submissions for respondent.

23. Mr Matthews firstly pointed to the structure of the determination.   At
    paragraph 30 the judge sets out as much as she is prepared to accept of
    the  appellant's  evidence.   Subsequently,  and   in   particular   at
    paragraphs 31 to 38, she explains why she does not find  the  essential
    parts of the claim to have been established to the necessary  standard.
    Paragraph  39  on  sufficiency  of  protection  is   clearly   in   the
    alternative.  The judge might be wrong about willingness to  prosecute,
    but that makes no difference.  In any event, the judge goes on to  find
    at paragraphs 41 to 42 that the claim would  be  defeated  by  internal
    relocation.  That is not challenged in the grounds, so any error  about
    whether prosecutions take place pales further into insignificance.

24. On ground 4, Mr Matthews acknowledged that the determination records  a
    submission for the appellant based on Mohammed v Gonzales but does  not
    explicitly answer it.  He referred to ML [2014] CSOH 54 and  DL  [2014]
    CSOH 147 to show that the  opinion  of  a  foreign  court  is  at  best
    persuasive, and to AX [2012]  UKUT  97  as  an  example  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal considering international case law.  These cases  showed  also
    that the legal approach in the USA to family planning policy issues  is
    different to that in the UK, and US case law is not a good guide.  This
    case was another example, although on a different issue.  Further,  the
    rule applied in Mohammed v Gonzales came from  previous  US  authority,
    which the appellant did not cite.  In any event, it  does  not  reflect
    the law of the UK, which does not contain any  such  presumption.   Our
    law is as stated at paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:

         'The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated.'

25. That principle could not apply to the risk to the children, because the
    First-tier Tribunal found as a fact that there is no  such  risk.   The
    harm to the appellant has been carried out.  She did not and could  not
    allege a fear of repetition.   The  proposition  that  the  act  itself
    amounted to a  continuing  act  of  persecution  did  not  square  with
    paragraph 339K, and did not reflect the law of the UK.

26. This argument was supported also  by  reference  to  the  Qualification
    Directive, 2004/83/EC, Article 4(4), which is effectively in  identical
    terms to paragraph 339K.

27. In the light of these principles, it was irrelevant that the judge  had
    not  resolved  the  submission  recorded  at  paragraph   29   of   the
    determination.  It could not assist the appellant.

Reply for appellant.

28. The appellant said in her witness statement that she  feared  not  only
    her own and her husband's families but also in  general  the  tribe  to
    which they belong, the Foula, a major group found not only in her  home
    area but throughout the country.  On ground  4,  the  judge  failed  to
    resolve the submission and  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  rely  on
    continuing persecution to establish her case.  There had  been  medical
    evidence to show that she was still suffering ill-effects in  2010.   A
    letter received only recently (but undated) from the Sandyford  Clinic,
    NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, states that a speciality doctor is still
    seeing the appellant "for ongoing psychosexual counselling as a  direct
    result from having [to] undergo FGM against her will."

Discussion and conclusions.

29. I raised with representatives whether there is any  relevant  principle
    about whether persons who have suffered particularly atrocious forms of
    persecution may be expected to return, even if  the  conditions  giving
    rise to their fear no longer exist.  Mr Matthews said that he  was  not
    aware of authority for that principle, and that the appellant  had  not
    made that argument.  Ms Loughran submitted that return  amounted  to  a
    continuing act of torture, and referred to Fornah [2006] UKHL46,  which
    she had produced in her bundle of authorities.

30. Fornah is not an authority on the issue  I  had  raised,  or  otherwise
    helpful, being a case on the definition of "particular social group".

31. On reflection, what I had in mind  is  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, which provides that cessation of refugee status  shall  not
    apply to someone who is "able to invoke compelling reasons arising  out
    of previous persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection
    of the country of nationality."  This has  been  thought  to  apply  to
    persons who should not have  to  return  to  the  scene  of  atrocities
    suffered, even after conditions have changed.  There is nothing in this
    principle which helps the appellant to make out her grounds of appeal.

32. There is a slip by the judge at paragraph 39.   The  evidence  did  not
    indicate willingness of the State to prosecute,  rather  the  opposite.
    However, the finding is plainly in the alternative.   For  the  reasons
    given by the Presenting Officer, correction of  this  error  would  not
    change the outcome.

33. A presumption that FGM constitutes a permanent and  continuing  act  of
    persecution so as to give rise to protection appears to be part of  the
    law of the USA, but it is no part of the law of the United Kingdom.  It
    is immaterial that  the  judge  recorded  but  failed  to  resolve  the
    submission.  It does not affect the fact that the  claim  was  defeated
    (a) for lack of credibility and (b)  on  the  alternative  of  internal
    relocation.

34. Ms Loughran in submissions  sought  to  resurrect  the  argument  of  a
    country-wide risk, but the judge dealt at paragraph 42 with the claimed
    fear of the entire Foula tribe.   The  grounds  contain  nothing  which
    shows these crucial conclusions to be legally flawed.

35. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on any point of law, such as to require it to be
    set aside.

36. No anonymity order has been requested or made




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           28 January 2016
