

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/16139/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 13th March 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     S K
                            Anonymity order made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Bazini, counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION BY CONSENT

   1. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey held, in a decision sent out  following  a
      hearing on 16th September 2011 that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had
      erred in law in dismissing an appeal on  asylum  grounds  against  the
      decision to remove the appellant. It was common ground that the First-
      tier Tribunal judge had failed to deal satisfactorily with the  expert
      evidence.


   2. Before us the respondent accepted that, on the basis of  the  evidence
      now before the Upper Tribunal and in the light of the current  country
      guidance case of MN [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC), the  appellant  had  made
      out her claim for international  protection  under  the  1951  Refugee
      Convention, the appeal should be allowed and the  appellant  would  be
      recognised as a refugee.

   3. At the request of the parties and in accordance with paragraph  39  of
      the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, a consent order to
      this effect was signed by the parties, confirmed by us and is attached
      herewith.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did the making of
    an error on a point of law.

     We set aside the decision

     We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    In  the  circumstances  however  we  make  an  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure  of  any  matter  that  may  lead  to  the  appellant  being
    identified (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).







                                    Date 20th March 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
