
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/16809/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 13 January 2014                            |On 5 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                             AELEO MAJID IBRAHIM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal has  a  protracted  history.   The  appellant,  who  is  of
    Palestinian ethnicity and is from Gaza, came to the United Kingdom,  it
    seems, in February 2008. He claimed  asylum  on  the  same  day.   This
    application  was  refused  on  22  August  2008  but  he  was   granted
    discretionary leave until 5 July 2009 in  line  with  the  respondent's
    policy for unaccompanied asylum seeking children  (he  was  born  on  5
    January 1992).

2.   The appellant made an application for further leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on 5 July 2009 and this was refused by the respondent on
    25 November 2010.  He appealed against that decision to a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and that appeal took place on  5  September  2011.
    The judge dismissed the  appeal  but  subsequently  the  appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal  by  an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  following
    refusal initially by a First-tier Judge.

3.   Things stalled  somewhat  thereafter  as  a  consequence  of  delay  in
    establishing whether or not the appellant is on the Israeli  Population
    Registry.  Ultimately it was confirmed that he was not on the  registry
    but following two previous For Mention hearings, on 19  June  2013  the
    respondent said that they had not worked out the legal consequences  of
    the appellant not being on the registry which, it was canvassed,  might
    lead to him being granted discretionary leave on the grounds  of  being
    stateless.

4.   The matter was further considered at another For Mention hearing on  20
    August 2013 and again on 27 September 2013.  Following the  failure  by
    the respondent to respond to case management directions the matter  was
    listed for a further hearing on 13 January 2014.  On that date  it  was
    accepted by Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent that the appellant is
    stateless and he noted the impasse in a situation where  the  appellant
    could not apply under the statelessness rules while he  had  an  appeal
    pending and he would lose his section 3C  leave.   Mr  Walker  did  not
    think it would be possible to comply with an unless  order  within   28
    days.

5.   As a consequence I directed that each side would have fourteen days  to
    put in further written submissions and subsequently I  would  determine
    the appeal on the papers.  Further submissions were received  from  the
    appellant but none from the respondent.

6.   In  his  written  submissions  Mr  Draycott  contends  first  that  the
    appellant is entitled to a grant of 30 months' discretionary  leave  on
    the basis that he meets the criteria set out within paragraph 403 of HC
    395.  In the alternative it is argued that since the appellant  clearly
    meets all the practical and compassionate considerations which underlie
    paragraph 403, and the extensive private life that he has developed, as
    detailed in his most recent witness statement, the Tribunal  was  asked
    to conclude that the appeal should be allowed under Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

7.   In the alternative, as I think it is expressed, the Tribunal  is  asked
    to remit the claim for a fresh hearing by the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    the further alternative, if remittal was not thought to be  appropriate
    then the appellant would rely upon  the  arguments  in  his  First-tier
    grounds to the effect that the country guidance decision  in  HS  could
    either be distinguished on its facts or was wrongly decided.

8.   I will consider these arguments in order.

9.   Paragraph 403 of HC 395 states as follows:

         "Requirements for limited leave to remain as a stateless person


         403.  The requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
             a stateless person are that the applicant:


             (a)  has made a valid application to the  Secretary  of  State
                  for limited leave to remain as a stateless person;


             (b)  is recognised as a stateless person by the  Secretary  of
                  State in accordance with paragraph 401;


             (c)  is  not admissible to their country  of  former  habitual
                  residence or any other country; and


             (d)  has  obtained  and  submitted  all  reasonably  available
                  evidence to enable the Secretary  of  State  to  determine
                  whether they are stateless."

10.  In paragraph  405  it  is  said  that  where  an  applicant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 403 they may  be  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom for a period not exceeding 30 months.

11.  As is  accepted  at  footnote  1  to  paragraph  13  of  Mr  Draycott's
    submissions,  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 403(c) as he has not  made  an  application  under  paragraph
    403(a).  The point is made of course,  as  has  been   accepted  by  Mr
    Walker, that he could only do that by withdrawing  his  present  appeal
    and thereby losing his section 3C extended leave  and the right to work
    or receive any welfare benefits accordingly and becoming an overstayer.

12.  The clear wording of the Rule cannot be  by-passed.   I  recognise  the
    dilemma with which the appellant is faced, but nevertheless he has  not
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 403(a) although  I  accept  the
    other requirements of paragraph 403 are satisfied.   It  is  of  course
    also the case that there is no concept of a "near miss"  in  Article  8
    cases.   Nevertheless  it  is  of  relevance  to  the   proportionality
    evaluation  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  private  life  that  the
    Secretary of State has on a number of occasions failed to  comply  with
    directions and  has  delayed  significantly  in  the  course  of  these
    proceedings which is capable of being interpreted as a indication  that
    she sees no urgency to the resolution  of  the  appellant's  situation.
    Nevertheless he cannot be required to remain in limbo for an indefinite
    period and these are matters that are not irrelevant to the  Article  8
    assessment.

13.  In that regard the appellant  says  in  his  third  witness  statement,
    dated 21 January 2014, that he  has  now  been  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom for nearly six years, most of this with lawful leave.   He  has
    had education and employment  during  this  period  and  has  developed
    friendships.  It is clear from reading his statement that he  has  used
    his time profitably while in the United Kingdom both in terms of  study
    and work.  It is relevant also to  note  from  Mr  Draycott's  skeleton
    argument for the For  Mention  hearing  of  13  January  2014  and  his
    reference to and reliance on the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Cvetkovs [2011] UKUT 212 (IAC) that an unexplained failure on the  part
    of the respondent to comply with a direction may lead the  Tribunal  to
    consider that the appeal is not opposed such that  the  matter  may  be
    determined on the papers without further notice after the expiry of  28
    days.

14.  I have noted above the defaults of the  respondent  in  the  course  of
    this litigation and to that can be added the  failure  to  provide  any
    submissions subsequent to the For Mention hearing on 13 January 2014.

15.  The Article 8 issues in this case as so frequently comes  down  to  the
    matter of  proportionality.  The  appellant  has  clearly  developed  a
    private life while in the United Kingdom over the six years he has been
    here and, although there is nothing  in  that  private  life  which  in
    ordinary circumstances would not render his  removal  disproportionate,
    and certainly it is the case that he cannot come within the Immigration
    Rules on Article 8, nevertheless the combination in my view of the lack
    of any strong indication from the respondent's side of  any  compelling
    interest in removal in this case,  together  with  the  fact  that  the
    appellant through no fault of his own is placed in the dilemma referred
    to above with regard to his inability to satisfy paragraph 403(a) of HC
    395,  leads me to the conclusion that  that on the exceptional facts as
    I conclude them to be in  this  case,  he  is  able  to  identify  such
    circumstances as set out above  to  show  that  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  I therefore allow his appeal under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

