
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00495/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at RCJ                            | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 March 2019                        | On 12 April 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                         Lukasz Tadeusz Boguszewski
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, solicitor of Burton & Burton Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Poland,  date  of  birth  28  March  1986,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 18 August  2017,  for
    deportation  made  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 (the 2016 Regulations).

2.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes on  9  November
    2017 and in a decision [D] promulgated on 28 November  2017  the  Judge
    dismissed his appeal.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was given by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb on 14 May 2018.

4.   The Judge in granting permission said:-

     "It is arguable that the judge erred in law in  considering  the  basis
         upon which the Appellant could be legally deported  under  EU  law.
         It appears that the judge accepted that the Appellant had  been  in
         the UK since 2006, although only  exercising  Treaty  rights  since
         2008 (see paras 25 and 26).  In which case, it  would  appear  that
         the Appellant had been in the UK for at least 10 years prior to the
         decision to deport and could only be deported on imperative grounds
         of security (reg 27(4)(a)).  The judge only considered the legality
         of his deportation on the 'lesser' basis  of  'serious  grounds  of
         public policy' based upon a permanent right of residence.  ...".

5.   The argument advanced by Mr Mohzam was that the Appellant  had  entered
    the United Kingdom lawfully in 2006.  Mr Mohzam  did  not  dispute  the
    finding as the Appellant was not, until early 2008,  exercising  treaty
    rights as a qualified person under Regulation 6.  Whilst the  Appellant
    had in the succeeding years of 2007, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013  been
    convicted of a number of offences, and  in 2016 for the  index  offence
    of possessing controlled drugs and producing a controlled  drug  :  For
    which he was sentenced to fourteen months' imprisonment in total, which
    led to the deportation notice served by the Respondent on 15 May  2017,
    that the grounds did not reflect the fact that  the  Appellant  had  by
    that stage been in the UK as a fact, according  to  his  argument,  for
    over ten years.  He further argued that  the  Judge  had  not  properly
    addressed the Article 8 ECHR based claim; in that  the  proportionality
    assessment had failed to take into  account  the  length  of  time  the
    Appellant had spent in the United Kingdom.

6.   At the hearing of the appeal the Appellant,  who  had  been  hoping  to
    attend for the purposes of his appeal having now  returned  to  Poland,
    was not produced, but it did not feature as an issue  that  was  argued
    before me as to some bases upon which the appeal should  be  adjourned.
    The e-mail and  information  relating  to  the  non-attendance  of  the
    Appellant was shown to Mr Mohzam before the hearing.

7.   Mr Jarvis countered the arguments:- first, If you calculated  the  time
    the Appellant had been exercising treaty rights in the UK he  had  not,
    as a fact on the evidence,  i.e.  from  early  2008  [D23-25]  and  the
    deportation decision, 18 August 2017, he was imprisoned on 3 May  2017,
    did not demonstrate the ten years'  residence,  and  in  the  sense  of
    exercising treaty rights. Secondly, more  than  that,  the  Appellant's
    criminal history showed that he had not been lawfully in the  UK  other
    than simply as a fact through being  able  to  reside  here  under  the
    provisions of the EEA directive as represented in the Regulations.   Mr
    Jarvis argued that even if that argument failed the fact was  that  the
    Appellant had been imprisoned, had been involved  in  criminality,  and
    that in the light of the case law the ten  year  period  had  not  been
    established.

8.   Third, Mr Jarvis relied upon the case of  Vomero,  a  decision  of  the
    Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Communities on 17
    April 2018.  The  decision  of  the  court  addressing,  amongst  other
    things, the implications on the cumulation of ten years' residence  and
    the implications of interruptions in that period, said [paragraph 70]:-

      "As  to  whether  periods  of  imprisonment  may,  by  themselves  and
         irrespective of periods of absence from the host Member State, also
         lead, where appropriate, to a severing of the link with that  State
         and to the discontinuity of the period of residence in that  State,
         the Court has held that although, in  principle,  such  periods  of
         imprisonment interrupt the continuity of the period  of  residence,
         for the purpose of Article 28(3)(a) of Directive  2004/38,  it  is
         nevertheless necessary -  in  order  to  determine  whether  those
         periods  of  imprisonment  have  broken   the   integrative   links
         previously forged with the host Member State with the  result  that
         the  person  concerned  is  no  longer  entitled  to  the  enhanced
         protection provided for in that provision - to carry out an overall
         assessment of the situation of that person at the precise time when
         the question of expulsion arises. In the context  of  that  overall
         assessment,  periods   of   imprisonment   must   be   taken   into
         consideration together  with  all  the  relevant  factors  in  each
         individual case, including, as the case may  be,  the  circumstance
         that the person concerned resided in the host Member State for  the
         10 years preceding his imprisonment ...".

     At [71] the court said:-

         "Indeed, particularly in the  case  of  a  Union  citizen  who  was
         already in a  position  to  satisfy  the  condition  of  10  years'
         continuous residence in the host Member State  in  the  past,  even
         before he committed a criminal act that resulted in his  detention,
         the fact that the person concerned was placed  in  custody  by  the
         authorities of that  State  cannot  be  regarded  as  automatically
         breaking the integrative links  that  that  person  had  previously
         forged with that State ..."


    and at [72]:-


          "As part of the overall assessment,  mentioned  in  paragraph 70
         above, which, in this case, is for the  referring  court  to  carry
         out,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account,  as  regards  the
         integrative links forged by B with the host Member State during the
         period of residence before his detention, the fact that,  the  more
         those integrative links with that State are solid - including from
         a social, cultural and family perspective, to the point where,  for
         example, the person concerned is genuinely rooted in the society of
         that  State,  as  found  by  the  referring  court  in   the   main
         proceedings - the lower the probability that a period of detention
         could have resulted in those links being broken and,  consequently,
         a discontinuity of the 10-year period of residence referred  to  in
         Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38."


9.   Other relevant factors were pointed out and the court noted [D74]:-

     "While the nature of the offence and the circumstances in which it  was
         committed shed light on the extent to which  the  person  concerned
         has, as the case may be, become disconnected from  the  society  of
         the host Member State, the attitude of the person concerned  during
         his detention  may,  in  turn,  reinforce  that  disconnection  or,
         conversely, help to maintain or  restore  links  previously  forged
         with the host Member  State  with  a  view  to  his  future  social
         reintegration in that State."

10.  Mr Jarvis essentially said that  the  litany  of  criminality  has  two
    consequences: First, it demonstrated the extent to which a person,  the
    Appellant, has not integrated into UK life and customs and a  sense  of
    responsibility.  It also significantly broke up any period in  the  ten
    years as claimed by the Appellant. Whilst he  has  spent  most  of  his
    adult life in the United Kingdom, he has repeatedly offended  and  such
    work as he has done between any periods when he has been  detained  are
    not so much integration as simply a part of the fact that he  has  been
    here in circumstances where  he  did  not  work  but  rather  committed
    crimes.

11.  A sidewind to this point was that the Judge  assessed  the  Appellant's
    criminality, the extent to which it had escalated,  the  lack  of  real
    remorse,  the  fact  that  there  was  no  ongoing  rehabilitation   or
    considerations which might indicate remorse or a wish to reintegrate in
    to the United Kingdom, and of course the  realities  of  the  harm  his
    criminality did, or would have done.

12.   The  Judge  was  entitled  therefore  to  take  into  account,  as   a
    consideration of the integrative status of the Appellant, the risks  of
    further offending and the lack of insight or rehabilitation within  the
    UK. There was nothing to conclude,  if  the  Appellant  understood  the
    impact of his criminality and wished to  rehabilitate,  there  was  any
    reason why he could not do so in Poland.  The Judge  with  a  range  of
    material, had the opportunity to hear  the  Appellant  and  assess  the
    claims as it was put, and it seemed to me that  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate the Original Tribunal made any error of law in  assessing  the
    claim and concluding that the Appellant did not have the benefit of the
    higher threshold required in  what  are  sometimes  called  "imperative
    grounds", but rather that there were serious grounds of  public  policy
    and public security to justify the decision to remove him.

13.  I agree with Mr Jarvis as to the calculation of  ten  years'  residence
    in the UK, as a qualified  person  and  that  there  was  no  need  for
    imperative grounds.

14.  Mr Mohzam essentially sought to diminish  the  Appellant's  criminality
    and whilst it is correct to say that criminality does not mean a person
    is not integrated, per se, I find the sequence recited in the  decision
    of the Judge gives an unhappy insight into the fact that  for  whatever
    reasons the Appellant has offended and reoffended at will and had  long
    since ceased to be integrated within the UK.

15.  I did not find there was any arguable material error  of  law  made  by
    the Judge.

NOTICE OF DECISION

16.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

17.  The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION

No anonymity direction is required.

Signed                                  Date10 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid.  No fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 10 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
