
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00633/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March 2014                              |On 27 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Norman, instructed by J M Wilson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    dated 2 November 2013 of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nixon  and  Ms  V
    Street which allowed the  respondent's  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    against a decision to make a deportation order against her.

 2. Ms S is a citizen of Jamaica and was born on 28 July 1989.

 3. For the purposes of  this  determination,  I  refer  to  Ms  S  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. This appeal concerns not only Ms S but her 7 year old son, J, a British
    national. In order to  prevent  the  likelihood  of  any  serious  harm
    arising to J, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding  publication  of  any
    information regarding the proceedings which would  be  likely  to  lead
    members of the public to identify the appellant or other members of her
    family and thereby J.

 5. The undisputed background to this matter is that the appellant came  to
    the UK at the age of 11, was placed in care in  2002  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 11 April 2003.

 6. On 3 October 2006 her son,  J,  was  born.  His  father  is  a  British
    national and so J is also British. J's father has a residence order  in
    his favour but with provision for regular  contact with  the  appellant
    on at least  3 days per week.  The respondent's position in the  appeal
    was that J could not be expected to leave the UK and could remain  here
    with his father.

 7. In approximately 2011 the appellant formed a relationship  with  CR,  a
    Jamaican national with indefinite leave to remain. The respondent  does
    not  challenge  the  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting.

 8. The appellant has convictions for shoplifting in 2005, 2007 and 2008.

 9. On 2 July 2009 she was sentenced to 12 months'  detention  in  a  Young
    Offenders  Institution   for   unlawful   wounding   and   theft.   The
    circumstances of the  unlawful  wounding  were  that  she  argued  with
    another girl in a nightclub and picked up something that  she  used  to
    stab the other girl.

10. The respondent commenced  deportation  proceedings  and  a  deportation
    order was made against the appellant on 28 October 2011.

11. The appellant received a conditional discharge for 24 months for  theft
    on 26 April 2011.

12. The appellant was cautioned for child neglect  on  12  June  2012.  The
    circumstances of that offence were that the appellant's second son,  R,
    born on 11 December 2011, died on 14 February 2012. It appears that her
    difficulties following his death lead to the conviction for neglect  of
    J and residence order in favour of his father.

13. Notwithstanding this history of offending, in summary,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal as it found that the best interests of  and
    damage to the child were the appellant deported outweighed  the  public
    interest in her deportation.

14. Paragraph 1 of the respondent's grounds argues that that the First-tier
    Tribunal  gave inadequate  consideration  to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation. Paragraph 2 of the grounds maintains that the panel failed
    to  give  any  or  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  finding  exceptional
    circumstances that  outweighed  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
    Paragraph 3 of the grounds maintain that the panel incorrectly assessed
    the risk of reoffending given the appellant's criminal history.

15. It is not my view that the First-tier Tribunal  can  be  said  to  have
    failed to identify and weigh appropriately the public interest  factors
    in this matter. The appellant's  offences were set  out  in  full;  see
    [3]. The Tribunal directed itself at [15] to the presumption in  favour
    of deportation and  to  the  need  for  "compelling"  or  "exceptional"
    circumstances in order to defeat the public interest in deportation, MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 being cited at [8] and  the  test
    from paragraph [43] of MF Nigeria being set out in the determination at
    [15]. The panel acknowledge at [22] that the index offence was  one  of
    violence. It was open to them to place weight on  the  absence  of  any
    further offending of that nature since the offence  occurred  in  2008,
    some 5 years earlier, and the panel was clearly astute to  the  further
    shoplifting offence following the index offence which received  a  non-
    custodial sentence and the neglect of J. The panel again addressed  the
    public interest in deportation at [24].  Having  clearly  set  out  the
    correct approach, it was for the panel to decide on  how  to  draw  the
    balance between the public interest and the  family  and  private  life
    rights of the appellant, her child and her partner.

16. Having taken into account the high threshold for a  deportation  appeal
    to succeed,  the First-tier Tribunal next addressed the best  interests
    of J at [16] to [21], correctly applying the  dicta  of  ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC) the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC  4.  As
    indicated at [19], J lived most of his 7  years  with  his  mother  and
    still has contact with her. It did not appear to me to  be  exceptional
    that the First-tier Tribunal found it in his best  interests  that  she
    remain in the UK rather than being deported.  Certainly,  they  had  no
    specific social work reports on the narrow point of his best interests.
    The family courts, operating with his welfare at the  centre  of  their
    decision making, however, has found that he  should  continue  to  have
    regular contact with his mother at least 3 times  a  week.  I  did  not
    accept that the panel erred in their assessment of J's  best  interests
    or  in  concluding  at  [20]  that  her  deportation   could   have   a
    "devastating" effect on him when combined with the loss of his  younger
    brother and concerns he has subsequently expressed about fear  of  loss
    of those around him.

17. It appeared to me  at  [22]  that  the  panel,  having  considered  the
    relevant law and evidence, set out the crux of the question before  it,
    whether the child's best interests and family and private life  of  the
    appellant and J outweighed the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The
    appellant's own history, ending up in care herself and losing  a  child
    was described by the First-tier Tribunal  at [23] as a "tragedy" and it
    is not suggested that this was a perverse characterisation.  The  panel
    found at  [25] that the appellant's  own  history,  combined  with  the
    serious impact on  J  of  her  deportation  amounted  to  "exceptional"
    circumstances. I do not accept that the reasons for  those  conclusions
    were "inadequate". It was open to this panel on the facts  before  them
    to find that the compelling factors weighing in favour of the appellant
    outweighed the public interest.

18. I did not find that any of the grounds had merit.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                          Date: 24 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
