
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: DA/00497/2018 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2020                           |On 6 January 2021             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                JULIA SOLOWKO

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent: Mr Y Youssefian, instructed by Saba Solicitors LLP

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant, to  avoid  confusion  I
   will refer below to the parties as they were at the  First-tier  Tribunal
   appeal hearing.

2. The appellant, who is a national of both  Poland  and  the  Ukraine  with
   date of birth given as 12.9.83, has appealed with permission to the Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   14.2.20 (Judge Loke), dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 5.4.18, to deport her from the UK  pursuant  to
   the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

3. The deportation decision  was  certified  under  Regulation  33  and  the
   appellant was removed from the UK on  29.5.18,  returning  only  for  the
   purpose of her appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

4. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  3.3.20,
   considering  the  grounds  a  mere  disagreement.   However,   when   the
   application was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Kamara granted permission on 29.4.20, considering  it  arguable  that  in
   finding that the appellant did  not  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
   sufficiently serious threat, the First-tier Tribunal "provided inadequate
   reasoning for all the reasons set out in the grounds."

5.  In  directions  issued  on  14.7.20,  the  Upper  Tribunal  proposed  to
   determine the error of law decision  on  the  papers  without  a  hearing
   pursuant to Rule 34, providing for the lodging of any objection  to  that
   course of action and for further written submissions on the error of  law
   issue. In  its  response  dated  21.7.20,  the  respondent  made  further
   representations but did not object to the matter being dealt with on  the
   papers. There was no response at all from  the  appellant  or  her  legal
   representatives.

6. On 6.10.20, the Upper Tribunal issued further directions  for  the  error
   of law issue to be decided in an oral hearing, proposing that it be  held
   remotely, given the nature of the respondent's  grounds  and  the  recent
   decision of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.
   The respondent's email of 8.10.20 indicated that there was no  opposition
   to the matter being dealt with in a remote hearing. Again, there  was  no
   response from the appellant.

7. Very late, outside the time limits set by the  directions,  and  only  on
   the Friday before the hearing (11.12.20) was listed on for the  following
   Monday  (14.12.20),  the   appellant's   representatives   made   written
   submissions and sought to adduce further evidence as to  the  appellant's
   ongoing alcohol treatment.  Yet  further  evidence  of  almost  identical
   nature, of more recent date, was submitted in an email sent only  on  the
   morning of the hearing. Although Mr Youssefian apologised for the serious
   delay in responding to directions, no  explanation  for  that  delay  was
   proffered.

8. The appellant now challenges the respondent's further submissions on  the
   basis that permission was only granted on grounds of inadequate reasoning
   and that the respondent should  be  precluded  from  arguing  perversity.
   However, there was no restriction in the grant of permission which  found
   that the grounds identified inadequate reasoning "for all the reasons set
   out in the grounds." Those grounds alleged inadequate reasoning bordering
   on perversity. In the premises, I decline  to  limit  the  scope  of  the
   respondent's submissions as requested by the  appellant  in  her  belated
   written submissions and in Mr  Youssefian's  oral  submissions.  As  this
   hearing is confined to whether there was an error of law in the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal, I also decline  to  admit  the  new  evidence
   relied on by the appellant and have disregarded it  for  the  purpose  of
   this decision.

9. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Relevant Background

10. In the period between her arrival in  the  UK  in  2014  and  2018,  the
   appellant acquired three criminal convictions for  offences  of  violence
   and public disorder. She was conditionally discharged in January 2016 for
   assaulting a police office and using threatening, abusive,  or  insulting
   words or behaviour, offences  committed  in  November  2015.  Within  the
   period of conditional discharge,  she  committed  a  further  offence  of
   common assault in November 2016,  receiving  a  community  order  with  a
   rehabilitation requirement in December 2016. The offence leading  to  her
   deportation was  committed  a  little  over  a  year  later  on  19.1.18,
   resulting in a sentence of imprisonment of 16 weeks and the imposition of
   a restraining order. The antecedent record also reveals that  she  had  a
   2012 drugs conviction in California, and had been cautioned in  September
   2016 for common assault and criminal damage.

11. As the appellant did not have permanent residence status under  the  EEA
   Regulations, she qualifies  only  for  the  lowest  level  of  protection
   against removal.

12. In allowing the appeal, Judge Loke made the following findings:

     a.  The  appellant  has  a  propensity  to  commit  violent  offences,
        particularly under the influence of alcohol;

     b. The fundamental interests of society are engaged, in that there  is
        an element of persistency of offending and the  violent  nature  of
        her offending presents a danger to the public;

     c. The repeated nature of the offending presents a genuine threat;

     d. However, for the reasons set out  between  [22]  and  [24]  of  the
        decision, including that she has  stopped  drinking  and  undergone
        alcohol  abuse  treatment,  the  appellant  does  not  represent  a
        'present' threat;

     e. Whilst her last offence involved the use of a knife, this was not a
        sufficiently serious offence in itself to justify deportation;

     f. The  repetitive  nature  of  her  offences  indicate  a  threat  of
        reoffending but this threat is not sufficiently  serious  "both  in
        terms of the likelihood of reoffending and the seriousness  of  the
        consequences if it does;

     g. Having had regard  to  the  mandatory  considerations  outlined  in
        Regulation 27(6), and for the reasons set out between [29] and [31]
        of the decision, deportation of the appellant is not proportionate.



The Grounds

13. The grounds of  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal argue that the assessment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
   whether the appellant representatives a genuine, present and sufficiently
   serious  threat  was  inadequately  reasoned  and   bordered   on   being
   irrational.

14.  Complaint  is  made  by  the  respondent  that  the  judge  linked  the
   commission of the last and most serious offence  and  her  propensity  to
   violence solely to the misuse of alcohol when the appellant  herself  was
   unsure whether or not she was sober when using a knife to injure her then
   partner. Despite her willingness to undergo treatment for alcohol misuse,
   the appellant had lapsed in the use of Crystal Meth and in  alcohol  use.
   The judge gave no reason why, in the context  of  ongoing  treatment  and
   proven lapses, further lapses with concurrent risk was unlikely to  occur
   on the balance of probabilities.

15. The respondent has also argued that the  assessment  of  seriousness  is
   flawed given that the judge accepted that the use of a knife was serious.
   The judge appeared to rely  on  the  relatively  minor  injuries  without
   consideration of the appellant's intent when using a knife to attack  her
   partner. The judge appears to have considered that the use of alcohol and
   the  appellant  being  in  a  'difficult  relationship'   mitigated   the
   seriousness of the offence. The respondent points out that the  appellant
   was subject to a restraint order. Further, the judge considered that  the
   gaps in time between the  commission  of  offences  reduced  the  serious
   nature of the threat when the same factor is also indicative of  a  long-
   standing recurring risk. In relation to the prospect  of  rehabilitation,
   the respondent points out that the appellant has no family in the UK  and
   no friends attended to support  her  appeal.  There  is  no  evidence  of
   community involvement or that she  would  have  any  settled  address  to
   return to.

Preliminary Matters

16. Not raised in the grounds but which I drew to the attention of  the  two
   representatives at the outset of the hearing  is  that  at  [21]  of  the
   decision is an apparent misdirection in law.  There,  the  judge  stated,
   "Thirdly I consider whether there are serious grounds to believe that the
   Appellant presents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat."
   That is not the correct test. As the appellant does  not  have  permanent
   residence status under the Regulations, 'serious grounds' do not need  to
   be shown.

17. I also indicated concern to the representatives as to what  is  set  out
   at [27] of the decision, where the judge considered whether there was  "a
   sufficiently serious threat of reoffending, bearing in mind the  guidance
   given in Schedule 1 para 3 of the 2016 Regulations."  That  provision  of
   the Regulations does  not  require  a  "sufficiently  serious  threat  of
   reoffending" but provides, "Where an EEA national or the family member of
   an EEA national has received a custodial sentence,  or  is  a  persistent
   offender, the longer the sentence, or the more numerous the  convictions,
   the greater the likelihood that the individual's  continued  presence  in
   the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
   threat affecting of the fundamental interests of  society."  The  judge's
   recasting of this provision and the considerations between [27] and  [28]
   of the decision, which followed the earlier findings as  to  whether  the
   appellant presents a sufficiently  serious  threat,  appeared  to  me  to
   indicate an approach that lies beyond the considerations required by  the
   Regulations,  rather  than  considering  whether,  overall,  pursuant  to
   Regulation 27(5)(c), "the appellant's personal conduct must  represent  a
   genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of  the
   fundamental interests of society, taking into account past conduct of the
   person and that the threat does not need to be imminent."

18. Mr Youssefian stated that he was taken by surprise by the  two  concerns
   with  the  decision  I  raised  and  sought  an   adjournment   to   take
   instructions. I refused that application, on the basis  that  whilst  the
   appellant is  not  expected  to  address  a  ground  not  raised  by  the
   respondent, the reference to 'serious grounds' was plain on the  face  of
   the decision, and he should have been prepared to address it. However, in
   the light of his concerns, at the conclusion of the  hearing  I  deferred
   reaching a conclusion on the issues and reserved  my  decision,  allowing
   for further written submissions to be lodged  by  4pm  on  15.12.20.  The
   Tribunal has now received those further written submissions, which I have
   carefully considered and taken into account.

19. In essence, the appellant submits that it is not open  to  the  Tribunal
   to raise of its own motion an altogether new point. Reliance is  made  on
   AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) [2018] UKUT 24, where Upper
   Tribunal held that it did have jurisdiction to revisit an  error  of  law
   decision, but under the Practice Direction 3.7 only in  very  exceptional
   cases would it depart from the reasons given for granting permission. The
   Practice Direction does not address the issue whether the Upper  Tribunal
   is entitled to find an error of law on grounds not raised  by  the  party
   seeking permission to appeal, whether at  the  permission  stage,  or  as
   here, in the substantive  hearing  of  the  appeal.  However,  the  Upper
   Tribunal in AZ went on to consider the grant of permission  on  a  ground
   not advanced by the applicant. After referring to the Court  of  Appeal's
   finding in Bulale v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 806 to the effect that Robinson-
   obvious points not raised in  the  grounds  are  only  available  in  the
   appellant's favour, the Upper Tribunal stated at [69] to [70]:

      "In conclusion, we consider that any judge who is considering  whether
      to grant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  must  not  grant
      permission  on  a  ground  which  does  not  feature  in  the  grounds
      accompanying the application, unless the judge is satisfied  that  the
      ground he or she has identified is one which has a strong prospect  of
      success for the original appellant; or for  the  Secretary  of  State,
      where the ground relates to a decision which,  if  undisturbed,  would
      breach the  United  Kingdom's  international  treaty  obligations;  or
      (possibly) if the ground relates to an issue  of  general  importance,
      which the Upper Tribunal needs to address. The basic point to be borne
      in mind is that there must  be  an  extremely  sound  reason  for,  in
      effect, compelling the parties to an appeal to engage  with  a  matter
      that neither of them has identified."

20. In the premises, I am persuaded that Mr Youssefian's submissions  as  to
   the concerns I raised are well-made.  Although  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
   jurisdiction to grant permission on a ground not raised by the  Secretary
   of State, I am satisfied that as the point does not assist the  appellant
   and does not identify an  issue  of  general  importance,  I  should  not
   address  the  two  potential  errors  identified  above  and  confine  my
   considerations to the grounds as drafted and advanced in oral submissions
   by Ms Pettersen.

Consideration of the Grounds

21. I bear in mind that it is for the respondent  to  demonstrate  that  the
   appellant's  conduct  represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
   serious threat affecting one (or more) of the  fundamental  interests  of
   society. Mr Youssefian submitted that there was a  "dearth  of  evidence"
   from the respondent in support and reminded the Tribunal the line of case
   law to the effect that the Tribunal should  be  slow  to  interfere  with
   findings of fact made by a specialist Tribunal unless  the  findings  are
   perverse. I bear in mind that a mere disagreement or because a  different
   judge may have reached a different  conclusion  is  insufficient  to  set
   aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Youssefian also  warned
   against submissions now raised by the respondent that were not previously
   relied on. On the other hand, the antecedent history largely  speaks  for
   itself, culminating in the serious offence of using a knife to wound  her
   partner, although prosecuted only as a  s47  Assault  Occasioning  Actual
   Bodily Harm. In my view, the difficulty with the  decision  lies  in  the
   limited evidence of rehabilitation and the judge's linking of the finding
   of a propensity to violence and the risk presented mainly, if not solely,
   to alcohol intoxication.

22. I note that permission was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
   on the basis that the grounds were a mere disagreement.  The  appellant's
   written submissions are also to  some  extent  a  disagreement  with  the
   grounds and in part an attempt to reargue the issues,  including  whether
   the appellant's last offence was alcohol-related. Whilst arguing that the
   respondent's grounds are disingenuous, the appellant's grounds themselves
   indulge in selective citation of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.
   For example, reliance is placed on  [12(c)]  of  the  decision  that  the
   appellant said that she had been drinking heavily the night  before  (the
   last offence) but did not include the  rest  of  the  sentence  that  she
   "didn't know whether she was sober in the morning of  the  offence."  The
   submissions also assert that the evidence  was  that  the  appellant  was
   intoxicated, referring to the police report, and submits  that  the  fact
   that the appellant was unsure whether she was intoxicated  is  irrelevant
   if in fact she was intoxicated. However, whilst the police report  stated
   that "The  defendant's  consumption  of  alcohol  was  a  component  that
   appeared to contribute to the offence"; it does not state that she was in
   fact intoxicated, although she admitted to the police  that  she  was  an
   alcoholic. She was not tested and there is no definitive  statement  that
   she was intoxicated at the time of the offence. She was  interviewed  the
   same morning but declined to answer questions.

23. It remains the fact that whilst the appellant's last  offence  may  have
   been committed whilst she was intoxicated, that is not at all clear  from
   the evidence. The difficulty with the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is
   that not only that the judge links  the  commission  of  the  offence  to
   alcohol misuse but finds her proclaimed abstinence, with one relapse  for
   alcohol and one for drugs use, and willingness to  access  rehabilitatory
   treatment, is sufficient to conclude that she is not  a  present  threat.
   EffectivIely, the judge has assumed that if she  does  not  drink  again,
   there is no present risk of further  offending.  Alcohol  use  may  be  a
   factor increasing the risk of reoffending and  is  therefore  a  relevant
   consideration, together with any evidence of rehabilitation, but  is  not
   determinative of present risk. Further and obviously,  if  the  appellant
   has a propensity to violence, as the judge  found,  such  propensity  may
   manifest  itself  even  without  resort  to  alcohol  intoxication.  That
   prospect does not appear to have been considered by the judge.

24.  Even  with  the  involvement  of  alcohol  intoxication  in   offending
   behaviour, there was limited evidence of actual  rehabilitation  for  the
   propensity to violence, rather than a willingness to continue to  "access
   treatment" for alcohol  misuse.  MC  (Essa  principles  recast)  Portugal
   [2015]  UKUT  00520  (IAC),  held  that   reference   to   prospects   of
   rehabilitation concern reasonable prospects of a person ceasing to commit
   crime, not the mere possibility of rehabilitation.  "Mere  capability  of
   rehabilitation  is  not  to  be  equated  with  reasonable  prospect   of
   rehabilitation." In reality, the evidence of  rehabilitation  put  before
   the First-tier Tribunal was limited and insubstantial.  I  also  bear  in
   mind that Regulation 27(5)(c) provides that the threat does not  need  to
   be imminent and that the appellant admits  that  she  has  twice  lapsed.
   However, the judge had the advantage of hearing from  the  appellant  and
   concluded at [28 that she had "taken steps to address her alcohol issues,
   and  whilst  they  are  plainly  not  finally  resolved,  her   continued
   engagement with rehabilitative services  is  a  relevant  factor  in  the
   reduction of risk and  the  proportionality  exercise,"  with  the  judge
   citing Essa (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC).

25. In the premises, whilst a different judge may have reached  a  different
   conclusion as to whether the  appellant  represented  a  present  threat,
   limiting myself to the grounds as drafted, I am satisfied that the  judge
   did consider the correct issues and made a careful assessment, reaching a
   conclusion open on the evidence. No error of law is  identified  in  this
   ground.

26.  In  relation  to  the  assessment  whether  the   appellant   poses   a
   sufficiently serious threat, the judge accepted that the use of  a  knife
   was a serious matter. However, the judge referenced the relatively  short
   custodial sentence and that "the offence was committed in the context  of
   the appellant having alcohol issues, and in  a  difficult  relationship."
   Again, the judge links the offending behaviour to  alcohol  intoxication.
   The judge also relied on the gaps between her offending behaviour but was
   in error to state at [19] of the decision  that  the  third  offence  was
   committed just over two years after her second offence. The  gap  was  in
   fact 1 year 2 months. However, I am not satisfied that  this  error,  not
   relied on by the respondent, is material.

27. I accept the submission that there was no indication that  the  wounding
   of her partner was provoked or committed in self-defence, or  that  there
   were any other significant mitigating features. It is  difficult  to  see
   how being intoxicated and/or in  a  difficult  relationship  reduces  the
   seriousness of using a knife to attack another individual. The respondent
   suggests it would be all the more concerning if the appellant were  sober
   when committing the  offence  and  that  gaps  in  offending  is  equally
   suggestive of a propensity to violence  as  a  "long-standing,  recurring
   risk." However, once again,  the  judge  made  a  careful  assessment  of
   seriousness and reached findings justified by cogent reasoning. Whilst  a
   different judge may have concluded that the risk presented  was  genuine,
   present and sufficiently serious, it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge on the evidence and for the reasons given to conclude  that  whilst
   the risk was genuine, it was neither a present  risk  nor  one  that  was
   sufficiently serious to justify deportation. It was open in the  premises
   for the judge to find the removal decision disproportionate.

28. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal of the respondent to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      allowed.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 December 2020

