
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 February 2016                      |On 23 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH



                                   Between

                                     A M
                      (AN ANONYMITY DIRECTION IS MADE)

                                                                 Appellant
                                        -and-

              THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                 Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. C. E. Talachi, of counsel, instructed by
Longfellows Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brockley-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1994, is a national of Zimbabwe.  He
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor  on  27  August  1998  and  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 23 May 2000.

2.   Between 20 May 2009 and 21 October 2012 he was  convicted  on  thirteen
    occasions. In 2012 he  joined  the  South-East  London  branch  of  the
    Movement  for  Democratic  Change  and  attended  a  number  of  branch
    meetings. It is also his case that he attended  some  protests  outside
    the Zimbabwean Embassy.

3.   On 4 April 2013 he was convicted of violent disorder and burglary  with
    intent  to  steal  and  sentenced  to  two  years   and   four   months
    imprisonment. Subsequently, on 24 September 2013  he  was  served  with
    notice of his liability to deportation from  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    responded to this notice on 17 October 2013 but he was  served  with  a
    deportation order on 20 January 2014.

4.   The Appellant applied for asylum on  24  March  2014  and  a  screening
    interview was conducted on 15 April 2014.  He  attended  a  substantive
    asylum interview on 26 November 2014 but his  application  was  refused
    and certified on 16 January 2015.  He appealed  against  this  decision
    later in January 2015.

5.   On 8  April  2015  the  Appellant  was  convicted  for  possessing  and
    supplying a Class B drug and sentenced to five months imprisonment.  On
    20 April 2015 he was sentenced  for  possessing  a  class  B  drug  and
    conveying a List B article into prison and  sentenced  to  nine  months
    imprisonment to run concurrently with his previous  sentence.   He  was
    released from prison on 10 September 2015 and his asylum appeal hearing
    was heard on 2 October 2015.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn dismissed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 November 2015. The Appellant appealed on 18  November
    2015 and on  9  December  2015  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McCarthy refused him permission  to  appeal  He  sought  permission  to
    appeal from the Upper Tribunal and on 5  January  2016  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Freeman granted him permission. He did so  on  only  one  of  the
    three grounds put forward on behalf of the  Appellant.  This  was  that
    when considering  the  guidance  given  in  CM  (EM  country  guidance;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 59  (IAC)  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Flynn should not have dismissed the appeal on the basis of paragraph  1
    of the country guidance in isolation from paragraph 2 of that guidance.
    The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 2 February 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

7.   Counsel for the Appellant submitted that  paragraph  94  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flynn's decision indicated that he had  found  that  the
    Appellant could be safely returned to Bulawayo.  He also noted that  in
    paragraph 110 of his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  found
    that the Appellant had some family members living in Zimbabwe who would
    be able  to  provide  a  degree  of  support,  emotional  even  if  not
    financial. He also noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made no
    findings of fact as to where in Zimbabwe his family members lived or to
    where the Appellant could safely return.

8.   Counsel for the Appellant relied on the fact that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had failed to  consider  paragraph  2  of  CN.  The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer then replied.  She  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had directed herself correctly to CM. She also submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had found that the  Appellant  could
    return to Bulawayo and that, in any event, CM did  not  find  that  all
    rural areas would place returnees at risk.  In addition, she relied  on
    the fact that in paragraph 102 of her decision the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found that the Appellant had retained some ties in Zimbabwe.

Error of Law

9.   In paragraph 95 of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn  noted
    that there was letter which confirmed that the Appellant  had  attended
    meetings of the South-East London branch of the MDC  in  the  past  but
    found that there was insufficient evidence to establish that he  had  a
    significant MDC profile.   This part of the decision was not challenged
    by the Appellant.

10.  At paragraph 96 of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn  noted
    that in paragraph 1 of the head note to CM the Upper Tribunal had  held
    that "as a general matter,  there  is  significantly  less  politically
    motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with the situation  considered
    by the AIT in RN. In particular, the evidence does not show that, as  a
    general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker  from  the  United
    Kingdom, having no significant MDC profile, would result in that person
    facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF".

11.  But, as noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman, the first  paragraph  of
    the head note is qualified by the second, which reads "the position is,
    however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a person without ZANU-PF
    connections, returning from the  United  Kingdom  after  a  significant
    absence to a rural area of Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland  North  or
    Matabeleland South. Such a person may well find it difficult  to  avoid
    adverse attention, amounting to  serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF
    authority figures and those they control.  The  adverse  attention  may
    well involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the
    prospect of serious harm in the event  of  failure.  Persons  who  have
    shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are  entitled
    to international protection, where or  not  they  could  and  would  do
    whatever  might  to  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
    (Zimbabwe))".

12.  In the current case the Appellant had left Zimbabwe  in  1998  when  he
    was four years old and there was no evidence that he had any allegiance
    to ZANU-PF; rather the evidence indicated  that  he  had  attended  MDC
    meetings in London. It was also asserted that he had a  grandparent  or
    grandparents upon whose support he could rely.  As  a  consequence,  in
    order to apply this second part of CM  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    needed to consider whether the Appellant would be returning to a  rural
    area in Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or South.

13.  It was not sufficient to merely rely on  the  sixth  paragraph  of  the
    head note in CM, which stated that "a  returnee  to  Bulawayo  will  in
    general not suffer the adverse  attention  of  ZANU-PF,  including  the
    security forces, even if he or she has a significant MDC profile".  The
    Respondent had referred to Bulawayo as a place of internal  relocation;
    as had the Tribunal in CN.  .

14.  The Tribunal also found in paragraph 7 that "the issue  of  what  is  a
    person's home for the purpose of internal relocation is to  be  decided
    as a matter or  fact  and  is  not  necessarily  to  be  determined  by
    reference to the place a person from Zimbabwe regards  as  his  or  her
    rural homeland. As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person  with
    a well-founded fear of persecution in a major urban area such as Harare
    will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a rural  area  in
    the Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
    may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona".

15.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn made no findings of fact  as  to  where
    the Appellant's grandfather or grandparents lived.  She  did  not  take
    into account the fact that his birth certificate indicated that he  and
    his mother were born in [N] village  in  [M]  and  his  father  in  [D]
    village or the fact that his father's death certificate indicated  that
    he had been living in Harare at the time of his death.  The Judge  also
    did not consider the fact that in his statement, dated  8  April  2014,
    the Appellant indicated that he spoke at lease some Shona.

16.  I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  needed  to  consider  the
    totality of the guidance in CN and not just two paragraphs of the  head
    note. As a consequence, there were errors of law in her decision.

17.  At the hearing the representatives agree that this  could  be  remedied
    by the decision being referred back to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn
    on this narrow basis.


Decision

    1. I allow the Appellant's appeal on the basis that First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Flynn made errors of law in the manner in  which  she  applied
       the country guidance in CN.
    2. The rest of her decision stands.
    3. I remit the appeal back to First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn  for  her
       to consider whether the Appellant can be safely deported to Zimbabwe
       in the light of the  totality  of  the  decision  in  CN,  including
       paragraphs of the head note not referred to above.

   Directions

    4. The Appellant do file and serve on First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Flynn
       at the First-tier Tribunal further evidence as to where  his  mother
       and father and grandparents and any other relatives live or lived in
       Zimbabwe within 21 days of receipt of this decision.
    5. The Respondent do file and serve any evidence in response on  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Flynn at the First-tier Tribunal within 21  days
       thereafter.
    6. The matter by listed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn as  soon
       as practicable thereafter.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 29 February 2016

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch









