
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00087/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates' Court        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                              |On 12 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               tHE Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KARIM KALED MOHAMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant (hereinafter the Secretary of State or  SSHD)  challenges
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Matthews  promulgated  on
    28 August 2015 allowing the appeal of the respondent  (hereinafter  the
    claimant)  against  a  decision  dated  25  February  2015  to  make  a
    deportation order following the  claimant's  conviction  at  Birmingham
    Crown Court on 7 April 2014 for an offence of robbery for which he  was
    sentenced to four years and 3 months' imprisonment.  The claimant is  a
    citizen of France as are both his parents.  He is aged 24.   The  judge
    allowed the claimant's appeal on the basis that the SSHD had failed  to
    show that there were imperative grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security to justify his deportation  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   Before his 2014 conviction  the  claimant  had  a  record  of  previous
    convictions including for offences of burglary, failures to comply with
    suspended sentences, common assault and criminal damage.

3.   The claimant appeared before me unrepresented.  He said  he  could  not
    afford a solicitor but wanted to proceed.   In  order  to  ensure  that
    during the proceedings the claimant was not disadvantaged  by  lack  of
    representation, I took steps to ensure at all  stages  (when  necessary
    through an interpreter) that he understood what was happening  and  had
    proper opportunity to comment and respond.

4.   At the outset I raised with the parties the matter of whether the  SSHD
    in her grounds of challenge and the original decision and the FtT judge
    may have  overlooked  one  possible  basis  for  considering  that  the
    claimant had accrued ten years' continuous residence in  fulfilment  of
    the conditions set out in regulation 21(4) namely by  virtue  of  being
    the family member of an EEA national parent exercising  Treaty  rights.
    I pointed out that there was very little information about whether  the
    claimant's parents had exercised Treaty rights since arrival in the  UK
    circa 1996.  Mr Mills undertook to make inquiries and I stood the  case
    down until the end of my list to enable him to  make  enquiries  within
    the Home Office as to whether the claimant's parents had ever  received
    or obtained residence documentation.  Upon reconvening  Mr  Mills  said
    that his enquiries had found no record of any residence  documentation.



5.   However, I then ascertained that the claimant's father,  Mr  Karim  Ali
    Mohamed, was present in court along with the claimant's elder  brother,
    Hamza.  With the agreement of Mr Mills I asked questions of the  father
    through an interpreter.  Mr Mohamed confirmed  he  was  the  claimant's
    father; that he had come to the UK with the claimant and  other  family
    members in 1996; that after a few months of arrival he had  got  a  job
    but he had to give it up after a few months because of ill-health; that
    he had been unable to work since; that he has  remained  in  ill-health
    ever since; and that his wife had never worked.  I also heard evidence,
    again with Mr Mills' consent from the claimant's elder  brother  Hamza,
    who confirmed his  father's  account,  although  emphasising  that  his
    father's health was poor physically and mentally and he was  illiterate
    in French and English.

6.   I also established from the claimant and his  elder  brother  that  the
    last time he had worked was in 2013.  The period concerned was  several
    months. They  also  confirmed  the  claimant's  relationship  with  his
    partner had broken down.

7.   During the hearing the claimant produced a number of documents which  I
    decided to admit into evidence in order to  ensure  I  had  as  full  a
    picture as possible of the background circumstances in existence at the
    date of his hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   They  included,
    inter alia: a letter from his employer Magna  Exteriors  and  Interiors
    Redditch confirming the claimant had  been  employed  with  them  as  a
    factory associate between 11 November 2013  and  22  November  2013,  a
    letter appearing to be from the same employer stating that the claimant
    worked for them  from  2  October  2013  -  19  March  2014;  a  letter
    confirming receipt of Jobseekers Allowance dated 8 March  2013  and  17
    October 2013; a letter from the claimant's father's  GP  confirming  he
    suffered from Type 2 Diabetes, Asthma, Lower Back Pain, gout and  renal
    problems.

8.   I am in no doubt that the FtT  Judge  materially  erred  in  law.   His
    error was to find  that  the  claimant  had  "accumulated  a  right  of
    permanent  residence"  ([29])  based  solely  on  the  claimant  having
    attended school in the UK, having lived with  his  parents  and  having
    "the period of residence that followed after his attendance at  school"
    ([29]).  This finding was erroneous because  there  was  no  evidential
    basis for the judge  to  find  that  the  claimant  had  ever  acquired
    permanent residence.  It is well-established by leading cases  that  to
    acquire permanent residence a claimant must meet  the  conditions  laid
    down in the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    and/or Directive 2004/EC/38  (the  Citizens  Directive).   Under  these
    legal provisions there  are  four  possible  routes  to  a  finding  of
    permanent residence for someone in the claimant's position.


    (i)  by virtue of the claimant's status as a school student (regulation
         6(1)(c)).


    (ii) by virtue of the claimant's status as a dependent  (minor)  family
         member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  by  working  or
         seeking work (regulation 6(1)(a) - (c)).


    (iii)    by virtue of  being  a  dependent  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national exercising Treaty rights as a  worker  temporarily  unable
         to work as the result of illness or accident (regulation 6(2)).


    (iv) by virtue of the claimant's  status  as  a  worker,  self-employed
         person or job-seeker in his own right.

9.   Dealing first with the principal basis the judge appeared to  rely  on,
    namely the claimant's status as a student, it is clear from  regulation
    4(d)(ii) that a student  can  only  qualify  if  he  has  comprehensive
    sickness insurance cover in the UK  for  the  requisite  period.   Such
    insurance must be private insurance: see Lepko-Bozua  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    909; and Ahmad [2014] EWCA Civ 988.  There was not a shred of  evidence
    to show the claimant had such insurance; indeed both  the  written  and
    the or oral evidence before me indicated strongly that  the  claimant's
    father and mother had been entirely dependent on  benefits  for  almost
    the whole of their time in the UK and had no resources to  obtain  such
    insurance.

10.  Dealing with (ii), which was the possibility I  myself  raised  at  the
    outset of the hearing -that the  claimant's  parents  might  have  been
    exercising Treaty rights whilst he was still a dependent child - it  is
    evident from the further oral and documentary evidence before  me  that
    the claimant's mother never worked  and  his  father  worked  only  for
    several months in 2006, after which he never worked  again  for  health
    reasons.

11.  I turn then to (iii).  Given that the father worked for a  few  months,
    I am prepared to accept for the purposes of this appeal that he  was  a
    worker in 1996 for several months and that immediately after  he  could
    not work due to illness.  However by no stretch of the imagination  can
    this situation be described as a temporary inability to work and it  is
    also manifest that since his last employment he has never had a genuine
    chance of being engaged in employment.

12.  As regards (iv), the only evidence of the claimant having worked  spans
    (at best) the period October /November 2013 to 19 March 2014.  Again  I
    am prepared to accept for the purposes of the appeal that the  claimant
    was a worker for this period, but on the evidence before  me  he  never
    worked after that and since he was sentenced to a term of  imprisonment
    on 5 June 2014, he had come nowhere near accruing the requisite  period
    of five  years  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  order  to  qualify  for
    permanent residence. (It may indeed be that he ceased  being  a  worker
    before he was taken into custody, although for present purposes I  will
    assume he was still such.) Once he began time in prison, he  ceased  to
    be able to accrue time towards permanent residence: see Case  C-378/12.
    Onuekwere.

13.  Hence it is plain that the  judge  had  no  evidential  basis  for  his
    finding that the  claimant  had  acquired  permanent  residence,  under
    regulation 21(3).

14     The question remains whether this error on the part of the judge  was
    a material one.  If  a  person  cannot  qualify  under  the  ten  years
    residence level of protection provided for in regulation  21(4)  unless
    he has first acquired permanent residence, then the error was  patently
    material. But  the  CJEU  rulings  in  the  two  cases,  Case  C-145/09
    Tsakouridis [2010] ECR I-11979Case C-400/12 and Secretary  of  State  v
    MG, ECLI:EU:C:2014:9  of  January  2014,  appear  to  leave  open  the
    possibility of a person being considered to have the requisite 10 years
    of  residence  notwithstanding  that  he   never   acquired   permanent
    residence.  In paragraph 38 of MG, the CJEU held that:
         "38      In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Questions  1
         and 4 is  that  Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be
         interpreted as  meaning  that  a  period  of  imprisonment  is,  in
         principle, capable both  of  interrupting  the  continuity  of  the
         period of residence for the  purposes  of  that  provision  and  of
         affecting  the  decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the   enhanced
         protection provided for thereunder, even where the person concerned
         resided in the  host  Member  State  for  the  10  years  prior  to
         imprisonment. However, the fact that that  person  resided  in  the
         host Member State for the 10 years prior  to  imprisonment  may  be
         taken into consideration as part of the overall assessment required
         in order to determine  whether  the  integrating  links  previously
         forged with the host Member State have been broken."
    However, even assuming that the requisite 10 year period can be accrued
    notwithstanding the lack of permanent residence, it cannot be  excluded
    that the judge in this case would have come to a  different  conclusion
    on the matter if he had  found  that  the  claimant  had  not  acquired
    permanent residence.

15.  Given that it was clearly central to the judge's reasons  for  allowing
    the appeal that the claimant stood to be considered under the ten  year
    threshold under regulation  21(4)  of  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    policy and public security", his error regarding the relevant period of
    residence was both fundamental and material.  Accordingly the  decision
    of the FtT Judge must be set aside.

16.  I turned to consider whether  I  was  in  a  position  to  re-make  the
    decision without further ado.  Although not strictly in accordance with
    Tribunal directions, the claimant has adduced further written evidence,
    which I summarised non-exhaustively earlier.  I also had the benefit of
    of his own evidence and that of his father and elder brother.   I  have
    concluded I am in a position to re-make the decision.

17.  Considering the claimant's appeal in the light of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, including the father's evidence adduced and given before me  and
    the oral evidence of the claimant  and  his  brother,  two  things  are
    incontrovertibly established.  First he has  never  acquired  permanent
    residence and the most that he can possibly lay claim to  is  that  has
    been a worker for a short period in 2013/2014.  Hence he cannot benefit
    from the higher thresholds of protection set out  in  Regulation  21(3)
    ("serious grounds of public policy or security"). Nor  can  he  benefit
    from the highest (10  year)  threshold  set  out  in  regulation  21(4)
    ("imperative ground ...") - it is convenient to deal  with  my  reasons
    for saying that at the end.  All that he can seek to argue is that  the
    SSHD was not entitled to consider there were grounds of  public  policy
    or public security under regulation 19  (the  so-called  "baseline"  or
    lowest form of protection").

18.  In assessing this question I have to apply the principles  set  out  in
    regulation 21(5) - (6).

19.  In this context  it  is  unnecessary  to  detail  all  aspects  of  the
    claimant's particular circumstances because three features stand out as
    being of particular importance in his case.  First,  in  terms  of  his
    personal conduct, he not only had a history of offending going back  to
    February 2006 but in February 2014, the level  of  seriousness  of  his
    offending escalated, culminating in him being sentenced to  4  years  3
    months for robbery.  There is no evidence  to  state  that  since  that
    period he has rehabilitated and in my view that offence was  a  serious
    indication that his personal conduct represented (and still represents)
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society.  To the contrary, in addition to  the
    fact that his most recent offence represents an escalation in his level
    of criminality, the OASys assessment made in January 2015 assessed  him
    to pose a medium risk of harm to the public in  the  community  and  no
    evidence has been adduced to suggest that assessment has altered.

20.  The second stand-out consideration is that the claimant no  longer  has
    a relationship with his partner and their children.  For the past  year
    or so he has either lived on his own or with his parents.  On his older
    brother's own account, the claimant has  been  leading  an  independent
    life.  Thus his present circumstances do not demonstrate  that  he  has
    close family ties over and above normal emotional ties with his parents
    and siblings.

21.  A third feature which is very clear from his history  is  that  he  has
    not been in work for any significant period and that he has  a  history
    of being in receipt of public funds.

22.  I take into account in the claimant's favour,  inter  alia,   that:  he
    was a minor when he came  to  the  UK  and  when  he  began  committing
    criminal offences, that whether or not in exercise of Treaty rights  he
    has been in the UK almost twenty years; that it cannot have  been  easy
    for him growing up in a family where his father's ill-health  prevented
    him from being a breadwinner; that he has not only a mother, father and
    siblings in the UK but also aunties,  uncles  and  cousins;  that  even
    though he has no subsisting relationship with them or their mother,  he
    has two children born in the UK.  However even taking these factors  in
    his favour at their highest, they fall well short of a set of  personal
    circumstances that make the decision to deport a disproportionate  one.
    The respondent has clearly established that  there  are  cogent  public
    policy reasons for his deportation.

23.  I said at [17] above that I would state  at  the  end  my  reasons  for
    concluding that the claimant cannot benefit from the 10 year  level  of
    protection set out in regulation 21(4).  It  is  convenient  to  do  so
    because my reasons are informed by certain of  the  considerations  set
    out in  [18]-[22]  above.  Even  assuming  that  the  CJEU  rulings  in
    Tsakouridis and MG allow for the 10 year level to  be  accrued  in  the
    absence of acquisition of permanent residence, it is  clear  that  this
    requires a  finding  that  there  has  been  sufficient  quality  to  a
    claimant's residence prior to imprisonment  and  that  his  integrative
    links with  the  host  Member  State  have  not  been  broken.  In  the
    claimant's case, for the period in the UK (which commenced in  November
    1996) when he was still a dependent child, his father exercised  Treaty
    rights for one period  of  a  few  months  in  1996  only  and  shortly
    thereafter ceased to exercise them. Except for that very brief  period,
    therefore, the claimant has never been the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights. It is also clear  that  for  all  of
    that period save for those few months his family has  been  reliant  on
    public funds. Once the claimant reached  adulthood,  he  himself  never
    exercised Treaty rights in his own right except for a very short period
    only - at best a period between October 2013 and March  2014.  Further,
    since 2006 he began a history of offending and his latest offence,  for
    which  he  was  imprisoned  for  over  three  years,  demonstrates   an
    escalation in the level of seriousness of his  offending.  Outside  his
    parent's family and relatives, he has no ongoing  relationship  with  a
    partner or with his biological children. In short, his period in the UK
    of just under 20 years is one in which he has never acquired  links  of
    any significant quality and the evidence of his integration  is  either
    lacking  or  extremely  thin.  Even  assuming  that  he  had   acquired
    integrative links of a relatively weak kind, his  history  of  criminal
    offending which began in 2006 weakened  them   further  and  the  plain
    effect of his imprisonment  in  April  2014  has  been  to  break  them
    altogether. Counting back from the decision to make a deportation order
    against him, it is my clear finding that  his  period  of  imprisonment
    broke the necessary period of 10 years in order for him  to  have  been
    able to qualify for protection under regulation 21(4).


Notice of Decision

24.  For the above  reasons  the  decision  I  re-make  is  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date: 27 April 2016


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


