
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00566/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 24th October 2019                 |On 31 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mohamed Barkhadle
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  Brooks,  Counsel  instructed  by   JM   Wilson
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of the Netherlands born on the 8th January
    1993.   On  the  7th  February  2018  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Rowlands) allowed his appeal with reference to  Regulation  27  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the EEA Regs').



 2. The central finding made by Judge Rowlands was that  Mr  Barkhadle  had
    lived in the United Kingdom since he was 7 years  old.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that he had  therefore  accrued  ten  years'  continuous
    residence in the United Kingdom. This,  the  Tribunal  reasoned,  meant
    that the Secretary of State had to show 'imperative'  grounds  for  his
    expulsion, which  on  the  facts  he  could  not  do.  The  appeal  was
    accordingly allowed.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed, the complaint made  that  it  was  not
    enough for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  simply  point  to  that  long
    residency: in order to attract  the  highest  level  of  protection  Mr
    Barkhadle had first to establish that he had acquired a permanent right
    of residence under Articles 16 and 28(2) of the Directive. Reliance was
    placed on the decision of the CJEU in Franco Vomero  C-424/16  to  that
    effect.  Since the First-tier Tribunal made no findings on whether such
    permanent residency was established, it followed that its  decision  on
    the proposed deportation is defective.

 4. The Secretary of State's appeal came before me on the 17th  June  2019.
    At that hearing Mr Brooks, appearing for Mr  Barkhadle,  accepted  that
    there had been no Vomero finding on permanent  residence  and  that  to
    that extent the decision was flawed for  error  of  law.  He  submitted
    however that the error was not such that the  decision  should  be  set
    aside. That  is  because  of  this  passage  at  paragraph  27  of  the
    determination:

         "I cannot agree that his  deportation  was  properly  done  on  the
         imperative grounds of public security. This is a more  severe  test
         than simply that of public policy or public security.  Had  I  even
         been considering those I would not have reached the conclusion that
         his  behaviour  was  such  as  to  be  serious  enough  to  justify
         deportation on that basis ..."

    Mr Brooks described this as an 'in the alternative finding' and invited
    me to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

 5. Having heard Mr Brooks' submissions, and those  made  by  Mr  Bates  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, I decided that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set  aside.  Whilst  I  accepted  that  the
    passage cited by Mr Brooks was an indication by the  Tribunal  that  it
    would have allowed the  appeal  even  if  the  Appellant  attracted  no
    enhanced protection,  it  was  a  conclusion  entirely  unsupported  by
    reasons. The Tribunal itself had recognised  that  Mr  Barkhadle  is  a
    repeat offender, and that he has a poor criminal record. The  Secretary
    of State was therefore entitled to ask for reasoned findings about  why
    the Tribunal considered that he should not be deported.

 6. By my written decision of the 18th June 2019 I found the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal to be made out and set  the  decision  aside.
    In doing so I noted that in  granting  permission  First-tier  Tribunal
    (now Upper  Tribunal)  Judge  Blundell  commented  that  in  the  final
    analysis the Vomero error might be irrelevant, considering the  finding
    that Mr Barkhadle has lived in the United Kingdom since  he  was  seven
    years old.  If he  could  show  that  he  had  been  at  school  for  a
    continuous five-year period, or otherwise living in the United  Kingdom
    in accordance with the Regulations (for instance as a family member  of
    an EEA national exercising treaty  rights),  then  the  position  would
    revert to that as it was found by the  First-tier  Tribunal:  he  would
    have accrued his 'permanent  residence'  and  therefore  his  ten  year
    continuous residence,  which  would  give  him  the  highest  level  of
    protection  against  deportation  under  the  EEA  Regs.    Since   the
    Secretary of State had not  challenged  the  findings  on  'imperative'
    grounds it would follow that Mr Barkhadle would in those  circumstances
    succeed in  his  appeal.   In  light  of  Judge  Blundell's  remarks  I
    considered it appropriate  to  give  Mr  Barkhadle  an  opportunity  to
    provide evidence that he had at some stage lived in the United  Kingdom
    for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  'in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations'.  The matter was therefore adjourned with directions.

 7. By the time that the appeal came  back  before  me,  Mr  Barkhadle  had
    produced evidence to demonstrate that he was  enrolled  in  schools  in
    Birmingham, at both primary and  secondary  level,  for  the  requisite
    amount of time.   What he could not do was demonstrate that during that
    period he had comprehensive sickness insurance. He could not  therefore
    show that he was a 'student' within the meaning of either the Directive
    or the Regulations. Nor did it appear that he had ever registered  with
    the Home Office so that the Secretary of State would, according to  her
    own policy, overlook the lack of  sickness  insurance.  See  Regulation
    4(1)(d)(ii) & (iii):

         (d)      "student" means a person who-

             (i) is enrolled, for the  principal  purpose  of  following  a
             course of study (including vocational training), at  a  public
             or private establishment which is-

                  (aa) financed from public funds; or

                  (bb) otherwise recognised by the Secretary of State as  an
                  establishment which has been accredited for the purpose of
                  providing such courses  or  training  within  the  law  or
                  administrative practice of the part of the United  Kingdom
                  in which the establishment is located;

             (ii)      has comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the
             United Kingdom; and

             (iii)     has assured the Secretary of State, by  means  of  a
             declaration, or by such equivalent means  as  the  person  may
             choose, that the person has sufficient resources not to become
             a burden on the social assistance system of the United Kingdom
             during the person's intended period of residence.

 8. Mr Brooks accepted that Mr Barkhadle was further unable to evidence any
    economic activity on the part of his mother such  that  he  could  have
    accrued a right of residence as a family member. It  followed  that  Mr
    Barkhadle had not demonstrated that he had acquired a  permanent  right
    of residence at any point, and so could not have  the  benefit  of  any
    Vomero period of long residence. He  attracts  no  enhanced  protection
    against expulsion.

 9. I am invited to re-make the decision on that basis.




    Legal Framework

10. The relevant framework for my decision is Regulation  27  of  the  2016
    Regs:

         27.-     (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an
             EEA decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989.

             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                  even in the absence of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ("P")  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.

             (7) In the case of a relevant decision  taken  on  grounds  of
             public health-

                  (a)  a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                  defined by the relevant instruments of  the  World  Health
                  Organisation or is not a disease listed in Schedule  1  to
                  the Health Protection (Notification) Regulations 2010; or

                  (b)  if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
                  disease occurring after the three month  period  beginning
                  on the date on which the  person  arrived  in  the  United
                  Kingdom,

             does not constitute grounds for the decision.

             (8) A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

11. The relevant part of Schedule 1 is paragraph 7:

         7. For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests
         of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)  preventing  unlawful  immigration  and   abuse   of   the
             immigration  laws,   and   maintaining   the   integrity   and
             effectiveness of the  immigration  control  system  (including
             under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b) maintaining public order;

             (c) preventing social harm;

             (d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e) protecting public services;

             (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member  of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,
             public offence)  and  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;

             (g) tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
             immediate or direct victim may be difficult  to  identify  but
             where there is wider societal harm (such as  offences  related
             to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border  dimension
             as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
             of the European Union);

             (h)   combating   the   effects   of   persistent    offending
             (particularly in relation  to  offences,  which  if  taken  in
             isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the  requirements
             of regulation 27);

             (i) protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly
             from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j) protecting the public;

             (k) acting in the best interests of a child  (including  where
             doing so entails refusing a  child  admission  to  the  United
             Kingdom, or otherwise taking an EEA decision against a child);

             (l) countering terrorism and extremism and  protecting  shared
             values.



    The Secretary of State's Case

12. Mr Barkhadle has the following convictions:

    20th April 2010    Convicted of theft (shoplifting) at Birmingham Youth
                      Court and made subject to a four-month referral order

    8th June 2010      Convicted of handling stolen goods

    11th February 2011 Convicted of attempted robbery and  handling  stolen
                      goods  and  made  subject  to   an   18-month   Youth
                      Rehabilitation Order

    31st May 2017      Convicted of  resisting  an  officer  at  Birmingham
                      Magistrates'  Court  and  sentenced  to  a  12  month
                      Community Order with costs

    1st November 2017  Convicted at Birmingham Magistrates Court of failing
                      to comply with his  Community  Order  -  unpaid  work
                      imposed for breach

13. Before me Mr Bates accepted that as poor  as  this  record  is,  it  is
    unlikely that the Secretary of  State  would  be  pursuing  deportation
    action were that the sum total of his  case.  The  centrepiece  of  the
    Secretary of State's case was rather a statement made by an officer  of
    the West Midlands Police, to the effect  that  Mr  Barkhadle  has  been
    involved in a good deal of serious criminality for  which  he  had  not
    been convicted.

14. DC Rachel Hensley's statement is dated the 1st August 2018. At the time
    that she wrote it she was  working  within  the  West  Midlands  Police
    Serious and Organised Crime Prevent Team. Although she has never met Mr
    Barkhadle personally DC Hensley drew on several sources to compile  her
    report: the Police National Computer (PNC), the police database  and  a
    'portal' used by police officers and relevant  staff  to  record  their
    personal accounts of  investigations  and  encounters  with  individual
    suspects.   She writes that Mr Barkhadle first came to the attention of
    West Midlands Police in 2007 when a local school reported that a  group
    of Somali males were causing a nuisance and shoplifting in the  Rookery
    Road area of Birmingham. The group, of whom Mr Barkhadle was identified
    as a 'prominent member', became well known to  officers  in  Birmingham
    city centre dealing with anti-social behaviour.

15. The databases available to DC Hensley show that between September  2007
    and August 2017 Mr Barkhadle has '26 Non Convictions for  43  Offences'
    recorded.   The detail of these investigations is set out. Mr Barkhadle
    was for instance identified  as  the  perpetrator  of  an  assault  and
    robbery of a woman on a bus who was knocked unconscious by being kicked
    in the head after she resisted being robbed. Mr Barkhadle was  arrested
    and when questioned stated that  he  had  acted  in  self-defence.  For
    reasons unexplained that investigation ended with no charge being made.
      The other investigations recorded concerned criminal damage, multiple
    offences of  burglary,  street  robbery,  possession  of  a  knife  and
    assault.  All these investigations ended either in 'no further  action'
    or Mr Barkhadle being found not guilty.

16. DC Hensley also writes:

       . "Barkhadle quickly gained police custody records often relating  to
         Robbery, Violence and Theft offences. Barkhadle went  on  to  serve
         custodial sentences between February 2010 to November 2010 then for
         11 days in June 2011 and again from  September  2011  to  September
         2012"

       . "Barkhadle has been linked to firearms, fraud and drug dealing"

       . "Suggestions of involvement in the  importation  of  illegal  drugs
         were raised following regular recordings of  stops  since  2011  at
         various ports ... often described at point of stop as  hostile  and
         anti-police"

       . "In August 2016 Mohammed Barkhadle was linked to  possession  of  a
         sawn-off shotgun and ammunition with the suggestion he had  swapped
         these items for a watch with his brother"

       . "In June 2017 Mohammad and his brother  Zak  have  been  committing
         robberies against other young criminals.  This had led  victims  to
         seek revenge leading to a  shooting  in  which  Zak  has  been  the
         intended target however an associate of Mohammad has been victim to
         being shot"

       . "In December 2016 there  was  a  murder  outside  a  shisha  lounge
         whereby a group of Somalians attacked  the  victim.  Barkhadle  was
         interviewed in relation to the murder"

17. Having reviewed all of this information DC Hensley concludes:

         "I strongly believe that he is a prominent  member  of  a  Somalian
         group involved in  drug  dealing  and  firearm  offences  posing  a
         significant risk to the communities and opposing gang members  with
         little concern for the general public being exposed to the  dangers
         surrounding his lifestyle and behaviour/ he has been  involved  and
         committed  crime  in  company  with  his  younger  brother  Zakaria
         Barkhadle failing to prevent and divert him  away  leading  to  his
         deportation  earlier  in  2018.  ...  [he]  has  no   respect   for
         authority".

18. Mr Bates placed reliance on all of this material. He further  asked  me
    to note that there was no evidence before me to show that Mr  Barkhadle
    was currently exercising treaty rights. Although he has lived  in  this
    country since he was a boy, and has a number of family members here, it
    was the Secretary of State's case that his deportation would be  wholly
    proportionate given the evidence of risk to the public. His brother had
    already been deported to the Netherlands and so he already had at least
    one relative there.




    The Case for Mr Barkhadle

19. Mr Brooks' primary submission was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to discharge the burden of proof  in  respect  of  the  test  in
    Regulation 27(5)(c). none of  the  convictions  had  ever  attracted  a
    custodial sentence and on their own fell well  short  of  the  evidence
    needed to justify a conclusion that Mr Barkhadle represented a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat. The last conviction  was  over
    two years ago and most of them were committed when Mr Barkhadle  was  a
    youth: on the occasion of that last serious one  he  was  only  17.  Mr
    Brooks submitted that I could not safely place reliance on  the  police
    evidence. There were numerous deficiencies in DC Hensley's  assessment.
    She had never met Mr Barkhadle; the entire report was based on  hearsay
    and it contained serious factual errors: contrary to her  evidence,  Mr
    Barkhadle had never been given a custodial sentence. DC Hensley had not
    presented herself for cross examination. Mr Brooks pointed out that the
    First-tier Tribunal  had  not  accepted  this  report  as  particularly
    weighty. Insofar as he acknowledged that Mr Barkhadle does appear to be
    'known to police' he submitted that for all we know  this  arises  from
    nothing more that hostility between  the  police  and  boys  that  they
    perceive as 'Somalian youth' engaging in anti-social behaviour.   There
    was no evidence of current risk, and Mr  Barkhadle  has  expressed  his
    regret for his past convictions.

20. In respect of whether or not it would be  proportionate  to  deport  Mr
    Barkhadle Mr Brooks relied on his close relationships with his  mother,
    four sisters and a little brother. I have before me witness  statements
    from both Mr Barkhadle and his family members attesting to the bonds of
    love and affection between them. I am told that one of his sisters is a
    single mother and that he helps her by taking the  children  to  school
    etc. His mother is in ill health and  he  takes  her  to  her  hospital
    appointments.  As  to  his  ability  to  work,  Mr  Barkhadle  strongly
    contests the Secretary of State's submission that he  is  "failing"  to
    exercise treaty rights. In fact he  is  currently  on  conditions  that
    prevent him from working.   He states that between  2015  and  2017  he
    worked for DHL but he was in car accident and was  no  longer  able  to
    keep that job due to injuries sustained.




    Discussion and Findings

21. I am satisfied that Mohammad Barkhadle has lived in this country  since
    he was young boy, that he attended primary and secondary  school  here,
    and that he no doubt has  many  friends  in  the  Birmingham  area.  He
    regards the United Kingdom as his home. I further accept that he has  a
    close relationship with his mother and sisters. I  make  clear  however
    that all of that will be very emphatically outweighed if I  accept  the
    evidence of DC Hensley that Mr Barkhadle has been, for some 12 years, a
    source of serious concern for West Midlands Police, being connected  to
    anti-social behaviour, vicious  assaults  on  members  of  the  public,
    robberies at knifepoint,  drug  trafficking  and  onward  distribution,
    theft, burglary and inter-gang warfare. That litany of  criminality  is
    such that if I accept it, the Secretary of State would  certainly  make
    out her case. It matters not that Mr Barkhadle  has  managed  to  avoid
    conviction since 2017. The  picture  that  emerges  from  DC  Hensley's
    report is of a profoundly anti-social and violent criminal,  and  I  do
    not need a probation service report to tell me that. The evidence of DC
    Hensley is, on the particular facts of this case, crucial.

22. With that I mind I have  had  regard  to  the  guidance  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Farquharson (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT  00146
    (IAC).  Although  concerned  with  the  statutory  scheme   under   the
    Immigration Acts, not the Regulations, Farquharson was  concerned  with
    the approach to be taken to police evidence such as that before me.

23. The facts in Farquharson were that the appellant had been charged  with
    six serious violence offences against women: five counts  of  rape  and
    one  of  domestic  violence  against  a  partner.  None  had  ended  in
    conviction. On two occasions the jury failed to reach a verdict; in two
    others the complainant did not want to give evidence;  in  two  of  the
    rapes the CPS declined to pursue the matter due to concerns  about  the
    credibility of the complainant.  The evidence before  the  Tribunal  on
    these matters consisted of the CRIS  records,  and  the  interpretation
    thereof by a DC Mahmood who attended court and was cross examined.

24. The Tribunal directed itself that the standard of proof was the balance
    of probabilities, and noted that it is for the Secretary  of  State  to
    substantiate the conduct relied upon.  In particular regard was had  to
    the Secretary of State's submission in Bah (liability  to  deportation)
    [2012] UKUT 196 (IAC):

         "Where any assertion of fact by the Secretary of State material  to
         the assessment of whether deportation is conducive  to  the  public
         good is in dispute, it must be established  by  her  on  the  civil
         standard of the balance of probabilities".

25. In considering how  that  burden  might  be  discharged  the  panel  in
    Farquharson (comprising  the  then  President  Mr  Justice  Blake,  Sir
    Jeffrey James KBE CMG and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane)  adopted  with
    approval this guidance in Bah:

         "any material relevant to meet that standard may be received by the
         Tribunal whether it is hearsay or a summary of information held  by
         others, if it is supplied in  time  and  in  accordance  with  case
         management directions  but  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  such
         material will depend on its nature, the circumstances in  which  it
         was collected or recorded, the susceptibility of the  informant  or
         original informant to error, and the extent to which the  appellant
         is able to comment or rebut it."

26. Having so directed  itself  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Farquharson  then
    proceeded to conduct its own detailed analysis of each of  the  alleged
    incidents, noting: "if the material renders itself capable of more than
    one interpretation we should only draw one adverse to the appellant  if
    on  the  balance  of  probabilities  there  is  no   other   reasonable
    explanation on the material before us".  Applying that principle to the
    evidence before it the Tribunal concluded  that  the  burden  had  been
    discharged in respect of some of the incidents, and not in others.  The
    decision  concludes,  insofar  as  is  relevant,  with  the   following
    statements of principle:

         "First, the  UKBA  must  consider  carefully  what  allegations  of
         conduct it wishes to rely on in the  absence  of  a  conviction  or
         other authoritative finding of fact. In our  judgement  the  agency
         should not allege conduct that it is not prepared to prove  to  the
         appropriate civil standard. The decision in Bah  demonstrates  that
         conduct based on intelligence and crime reports can be relied on in
         immigration  appeals  provided  that  there  is  some   decree   of
         transparency about how the material  is  accumulated  and  what  it
         consists of. If intelligence is so sensitive that a sufficient gist
         of it cannot be disclosed, then it should  not  be  raised  in  the
         appeal. Mere assertion will not be enough.

         Second, where deportation  or  removal  proceedings  are  based  on
         information derived from police sources, a police witness statement
         should  be  made  available  enclosing  the  relevant   documentary
         material. That material  must  fairly  reflect  the  strengths  and
         weaknesses of any assessment and should not  be  cherry  picked  to
         present one side only if there is material that exculpates as  well
         as inculpates.  The  witness  statement  should  reveal  that  this
         exercise has been undertaken to obviate the need  for  third  party
         disclosure requests under the Upper Tribunal Rules. The judge  must
         ensure that the hearing is fair.

         Third, material is likely to be considered  the  more  cogent,  the
         greater the extent to which  it  is  supported  by  other  relevant
         documents. In the present case we have searched for  data  relating
         to the incidents independent of the  complainant's  narrative.  The
         CRIS extracts might have been supported by witness statements  made
         by forensic medical  examiners  or  eye-witnesses.  This  will  not
         always be necessary, and the Tribunal is not conducting a re-trial,
         but it may well prove helpful. We anticipate that the CPS should be
         able to assist the UKBA and indeed the Tribunal and, where material
         is sensitive, appropriate directions as to its return and  use  can
         be made if requested in advance".

27. I return to the evidence before me.

28. The report  by  DC  Hemsley  refers  to  multiple  incidents,  and  the
    Secretary of State has not specified which ones in particular she seeks
    to rely upon. That has not made my task any easier.

29. Some of the matters raised by DC Hensley can be discounted the  outset,
    since they  individually  fall,  clearly  and  demonstrably,  short  of
    meeting  the  relevant  standard.   Amongst  these  are  the  following
    matters:

      i)    The allegations of "nuisance" behaviour in the Rookery  Rd  area
         in 2007 appear to  add  nothing  to  the  existing  conviction  for
         shoplifting, committed when Mr Barkhadle was still a minor;

     ii) I can make no findings on the "issues" said to have been caused  by
         Mr  Barkhadle  and  associates  around  bookmakers  and  on  public
         transport between 2010 and 2012, since DC Hensley here  makes  what
         is accepted to be a significant error of fact in that  she  details
         three prison sentences that were never imposed or served;

    iii) No particulars or evidence are offered in respect of the allegation
         that Mr Barkhadle is "linked" to firearms, fraud and  drug  dealing
         in Birmingham City Centre;

     iv) The suggestion that he is involved in the  importation  of  illegal
         drugs appears  to  be  wholly  without  foundation,  consisting  of
         nothing more than the fact that he travelled abroad frequently  and
         didn't like being stopped by the police. I must assume that  a  car
         with "hostile to police"  occupants,  stopped  at  port,  would  be
         subject to a search; absent any  positive  assertion  that  such  a
         search found illegal substances I must assume that nothing  was  in
         fact found on any such occasion;

      v) In August 2016 Mr Barkhadle was "linked" to possession of  a  sawn-
         off shotgun and ammunition. No particulars or evidence are  offered
         by the Secretary of State, nor any explanation  given  as  to  whom
         might have done the 'linking';

     vi) In June 2017 police investigating the shooting of an  associate  of
         Mr Barkhadle came to hear that it was a revenge attack for a series
         of robberies  perpetrated  against  other  young  criminals  by  Mr
         Barkhadle and his brother. No particulars or evidence  are  offered
         by the Secretary of State;

    vii) In December 2016 the police interviewed Mr Barkhadle  "in  relation
         to" a murder outside a shisha  bar.  That  is  the  extent  of  the
         information provided - it does not appear  that  the  investigation
         went any further than that, and no charges were ever brought. It is
         not even clear whether  he  was  interviewed  as  a  witness  or  a
         suspect;

   viii) The alleged robbery on the 5th May 2008 was not pursued by the  CPS
         who offered no evidence and Birmingham Youth  Court  dismissed  the
         case. No new evidence has been provided by the Secretary  of  State
         in respect of this offence;

     ix) DC Hensley mentions police interest in Mr Barkhadle in respect of a
         further 15 robberies (one with a charge of kidnap),  all  of  which
         end with 'no further action', findings of not  guilty  or  the  CPS
         offering no evidence at trial. In none of these does the  Secretary
         of State offer particulars or  evidence  sufficient  to  warrant  a
         civil standard finding; ditto the five additional charges of theft,
         two of burglary, one of  threatening  behaviour,  one  of  criminal
         damage and one of assault on a PC.

30. Only two of the  matters  raised  by  DC  Hensley  give  any  level  of
    significant detail.

31. The first is the assault on the  woman  on  the  bus.  The  victim  was
    travelling on a bus in the company of her brother on the night  of  the
    22nd May 2007 when she was approached by a group of  men  who  verbally
    abused her and her brother and tried to  grab  the  woman's  bag.   She
    pushed them away and tried to get off the bus. As she left the bus  she
    was kicked in the head; once she was on the floor she was kicked  again
    and lost consciousness. When she woke she found  that  items  had  been
    stolen from her bag. Her brother had also been assaulted, sustaining  a
    broken jaw. The report states that the 'IP' (this abbreviation  is  not
    explained but I read it to be 'injured  party')  "identified  Barkhadle
    from school". When interviewed Mr Barkhadle admitted that he was there,
    and that he was involved in the incident, but claimed that he had acted
    "in self-defence". Reading those bare facts I am perplexed  as  to  why
    the police took no further action. There was a positive  identification
    from someone who knew Mr Barkhadle personally, and it is  difficult  to
    see how kicking the head of a woman already on the  ground  could  ever
    legitimately be described as self-defence. That brings me back  to  the
    guidance in Bah and Farquharson.  I have to assume  that  the  decision
    not to pursue that prosecution was taken in full possession of  all  of
    the available evidence and having regard to all known facts.  There are
    alternative explanations for the events of that night, namely  that  of
    Mr Barkhadle that it was a dispute on  a  bus  between  two  groups  of
    people known to each other and that he acted in fear  for  his  person.
    The Secretary of State has provided no additional evidence.  There  are
    no witness statements, and it  is  not  even  clear  who  provided  the
    information that DC Hensley was working with.  Nor is it clear that  it
    was in fact Mr Barkhadle who is  said  to  have  assaulted  the  woman,
    rather than one of the other youths on the bus.  I am  unable  to  find
    that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  proven  that  on  a  balance   of
    probabilities it was Mr Barkhadle who assaulted and robbed the  victims
    on this occasion.

32. The second incident occurred on the 15th November 2008.   Acting  on  a
    description given by the victim, the vendor of a mobile phone stall  in
    a shopping  centre,  police  apprehended  Mr  Barkhadle  on  a  bus  on
    suspicion of stealing items from that stall. The stolen phone was found
    near to where he was sitting on the bus. Although he denied having  any
    property on his person, another phone and a SIM card were found in  the
    waistband of his trousers.  On this occasion Mr Barkhadle attempted  to
    frustrate the investigation into him  by  providing  false  details  in
    custody; I also note that someone described as his "father" refused  to
    act as an appropriate adult (I was told  that  his  father  remains  in
    Somalia).  The police decided  not  to  pursue  the  matter  after  the
    stallholder declined to give any further evidence.  In this instance  I
    would be prepared to find - just - that the  burden  is  discharged.  A
    description of the  offender,  plus  CCTV  footage  from  the  shopping
    centre, lead police to the top of a bus, where they find  Mr  Barkhadle
    along with the stolen phone. He then behaves in a way consonant with DC
    Hensley's description of  him  as  profoundly  anti-social  and  'anti-
    police'.

33. I therefore add the details of the theft on the 15th November  2008  to
    the convictions that I already know  about.   It  is  a  poor  criminal
    record.  From a young age Mr Barkhadle was engaging in  theft  (at  the
    time of the 2008 offence he was fifteen;  at  the  date  of  his  first
    conviction  in  2010  he  was  seventeen).   The  behaviour   certainly
    escalated in 2011 with the attempted robbery, but it is right  to  note
    Mr Brooks is correct when he says that the  offending  since  then  -an
    altercation with a police officer in his home, and a failing to  comply
    with conditions - do not in themselves indicate any significant risk to
    the public. What I am left with is a young man  who  between  2008  and
    2011, whilst still  youth,  committed  offences  such  as  shoplifting,
    attempted robbery and  handling  stolen  goods.   That  is  not  to  be
    condoned in any way, but the offences, and the sentences imposed,  fall
    far short of establishing that he presents a risk to the public today.

34. It follows that the appeal must be allowed. I make no  general  finding
    on the quality or reliability of DC  Hensley's  report.  She  no  doubt
    prepared her  report  in  good  faith.  Unfortunately  it  did  contain
    significant errors, not least in her assertion that Mr  Barkhadle  went
    to prison for a year when in fact  he  has  never  served  a  custodial
    sentence.  That error enabled Mr Brooks, quite  properly,  to  question
    whether the 'intelligence' reports upon which DC  Hensley  relied  were
    credible or factually  correct.    In  her  review  of  this  case  the
    Secretary of State may wish to reflect on the legal framework that  the
    Tribunal must apply when non-conviction  'bad  character'  evidence  is
    offered. Had DC Hensley's report been supported by  live  evidence,  or
    even witness statements or case notes, my decision may well  have  been
    other than it is.




    Decisions

35. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for error of law
    and it is set aside.

36. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows: "the appeal is  allowed
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016".

37. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           30th October 2019
