
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Number: DA/00030/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 February 2020                 |On 22 April 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr kamtochukwu ezepue
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Shakir, Counsel instructed by Pillai & Jones
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  However, for the sake of
    clarity, I will refer to the parties as they were referred to in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24 March 1976 who is
    married to an EEA national.  He was granted a permanent right of
    residence in the UK under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") in July 2014.

 3. In March 2015 the appellant was convicted of assaulting his wife and
    was sentenced to sixteen months in prison. The respondent decided to
    deport him in accordance with reg. 21 of the 2006 Regulations on the
    basis that his deportation was justified on serious grounds of public
    policy. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Swaney ("the
    judge").  In a decision promulgated on 14 November 2019 the judge
    allowed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.  The Secretary of State
    is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge directed herself that it was necessary to consider the risk
    of whether the appellant will cause harm by further offending and that
    this required an evaluation to be made of the likelihood that he would
    re-offend and what the consequences would likely be if he were to do
    so.

 5. She noted that prior to his conviction for actual bodily harm the
    appellant had been cautioned on one occasion for assaulting his wife
    (in 2007) and that between 2007 and 2014 the police had been called on
    approximately ten occasions.  The judge noted that the sentencing
    judge, following his conviction in 2015, remarked that this appeared to
    be "an appalling repeat of what appeared to be bullying" of his wife.

 6. The judge stated that the OASys Report dated January 2016 described the
    appellant as posing a medium risk of serious harm to known adults and
    children in the community and a low risk of harm in all other respects.
     She noted that the OASys Report identified circumstances in which
    risks would be greatest, one of which was the risk that the appellant
    would reconcile with his wife.

 7. The judge noted that the appellant had now reconciled with his wife.
    She stated at paragraph 64:

         "The situation has changed in that their evidence is that they  are
         now once again living together with their children.   I  take  into
         account that the restraining order against the appellant was lifted
         by the judge in July 2018, indicating the judge accepted it was  no
         longer necessary for the protection of the appellant's wife."

    The judge found that both the appellant and his wife were dishonest
    when they denied at the hearing that there had been any further
    involvement with the police since the appellant's release from prison
    and that it was only when confronted with a record that the appellant
    was arrested in July 2019 on suspicion of actual bodily harm against
    his wife that the appellant confirmed he had been arrested.  The judge
    observed that the appellant's wife denied outright that the appellant
    had been arrested and when asked whether she and the appellant had any
    major arguments since his release from prison she denied that they had.
     At paragraph 67 the judge stated:

         "It is regrettable that neither the appellant nor his wife told the
         truth in their evidence in this respect [the arrest in July 2019 on
         the suspicion of actual  bodily  harm].   Notwithstanding  this,  I
         place limited weight on this aspect of their evidence.  This is one
         incident since the appellant's release and comes some twelve months
         after  they  say  they  resumed  living  together.   While  it   is
         concerning that this is similar to other incidents in  the  history
         of this relationship, it does appear to be a  one-off.   There  was
         nothing to suggest that this forms part of a pattern  of  behaviour
         that was evident previously.  I do not consider this  one  incident
         is of itself enough to suggest that the assessment of the  risk  of
         re-offending are inaccurate or otherwise  unreliable.   I  find  on
         that basis that the risk  of  re-offending  remains  low  and  this
         carries weight in the balancing exercise."

 8. At paragraph 70 the judge concluded:

         "I find that the appellant does not pose  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society.  I have considered all the  matters  referred
         to above, but the key factors that have contributed to this finding
         are:

          a. The assessed low risk of re-offending which takes into account
             the steps the appellant has taken to rehabilitate himself.

          b.  The  fact  that  a  judge  of  the  Crown  Court  lifted  the
             restraining order against the appellant.

          c. The evidence of the appellant's wife  that  she  is  satisfied
             that he has changed and that she is happy to have him back  in
             the family home.

          d. The appellant's social and cultural integration in the  United
             Kingdom and the personal factors that I have outlined above."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 9. The grounds of appeal make several arguments under the heading
    "material misdirection of law".

10. First, it is argued that the judge's finding that the appellant is at a
    low risk of re-offending is inconsistent with the OASys Report which
    assessed the appellant as being a medium risk of serious harm to known
    adults and children in the community.

11. Second, it is submitted that the judge failed to give proper
    consideration to the evidence of the appellant continuing to arouse
    suspicion of marital abuse as recently as July 2019 in the context of,
    over a long period of time, the appellant having repeatedly come to the
    attention of the police for conduct towards his wife.

12. Third, the grounds of appeal submit that the judge failed to assess the
    obvious credibility issues arising from the appellant and his wife
    failing to mention the 2019 arrest.

13. Fourth, it is submitted that the judge improperly placed weight on
    various courses the appellant claimed to have completed when
    documentary evidence was not submitted.

14. Mr Lindsay argued that the judge's approach to the OASys Report, the
    threat posed by the appellant, and to his credibility, were not
    sustainable and did not adequately address whether he is a present
    threat.

15. He noted that the OASys Report identified, as one of the greatest
    risks, that the appellant would reconcile with his wife, and this is
    what has in fact occurred.  He argued that the judge has not engaged
    with the fact that the current circumstances are such that there is an
    increased risk, based on OASys Report.

16. He also argued that it is plain that the appellant and his wife were
    not credible given that they denied having any further involvement with
    the police and it was only when they were confronted with the evidence
    that the appellant admitted he was arrested in July 2019.  Mr Lindsay
    submitted that the judge failed to adequately explain how he could
    still find the appellant and his wife credible despite this.

17. Mr Lindsay also argued that the reliance by the judge on the evidence
    of the appellant's wife that she believed the appellant had changed his
    ways failed to engage with the remark of the sentencing judge as to the
    appellant bullying his wife.  He also maintained that the judge had not
    addressed whether the apparent support given to the appellant by his
    wife might be a result of bullying or compulsion; or taken into account
    that she and the appellant were untruthful as witnesses.

18. Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge had not adequately considered the
    implication of the appellant being arrested in 2019.  He recognised
    that the appellant was not charged or convicted; but noted that an
    arrest is still capable of meeting the relevant civil standard.  He
    commented that the absence of any analysis in the decision of the
    arrest in 2019 notable.  He also argued that the reference by the judge
    at paragraph 67 to the incident in 2019 appearing to be a "one-off" is
    not consistent with the long history of abuse and the police being
    called, prior to the conviction in 2015, on approximately ten
    occasions.  He argued that the incident in 2019 appears to be
    consistent with this pattern and therefore it was not open to the judge
    to state that there was "nothing to suggest that this forms part of a
    pattern of behaviour".

19. Ms Shakir argued that this is a properly made decision.  She submitted
    that the appellant was not charged, let alone convicted, in 2019; and
    it was a matter for the judge to determine how much weight to place on
    the arrest.  She observed that it has been four years since the OASys
    Report, and that the incident in 2019 was a "one-off" incident.  The
    judge, argued Ms Shakir, was entitled to reach a conclusion on
    credibility, having heard oral evidence and it was the judge who was
    best placed to decide credibility.

Analysis

20. This is a comprehensive and clear decision where the judge has:

      i) accurately identified the applicable law,

     ii) engaged with all of the material evidence (and not relied on any
         immaterial evidence), and

    iii) given clear reasons to support the conclusions reached.

21. Although the grounds of appeal are framed as a challenge based on a
    "misdirection of law" and Mr Lindsay submitted that aspects of the
    evidence had not been adequately considered,  the Secretary of State's
    case, in reality, is that the conclusion reached by the judge was
    irrational/perverse.

22. The first ground submits that the judge was wrong to assess the
    appellant as low risk when the OASys Report assessed him as a medium
    risk. The judge set out the OASys assessment, considered the events
    occurring in the intervening years, and explained why her conclusion
    differed. The only possible error is that the conclusion reached was
    not rational. This is the point made in the grant of permission, where
    it was stated:

         "It is arguable that it is perverse and/or irrational that the  FTT
         Judge placed no or very little weight on an arrest  by  the  police
         for domestic violence, even though not proceeded  with  to  charge,
         given the content of the OASys Report, the  contradictions  in  the
         appellant's and his wife's evidence and  the  lack  of  documentary
         evidence to corroborate the appellant's evidence of the courses  he
         claimed to have undertaken."

23. The second ground of appeal submits that the judge failed to give
    proper consideration to the evidence of the appellant continuing to
    arouse suspicion of marital abuse as recently as July 2019 in the
    context of, over a long period of time, the appellant having repeatedly
    come to the attention of the police for conduct towards his wife. It is
    clear from the decision that the judge considered - in some detail, and
    accurately- the arrest in July 2019 along with the evidence relating to
    a lengthy history of abuse. The real point advanced by the Secretary of
    State is not that there was "improper consideration" but that it was
    not reasonably open to the judge to not place weight on the arrest in
    the light of all the circumstances.

24. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge failed to assess the
    credibility issues arising from the appellant and his wife failing to
    mention the 2019 arrest.  It is simply not the case that the judge
    "failed to assess" the credibility issues arising from the appellant,
    and his wife, being dishonest at the hearing, as she clearly did
    consider this and gave reasons to support her position. The real basis
    for this challenge is that it was not rational to treat the
    appellant's, and his wife's, evidence as credible given the dishonesty.

25. The fourth ground submits that the judge improperly placed weight on
    various courses the appellant claimed to have completed when
    documentary evidence was not submitted. However, there was evidence
    before the judge, in the form of the witness evidence of the appellant.
    Again, the real issue is whether it was irrational to accept the
    evidence of the appellant given his dishonesty at the hearing.

26. The key issue in this appeal was whether the appellant was now at low
    risk of offending. There were strong reasons to find that he was not,
    including that:

      i) he (and his wife) were dishonest at the hearing on an important
         issue;

     ii) the appellant was arrested in 2019 for an incident that, on its
         face, seems to fall into the pattern of previous offending; and

    iii) the appellant had reconciled his wife, which was a risk factor
         identified in the OASys report.

27. However, there were some factors that reasonably could be considered as
    pointing to the appellant now being at low risk. These include:

      i) The OASys report was prepared over 4 years earlier and since then
         the appellant had not been charged or convicted of any offence (in
         2019 he was arrested but not charged);

     ii) the restraining order against him had been lifted; and

    iii) his wife gave oral evidence that she believed he had changed.

28. The relative weight to give these factors was a matter for the judge. I
    am in no doubt that many judges would have decided the appeal
    differently. In particular, other judges might have attached
    significant weight to the lack of honesty at the hearing. However, the
    matter for me to determine is not whether I (or another judge) would
    have reached a different conclusion as to whether the appellant was at
    low risk of reoffending, but whether it was irrational (i.e. not open
    to the judge) to reach such a conclusion. The conclusion reached by the
    judge is generous to the appellant, but not irrational. There are
    sustainable reasons (as set out above, in para. 27) to support the
    judge's conclusion. Having reviewed for myself the evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that the decision was open to the
    judge. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

29. The appeal is dismissed.
|                                           |                                   |
|                                           |                                   |
|Signed                                     |                                   |
|                                           |                                   |
|[pic]                                      |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan              |                         Dated: 24 |
|                                           |March 2020                         |

