
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00072/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 May 2015                       |On 10 June 2015                      |
|Prepared 20 May 2015                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ROHAN EVERTON MONTGOMERY WILLIAMS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon of Counsel instructed by Messrs Jein
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lingam and Mr
    G F Sandall (Non-Legal Member)) who, in a determination promulgated  on
    18 August 2014, allowed the appeal of Rohan Everton Montgomery Williams
    against a decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order made against him on 21 March 2007.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before us we will  for
    ease of reference refer to her  as  the  respondent,  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly we  will  refer  to  Mr  Rohan
    Everton Montgomery Williams as the appellant, as he was  the  appellant
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 8  October  1974.
    He entered Britain  as  a  visitor  in  2001  and  thereafter  received
    extensions of stay firstly as a student and  then  as  the  husband  of
    Giselle Dowe by whom he had  already  had  two  children  and  whom  he
    married on 31 March 2003.  On 2 April 2003 he was  granted  an  initial
    period of two years' leave as the spouse of a settled  person  until  2
    April 2005.

4.   The appellant committed a series of eight drug offences between 12  May
    2004 and 14 July 2004 and on 7 January 2005 he was convicted  of  eight
    counts of possession and supplying class A  controlled  drugs  and  was
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment concurrent on each count.  He  did
    not appeal against conviction or sentence.

5.   A decision to make a deportation order was made on 25 June  2005.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision and although  his  appeal  was
    allowed in the First-tier, largely because of the mental health of  the
    appellant's wife, on reconsideration in the Upper Tribunal, it was  set
    aside, re-made and dismissed.  An application to the  Court  of  Appeal
    was refused.

6.   The deportation order was then made on 21 March 2007.

7.   It appears that the appellant was not removed at that stage because  he
    was a witness for the prosecution in a murder trial.

8.   In 2013 the appellant's solicitors made an application  for  revocation
    of  the  deportation  order.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent, reasons being given for the refusal in  a  detailed  letter
    dated 2 December 2013.

9.   The writer of the letter referred  firstly  to  paragraph  390  of  the
    Immigration Rules which set out the circumstances in  which  revocation
    of a deportation order should be  considered  before  setting  out  the
    terms of paragraphs 391 and 391A.  These stated:-

         "391.    In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
         conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the   continuation   of   a
         Deportation Order against that person will be the proper course:

         a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the  person
            was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4  years,
            unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the Deportation
            Order, ..

         b)

         Unless, ...the continuation would be contrary to the  Human  Rights
         Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of
         Refugees,  or   there   are   exceptional   circumstances   meaning
         continuation is outweighed by compelling factors.

         391A.    In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
         be authorised unless the situation  has  been  materially  altered,
         either by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by
         fresh  information  coming  to  light  which  was  not  before  the
         appellate authorities or the Secretary of  State.  The  passage  of
         time since the person was deported may also  in  itself  amount  to
         such a change of circumstances as  to  warrant  revocation  of  the
         order."

10.  The writer of the letter considered that as ten years had  not  elapsed
    since the making of the deportation  order  the  appellant's  continued
    exclusion would normally be the proper course.   He  then  went  on  to
    consider the relevant background information set out in the appellant's
    application for revocation.

11.  We would comment that as the appellant had not  been  deported  he  had
    not been excluded from the United Kingdom.  However we note, of course,
    that it is now ten years since he was convicted.

12.  The relevant factors which were taken into account by the Secretary  of
    State regarding the appellant's change of circumstances were  that  his
    marriage had broken down and he  had  formed  a  relationship  with  Ms
    Maurisa Buckley-Stevens, a British citizen  and  with  her  had  had  a
    child, T who had been born on 7 May 2007 and who was also British.

13.  The appellant had had another relationship during the currency  of  his
    relationship with Ms Buckley-Stevens with a Dionne  McDonnough.   Their
    child, O had been born on 26 April 2009 and was also British.   It  was
    accepted that the appellant also had parental responsibilities for  his
    son.

14.  The Secretary of State referred to  relevant  case  law  regarding  the
    Article 8  rights  of  the  children  including  the  determination  in
    Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied - Razgar)  [Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00247 (IAC) and ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  Weight was placed on
    the fact that the appellant's appeal against the decision to deport had
    been dismissed.  The writer of the letter then went on to consider  the
    terms of Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and paragraphs 398,  399
    and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

15.   Under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399(a)  the  positions  of  the
    appellant's two children were considered.  It was stated  that  it  was
    accepted it was unreasonable to expect T to leave Britain  because  she
    was aged 6 and had lived all her life in Britain but it was  considered
    that there was another family member who was able to care for the child
    in Britain because the child could remain in the continued care of  her
    mother.

16.  Similarly, although it was accepted  that  the  appellant  also  had  a
    genuine subsisting relationship with O,  it  was  considered  that  his
    mother could care for him.

17.  Under the provisions of paragraph 399(b) it was stated that there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  his  wife  living
    together in Jamaica.

18.  It was not considered  that  the  appellant  could  benefit  under  the
    private  life  Rules  nor  indeed  that  there  were  any   exceptional
    circumstances   would   mean   that   his    deportation    would    be
    disproportionate.

19.  When considering the appellant's appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  noted
    that  under  the  provisions  of  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT   702   the
    determination of the Tribunal in the appeal  against  the  decision  to
    make a deportation order should be the  relevant  starting  point.   In
    paragraphs 21 onwards of the determination they set out their  findings
    and conclusions.

20.  They first consider the provisions of paragraph 399(a).   Having  noted
    that the appellant had a genuine subsisting  relationship  with  T  and
    that the respondent had considered that T had another parent who  could
    care for her they have stated in paragraph 32 (  the  second  one-there
    are two):-

         "We find the respondent's suggestion that  Ms  Buckley-Stevens  can
         care for T dismissive, without  good  reason,  of  the  appellant's
         evidence that Ms Buckley-Stevens is the sole wage earner  in  their
         household."

    They asserted that the  respondent  had  not  properly  considered  all
    relevant evidence.

21.  In paragraphs 34 onwards the Tribunal noted the  evidence  before  them
    that the appellant was supported by his partner and  that  Ms  Buckley-
    Stevens worked shift hours relying on the appellant to take  and  fetch
    their daughter to school and deal with daily childcare matters and that
    the appellant had the responsibility to bathe, feed and put Tiyanna  to
    bed  on  a  regular  basis  as  well  as  dealing  with   her   medical
    appointments.

22.  Having referred to the need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare  of
    the child who was in Britain the Tribunal went on to say that:

         "As it is only his partner who is in full-time employment and there
         is no evidence to suggest different (sic) it is reasonable to  find
         that the appellant would have full daily responsibility and care of
         their daughter.  We accept it probable that his daughter, over  the
         years, would have got familiar  with  her  father  being  her  main
         carer.  Therefore, we accept that the appellant's extensive role as
         the main carer must be afforded due weight."

23.  Having emphasised that Ms Buckley-Stevens was the only  earner  in  the
    family the Tribunal then referred to the terms of  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act and the decision of the ECJ in
    Zambrano and the determination of the Tribunal  in  Sanade  and  Others
    (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048  (IAC)  before
    reaching the conclusion in paragraph 45 that  T  and  her  mother  were
    actively involved in their respective private lives  and  stating  that
    "based on the principles in Zambrano and Sanade, it must follow that it
    would not be possible or reasonable  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    expect or require British citizens who are also citizens of the  EU  to
    relocate, as a family unit outside the EU."

24.  They then  stated  that  they  gave  full  weight  to  the  appellant's
    conviction but said that if he were deported the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his daughter  would  suffer  and  it  would  severely
    interrupt the extensive nature of the appellant's care activities  with
    his daughter.  This would have a profound impact on the development  of
    the father/child relationship and would mean that  either  Ms  Buckley-
    Stevens would have to reduce her working hours or  she  might  have  to
    quit her job to stay home and maintain the same level of care  for  her
    daughter.  If that happened Ms Buckley-Stevens would become reliant  on
    public funds and would not be  in  a  position  to  facilitate  regular
    visits to Jamaica.

25.  The Tribunal then considered the appellant's relationship  with  O  but
    and  stated that it was generally in a child's best interests  to  have
    both its parents together as a unit  and they took  into  account  that
    the appellant was actively involved in both the children's lives.

26.  They took into  account  that  the  appellant  had  lived  lawfully  in
    Britain between 2001 and 2005 and that he had not been removed in  2007
    because removal action had been suspended in 2007.  They concluded,  in
    paragraph 54  that  the  appellant's  family  life  with  the  children
    outweighed the public interest in deporting him.

27.  They went on to state, on a generous reading of reading  paragraphs  55
    and 57 together, that given the disruption that there would have to  be
    to Ms Buckley-Stevens' life if she had to  leave  Britain,  the  appeal
    should succeed under paragraph 399(b) as it would  be  unreasonable  to
    require her to leave this country.

28.  They therefore found that the appellant's appeal should  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  They then turned, it appears to the appellant's
    Article 8 claim under the ECHR and referred to  considerable  case  law
    before stating that the appellant's relationship with his daughter  was
    such that it would not be in her best interests or that  of  O  if  the
    appellant were removed.  They also appear to have placed weight on  the
    fact that since the initial convictions in 2005 the appellant  had  not
    been convicted of any further crime.

29.  They therefore allowed the appellant's appeal.

30.  The Secretary of State appealed, arguing that the  Tribunal  had  erred
    in their consideration of paragraph 399(a) in their assessment  of  the
    condition in the Rule that there should be "no other family member  who
    is able to care for the child in the UK".

31.  It was argued that the Tribunal had materially  misdirected  themselves
    in law as there were other family members who were able to care for the
    children in Britain.

32.  With regard to the provisions of paragraph 399(b) it  was  stated  that
    the Tribunal had conducted very little assessment or  consideration  of
    the requirements merely stating that on the totality  of  the  evidence
    before them the appellant succeeded under that paragraph.

33.  In any event it was stated that  paragraph  399(b)  required  that  the
    appellant should have been in Britain with valid leave for a continuous
    period of fifteen years (the actual requirement is twenty  years).   It
    was also argued that the Tribunal had not properly taken  into  account
    the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   The
    grounds refer to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  SS  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

34.  Although the application was not admitted  in  the  First-tier  on  the
    basis that it was out of  time,  the  judge  deciding  the  application
    considered that there was no error of law in the determination as there
    had been a proper "proportionality" exercise under Article 8.

35.  The  application  was  renewed  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  further
    grounds  stating that the Tribunal had failed to consider the effect of
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which
    had come into force on 28 July 2014.  That was after  the  hearing  but
    before the promulgation of the determination: that was  a  misdirection
    such that the decision should be set aside.

36.  Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor considered it appropriate to extend  time
    to apply for permission  to  appeal  and  also  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He wrote:-

         "It is arguable that, although the  terms  of  relevant  rules  had
         changed from those cited in the respondent's  grounds,  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's reasons and conclusions in relation  to  paragraphs
         399(a) and 399(b) of the Immigration Rules are legally flawed.

         It is further arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's determination
         contains an error of law capable of affecting the  outcome  of  the
         appeal, in that it failed to have regard to,  and  apply,  sections
         117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

37.  At the hearing of the appeal before us Mr Nath referred  to  the  terms
    of the letter of  refusal  and  to  relevant  case  law  including  the
    judgments in SS (Nigeria) and SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   He
    argued that  the  Tribunal  had  not  properly  considered  the  public
    interest in the deportation of the appellant and  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's  relationship  with  his  daughter  outweighed  the  public
    interest in deportation.  The fact that the appellant looked after  his
    daughter did not mean that this was  an  exceptional  case.   While  he
    accepted that the appellant looked after his daughter,  taking  her  to
    school and dealing with much of her day to day care, he stated that the
    Tribunal had not properly considered the fact that  the  appellant  had
    committed very serious offences - he referred to the judge's sentencing
    remarks.  He referred to paragraph 13 of the judgment of  the  Tribunal
    in Chege (Section 117D - Article 8 - approach: Kenya) [2015]  UKUT  165
    (IAC) which  referred to the provisions of HC 532 which  provided  that
    the changes which  took effect on 28  July  would  apply  to  all  ECHR
    Article 8 claims from foreign criminals who were decided  on  or  after
    that date and went on to say:-

         "Although this appears on the face to mean a decision by  the  SSHD
         because the Tribunal does not take  decisions  in  the  context  in
         which that expression is here being used, paragraph A362 refers  to
         Rules having effect regardless of when the notice of  intention  or
         the deportation order was served; the explanatory memorandum at 3.4
         and 3.5 talks of harmonisation of the Rules  with  Immigration  Act
         2014 and [38]-[39]  of YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292  made  it
         clear that irrespective of when the deportation order was signed or
         the decision to deport was made, if the appeal is determined  after
         28th. July 2014 then the Rules  in  force  on  that  date  are  the
         relevant Rules."

    He also referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in YM  (Uganda)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.  In that paragraph Aikens  LJ  having  considered
    the coming into force of Section 117A of the 2014 stated that:

         "To my mind there is no unfairness in applying  the  new  statutory
         provisions to a decision that has now to be made by a  Tribunal  or
         court.  The decision should  reflect  the  balance  that  has  been
         struck, which has some benefits and, perhaps,  some  drawbacks  for
         the person concerned.

38.  He went on to say in paragraph 39:-

         "So far as the 2014 Rules are  concerned,  it  is  clear  from  the
         provisions of Rule A362 itself, as  well  as  the  statement  under
         'implementation' in the Statement of Changes and paragraphs 3.4 and
         4.7 of the Explanatory Memorandum, that the 2014 Rules  are  to  be
         applied to all decisions concerning Article 8 claims that are  made
         after 28 July 2014. As Lord Hoffmann said in the  Odelola  case  at
         [7], the Immigration Rules are a statement by the SSHD of  how  she
         will exercise powers of control  over  immigration.  Thus,  in  the
         absence of any statement to the contrary, the most natural  reading
         of the Rules is that they apply to  decisions  taken  by  the  SSHD
         until such time as she promulgates new rules, after which she  will
         decide according to the new rules. The same applies to decisions by
         tribunals and the courts: that  is  why  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
         (hereafter "MF (Nigeria)"), the Court of Appeal held that both  the
         UT and it were obliged to apply the 2012 Rules to MF,  despite  the
         fact that the SSHD had taken her original decision  in  2010  under
         the pre-existing rules."

39.  We were asked to find that the finding  of  the  Tribunal  was  legally
    flawed and to set aside the decision.

40.  In reply Mr Solomon asked us to find that  the  Tribunal  had  properly
    considered all relevant factors under paragraphs 399(a) and  399(b)  of
    the Rules and had reached conclusions that were fully open to  them  on
    the evidence.  They were entitled to find that  there  were  compelling
    exceptional circumstances.

41.  In that regard he referred to the provisions of Section 117A-D  of  the
    2002 Act.

42.  He accepted that the Tribunal might have erred with  regard  to  issues
    regarding paragraph 399(b)  but  stated  that  there  were  sustainable
    reasons given for the conclusion of the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant
    should succeed under the provisions of  paragraph  399(a).   He  stated
    that they had taken into account the  previous  determination  and  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules.  He took  us  through  the  appellant's
    history and emphasised that he had not been removed because he had been
    a witness for the prosecution in a murder case.

43.  The appellant had properly made an application to regularise  his  stay
    and there had been a material change in circumstances as he now had two
    children with which he had a parental relationship.  The Tribunal  were
    entitled to conclude that the appellant was the primary carer for T and
    gave reasons for that.  He emphasised that Ms Buckley-Stevens' evidence
    had been that neither her mother nor the appellant's  sister  would  be
    able to offer assistance in looking after T.

44.  He emphasised the Tribunal were entitled to find that there would be  a
    profound impact on T  should  the  appellant  be  removed.   He  argued
    moreover that the Tribunal had been entitled to carry out the  relevant
    proportionality test and had given reasons why this was an  exceptional
    case.  He stated that the  judge's  sentencing  remarks  had  not  been
    unfavourable and asked us to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had not sought to evade the police or immigration authorities
    in any way since he had been served with the deportation order.

45.  Taking into account the consequences of the removal to family  life  he
    asked us to conclude that the Tribunal had conducted  proper  balancing
    exercises and that they reached conclusions which were  fully  open  to
    them.

46.  In  any  event  he  emphasised  that  applying  the  amended  terms  of
    paragraph 399(a) the removal of the  appellant  would  have  an  unduly
    harsh effect on his daughter.  Similarly the appellant met the terms of
    exception 2 in Section 117C of the 2002 Act.  The  Tribunal  he  argued
    had clearly found that the removal of the appellant would  have  unduly
    harsh consequences for his daughter.

47.  He stated that in any event it was clear from the determination of  the
    Tribunal in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) that it was not an
    error of law to fail to refer to Sections 117A-117D if  the  judge  had
    applied the test which she was supposedly to  apply  according  to  its
    terms and that what mattered was substance and not form.

48.  He therefore asked us to find there was no material  error  of  law  in
    the determination of the Tribunal  and  to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

Discussion

49.  In order to consider what was the relevant law which had  been  applied
    by the Tribunal  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the  chronology:  the
    application, the decision and the changes in the Rules and in  statute.



50.  The application for revocation was made on 11 June 2013.  It  was  made
    on the form for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

51.  The decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order was  made  on  2
    December 2013.   The appeal was heard on 9 July 2014. The decision  was
    reserved.  The changes in the Immigration Rules came into effect on  28
    July 2014 which was the date on  which  the  2014  Act  which  inserted
    Sections 117A-D into the 2002 Act came into force.   The  determination
    was promulgated on 18 August 2014.  The new Rules  and  statute  should
    have applied to all decisions made after 28 July 2014. We consider that
    the date of promulgation is the date of the decision.  The first  issue
    which we must consider is whether  or  not  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal should have applied the new Rules because the decision was not
    promulgated until after the new Rules came  into  force.   We  consider
    that that must be the case.  It would have been open to the Tribunal to
    reconvene so that they could be addressed  on  the  terms  of  the  new
    Rules.

52.  The reality is that the terms of the Rules  are  different  from  those
    which were in force at the hearing of the appeal.  Moreover,  the  2002
    Act had been amended with the insertion of  Section 117.  In particular
    we note the terms of Section 117C of the 2002 Act which at  (3)  states
    that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of four years or more  the  public  interest
         requires  C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or  Exception   2
         applies."

    At 117C(5) it states:-

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

53.  Moreover, the amendment to the Rules states that at 399(a)(ii)

         "(a) It would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the  country
             to which the person is to be deported; and

         (b)  It would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
             without the person who is to be deported."

54.  That test of undue harshness was not the test  which  was  supplied  by
    the Tribunal nor indeed was it the test to which reference was made  in
    the grounds of appeal.

55.  We consider that in not applying that test  in  a  decision  which  was
    made after 28 July there was a clear error of law.

56.  We would add that when considering the test as it stood  prior  to  the
    changes of the Rules which stated that in  paragraph  399(a)  that  the
    test was whether or not it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom there was the further requirement,  as  stated
    in the grounds of appeal that there would be "no  other  family  member
    who is able to care for the child in the UK."  Applying that  condition
    and in reaching their conclusion that there was no other family  member
    who was able to care for the child in the UK we do  not  consider  that
    the decision of the Tribunal  was  sufficiently  clearly  argued.   The
    reality is that T's  mother would remain in  Britain  and  would  be  a
    carer for her.  While we accept that any  single  mother,  particularly
    one who works shift work has difficulties in caring for  a  child  that
    does not meet the test of whether there is no other family  member  who
    is able to care for the child in the UK. Moreover, the requirements  of
    Section 117C  were not considered.

57.  We therefore consider that there are a material errors of  law  in  the
    determination of the Tribunal.

59.   We  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of   the   Tribunal.    Both
    representatives argued that should we find a material error of  law  in
    the determination the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier for a
    consideration afresh.  On the basis that we  consider  that  a  further
    fact-finding exercise should take place and, indeed,  that  it  is  now
    appropriate that the test as set out in Section 117C and in the changed
    Rules should apply that it is appropriate this appeal should proceed to
    a  hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

60.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed to the extent that  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

Directions

    1.   The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh at Taylor House.

    2.   Time estimate:  3 Hours



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

