
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00215/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice                |Oral Determination         |
|On 28 July 2014                                 |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 6 August 2014           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                           miss sabrina hamidovic
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina.   She  is  to  be
    treated as having a date of birth as 25 August 1991.  She is  therefore
    22 years old.  She arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2003,  aged
    11, shortly after her father, brother and  aunt  arrived.   Accordingly
    she had spent just over half her life in Bosnia and Herzegovina at  the
    time the decision was made; indeed that is still the situation now.

 2. The appellant formed a relationship with a person who is settled in the
    United Kingdom and they married.  However the couple are now  separated
    and the father is looking after the couple's three children.  There are
    two girls aged 8 and 5 respectively  and  a  boy  aged  7.   The  panel
    recorded that the father's immigration status  was  not  clear  but  it
    appeared that he had indefinite leave to remain and had been recognised
    as a refugee some time before.  It is on that  basis  that  I  approach
    this appeal.  It would also be consistent with the fact  that  the  two
    younger children who are aged 7 and 5 respectively are British citizens
    and it is said that the eldest child aged 8 is entitled to apply to  be
    registered as a British citizen as a result of her  father's  grant  of
    ILR.  I have no reason to doubt that.

 3. The appellant made a claim for asylum but what  is  important  for  the
    purposes of this appeal is the decision to  make  a  deportation  order
    against her as a result of her criminal conduct.  In  paragraph  12  of
    the  determination  there  are  a  number  of  findings  dealing   with
    appearances before the Criminal Courts.  They number some  25  in  all.
    They begin in August 2003 when the appellant was aged 12 or just under.
     There then follows a series of offences.  During the course  of  2003,
    there were four offences.  During the course of 2004 there were another
    series  of  appearances.   These  were  all  in  relation   either   to
    shoplifting or theft or failing to surrender to custody or breaches  of
    orders that had previously been made.  As a result, there were  periods
    of imprisonment which were recorded by the Tribunal in paragraph 16  of
    its determination.  They numbered seven in all.

 4. It is said the panel erred in law by adopting a different position from
    that which had been taken by the panel which  decided  the  appellant's
    earlier appeal in March 2008.   Reliance  is  placed  on  the  case  of
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  However, a consideration of the  appeal
    that was heard  in  2008  reveals  that  there  were  very  substantial
    differences between the situation as it then stood and the situation as
    now appears.

 5. In 2008 the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  of
    2007 to make a deportation order against her was heard  by  Immigration
    Judge Astle and Mrs E. Hurst JP.  In its determination it  is  apparent
    that the panel lacked a considerable number of  documents.   They  were
    without the copies of the determinations of  the  appellant's  previous
    appeals in August 2003 and May 2005; nor did  they  have  documents  in
    relation to some of the  more  substantial  parts  of  the  claim.   In
    particular, as recorded in paragraph 6, they did not  have  details  of
    the fourteen convictions.  The principal challenge that was made by the
    appellant then was the decision to make a deportation  order  upon  the
    appellant  when  the  ultimate  destination  was  Croatia.   There  was
    evidence, and it was accepted by the Home Office Presenting Officer who
    was at one stage invited to withdraw his decision, that  Croatia  would
    not accept the appellant.  There was indeed a fax from  the  respondent
    dated 30 November 2007 that removal was neither possible to Croatia nor
    Bosnia and Herzegovina.

 6. The panel went on to say in paragraph 11,

         "Whilst we are not concerned with the mechanics of implementing the
         decision, that is quite different from upholding  a  decision  that
         cannot be implemented."

    I am bound to say I do not fully understand what the Tribunal meant  by
    this distinction, except that it appears that the Article 8  claim  was
    allowed solely on the basis that there could not be an effective return
    to Croatia or Bosnia-Herzegovina.  The Tribunal found that, as a result
    of being subjected to a deportation  order,  she  would  be  liable  to
    detention if she could not be returned to Croatia or  Bosnia  and  that
    she would not be able to apply to revoke the order as she would be  in-
    country and she could not apply to enter as the spouse of a person with
    settled leave.  For my part I  am  not  persuaded  that  any  of  those
    grounds amounted to a sustainable reason for finding that she could not
    legitimately be made the subject of a deportation order or that such an
    order would automatically violate her human rights.   However  that  is
    not the issue before me because  we  are  concerned  with  a  radically
    different position when it was heard by the panel whose decision  I  am
    reviewing.

 7. On that occasion it was said by the Presenting Officer that he accepted
    that, at the time of the earlier decision had been made, the  appellant
    could not be removed either to Bosnia or to Croatia  but  the  position
    was substantially different when it came before the fresh  panel.   The
    panel was given information from  the  respondent  that  removals  were
    being effected to Bosnia and that negotiations would take place  on  an
    individual case basis with a view to effecting removal if a deportation
    order was made.  Accordingly the panel concluded,

         "Whilst it is far from certain that the appellant would be removed,
         the position now is different to that in 2008 when it was  accepted
         that she could not be removed".

 8. It is therefore something of a surprise to read in paragraph 1  of  the
    grounds of appeal that the panel erred in finding that the position was
    different from the position as it stood in March 2008 and that the case
    of Devaseelan applied.   The  position  was  mst  certainly  different.
    Devaseelan did not apply in any meaningful way.

 9. Further, I am bound to say I see little opportunity for the application
    of  Devaseelan  in  circumstances  where  there  has  been   continuing
    wrongdoing on the part of the appellant.  Were the panel to be bound by
    the earlier decision then it  would  mean  that  this  appellant  could
    continue to commit further offences but would always be  able  to  rely
    upon the decision made in 2008 that her removal was unlawful and should
    properly govern any future application of the  principles  relating  to
    deportation.  I am quite satisfied  that  this  is  legally  incorrect.
    Consequently Devaseelan has very little to offer in  the  circumstances
    of  this  case.   But  in  any  event  there  are   other   substantial
    differences.

10. The Tribunal properly pointed out in paragraph 26 that in  the  earlier
    decision the first panel lacked information about the appellant's  full
    circumstances including her criminal convictions. The second panel came
    to the sustainable conclusion in paragraph 28 that the changes  in  the
    circumstances  of  the  appellant  had  significantly  affected   their
    assessment of proportionality.

11. The situation in relation to the children is that an attempt  was  made
    by the appellant to seek contact.  The position faced by the panel,  as
    recorded in paragraph 18, was that there was no means of  providing  an
    independent social worker's report because the husband would not  allow
    the social worker to see the children.  In other  words  there  was  no
    evidence from any independent source as to where the best interests  of
    the children lay.

12. The panel was obviously taxed by this feature of the case and  recorded
    in paragraph 18:

         "Normally it would be in the children's best interests to live with
         their mother and their father or to have significant  contact  with
         each of them if they were separated."

    It then went on to say in paragraph 20 that there had to be  a  pressing
    need for it to be  a  proportionate  interference  in  the  relationship
    between  young  children  and  their  mother  but   concluded   in   the
    circumstances of this appeal that such interference  was  proportionate.
    The  panel  went  on  to  deal  in  paragraph  22  with  the  fact  that
    historically  the  children  had  been  largely  brought  up  by   their
    grandmother who had provided stability to them.  It  therefore  requires
    me to look at the relationship that the appellant was able to  establish
    with her children.

13. Paragraph 16 of the determination deals with the periods of  time  that
    the appellant has been in prison.  It made reference  to  sentences  in
    2005, to  a  three  sentences  in  2006.   There  was  a  reference  to
    imprisonment in 2007, in December 2008, in April 2009  and  in  October
    2010, albeit a suspended sentence, and thereafter  sentences  in  March
    2011 and further offending in February 2013.  This established that the
    children had had a highly disruptive relationship  with  their  mother.
    They were then looked after by their  father  and  there  could  be  no
    presumption  that  the  children's  best  interests  were   served   by
    continuing  contact  with  their  mother.   Even  if  there  were  some
    advantage in that, there would have to be such  an  advantage  that  it
    would outweigh the need to maintain effective  immigration  control  in
    relation to an individual who has repeatedly misbehaved.

14. The difficulty as I see the case presented by the appellant is that, as
    appears in the grounds of appeal, it is said that the detriment to  the
    children of the mother's removal (absent any evidence to the  contrary)
    amounted to a failure to consider the implications of  removal  thereby
    vitiating any exercise under Article  8  and  s.  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  In my judgment there is no  such
    thing as a presumption which is provided by either of these provisions.
     Each case has to be looked at on a case-by-case basis and there was no
    evidence from the children,  or  indeed  from  the  independent  social
    worker, as to where the children's best interests  might  lie.   It  is
    true that there were letters  from  the  children  in  the  appellant's
    bundle which appeared to be in loving terms addressed to their  mother.
    One would not expect any child between the ages of 8  and  5  to  write
    anything else but that does not mean that this was conclusive  evidence
    or indeed significant evidence of where the children's  best  interests
    might lay.  There had been no  application  for  contact  made  by  the
    appellant during the period that she spent in the prison and  therefore
    that did not activate any research on the part of the Family  Court  as
    to whether or not the appellant should be permitted  contact  with  the
    children.  The father's refusal to allow a social  worker  to  see  the
    children might be an act of spite but, equally, it might be the concern
    of a father worried about the disruptive and painful effect of  contact
    on these young children.  In these circumstances it  was  open  to  the
    panel to reach the conclusion that they could  not  be  satisfied  that
    removal would violate the appellant's human  rights  or  those  of  her
    children or that it was an infringement of the requirements of s. 55.

15. The panel took into account the evidence of  telephone  contact.   That
    has been drawn to my attention  in  the  course  of  the  hearing  this
    morning.  There was evidence in the form of a British Telecom record of
    'phone calls at which a particular number ending with the  digits  -240
    indicated that there had been contact made  by  the  appellant  to  the
    telephone number of her husband but it is apparent from  the  call  log
    that the duration of these calls sometimes only lasted for a matter  of
    seconds and rarely lasted for anything in excess of one or two minutes.
     It seems reasonable to infer that the person  who  received  the  call
    must have been the father since the children are relatively young.   He
    was not prepared to  accept  a  call  which  would  provide  meaningful
    contact between  the  mother  and  her  children.   The  telephone  log
    therefore does not provide an insight into the  relationship  that  the
    appellant had with her children.  Accordingly, in paragraph 23  of  the
    determination, the panel reached a sustainable finding that  they  were
    not satisfied that the appellant was  in  a  great  deal  of  telephone
    contact with her children.

16. The panel also looked at the circumstances of the appellant herself and
    the high risk of re-offending.  That is certainly something  which  was
    open to the panel to take into account.  It is on the  basis  of  those
    findings that  the  panel  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

17. The challenge to the determination is fundamentally that  the  position
    has not substantially altered since the determination of March 2008.  I
    emphatically reject that submission.   The  panel  set  out  very  good
    reasons why the situation had changed.  It was clear that in March 2008
    the basis upon which a right to remain was considered  appropriate  was
    that there could be no removal to Bosnia or  Croatia.   That  situation
    did not exist when the panel looked at  it  in  2014.   That  challenge
    therefore cannot be sustained.

18. In ground  2  it  is  said  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    implications that the children would be unlikely to be taken  to  visit
    their mother in Bosnia and by implication that they would never see her
    again.  In my judgment it was perfectly plain that this was in the mind
    of the panel.  It was never suggested  that  the  family  would  return
    together to Bosnia or Herzegovina.  It appears to be  recorded  by  the
    panel in paragraph 4 of the determination  that  the  father  had  been
    recognised as a refugee some years before.  Accordingly the basis  upon
    which the Tribunal made its decision was  that  the  family  would  not
    relocate en bloc to Bosnia.  This was a case where  the  panel  had  to
    consider the relationship that the appellant had with her children and,
    more importantly, the relationship that the  children  had  with  their
    mother and whether or not that relationship was of such a character  as
    to  prevent  the  appellant's  removal  notwithstanding  her   criminal
    wrongdoing.  In my judgment, sad as it may be, it was perfectly open to
    the panel to conclude that the balance was in favour of removal.

19. Finally it is said that there is an error in  the  panel's  finding  in
    relation to risk of persecution on return to Bosnia.  The appellant  is
    of Roma ethnicity and in paragraphs 7 onwards the panel considered  the
    background information that  Roma  were  subject  to  ethnic  cleansing
    during the war.  It was known that many Roma had left the country.   It
    was not known how many had returned.  The vast majority of Roma do  not
    have  any  documentary  evidence  and  that  provides   a   significant
    difficulty for them in relation to health  insurance,  social  welfare,
    employment and education.  The panel went on to consider that over  90%
    of Roma women did not have  access  to  health,  social  protection  or
    employment  and  were  especially  vulnerable  to  trafficking.    That
    material comes directly from the report found at page 53 of the  bundle
    which is a report by two authors on the Social Impact of Emigration and
    Rural-Urban Migration in Central and Eastern Europe.  At page 55 of the
    bundle  the  authors  set  out  a  passage   showing   the   particular
    difficulties that Roma women face.  It is this passage that is referred
    to and summarised by the panel in its determination.

20. The panel cannot be criticised for not having  paid  attention  to  the
    background material but came to the conclusion in paragraph  8  of  the
    determination that there was nothing  to  show  that  the  difficulties
    faced by Roma women were so severe  as  to  amount  to  persecution  or
    Article 3 ill-treatment. The panel paid regard to the  UNHCR  overview.
    This material in 2013 did not support a  finding  that  the  widespread
    discrimination which was referred to amounted to  persecution.   In  my
    judgment, that was the finding which was open to the panel.  The report
    does not go nearly far enough to suggest that there can be no returnees
    to Bosnia of lone young women.  For these reasons I am  satisfied  that
    the grounds of  appeal  do  not  make  out  a  claim  for  persecution.
    Furthermore, I am satisfied that  none  of  the  grounds  make  out  an
    arguable case that the  decision  violated  the  human  rights  of  the
    appellant or  her  family  or  rendered  the  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant an unlawful one.

DECISION

    The  panel  made  no  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the   original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.
                                                                       [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

