

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               DA/00085/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 20th July 2016                             |On 26th July 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     XT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, Counsel of Garden Court North instructed
                       by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Zimbabwe born in 1981. He is subject to
    a Deportation Order and as such would not ordinarily  benefit  from  an
    order for anonymity. This case does however involve minor children  and
    having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I consider it appropriate to make  an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

 2. In this determination I re-make the decision in the Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's refusal to revoke  a  Deportation  Order.  The
    decision was served on the Appellant on the  23rd  December  2013.  The
    Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and in a  decision  dated
    23rd September 2014 the appeal was  allowed  by  Judge  Mulvenna.   The
    Secretary of State appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  and  in  a  written
    decision dated 23rd December 2015 a panel of the Upper  Tribunal  (UTJJ
    Martin and Bruce) found legal error in the determination such  that  it
    had to be set aside.  A  copy  of  that  'error  of  law'  decision  is
    attached.


 3. In the remaking the Appellant was ably assisted by Ms Smith of Counsel,
    who  prepared  the  case  without  assistance  from   any   instructing
    solicitors after the Appellant was left without representation when the
    firm originally instructed closed down.  Her involvement was  of  great
    assistance to the Tribunal and I am grateful to her and Mr Harrison for
    their well-made and succinct submissions.




    Factual Background and Legal Framework


 4. The Appellant arrived in the UK on the 8th June 2007 and  attempted  to
    enter the country using a South African passport and claiming to  be  a
    musician on tour. When  enquiries  revealed  that  he  had  twice  been
    refused a visa for the UK he  was  refused  leave  to  enter.  He  then
    admitted that he was Zimbabwean and claimed asylum.  He was  prosecuted
    in respect of using an improperly obtained identity document and on the
    18th June 2007 was sentenced to 12 months  imprisonment  at  Manchester
    Crown Court. On the 2nd August 2007 the Secretary  of  State  served  a
    notice of intention to  deport  and  the  Appellant  was  detained.  He
    pursued his appeal and in May 2008  was  granted  bail.   On  the  10th
    September 2008 the asylum claim was rejected.   The First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds and the Respondent  became  'appeal
    rights exhausted' on the 3rd November 2008.  On the 23rd December  2008
    the Appellant made an application  for  his  deportation  order  to  be
    revoked.   That application was refused on the 28th November 2011,  but
    the decision was not properly served because the  Appellant  had  moved
    house and had not informed the Home  Office.  He  was  apprehended  re-
    entering the UK mainland  from  Ireland  in  May  2013  and  placed  in
    detention. The decision to revoke that is now subject to challenge  was
    not properly served until the 23rd December 2013.


 5. At the time of the original deportation appeal in  September  2008  the
    Appellant had sought to resist removal on asylum grounds. He advanced a
    claim for asylum which was  rejected  by  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Immigration Judge McAll and lay member Mrs  S.  Hewitt).  The
    panel did not consider Article 8 since the Appellant did  not  at  that
    time raise it as a ground of appeal. The parties agree  that  the  2008
    determination is therefore of limited value to  my  decision.  Applying
    the Devaseelan principles I note that the matters before  me  have  all
    arisen since that decision in 2008 and are therefore new  matters  that
    may be considered afresh. Insofar as it might be relevant I am  obliged
    to take account of the generally negative credibility findings made  in
    respect of the Appellant.

 6. The case advanced before me  now  rests  squarely  on  Article  8.  The
    Appellant has what he claims to be a genuine  and  subsisting  paternal
    relationship with a British child, B,  who  was  born  in  April  2009.
    Although B's mother and the Appellant are no longer  together,  she  is
    currently pregnant with their second child. I am told it  is  a  little
    girl, due in September  2016.   DNA  has  been  produced  so  that  the
    Respondent is satisfied that the Appellant is the father of B.

 7. In respect of the applicable legal framework, the relevant Rules are to
    be found in Part 13. Paragraph A362 makes it clear that the "new rules"
    apply to all Article 8  claims  raised  in  respect  of  a  deportation
    matter, even if the Order itself was made before those  Rules  were  in
    force:

         A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.


    The point is underlined at paragraph A398(b)  which  makes  clear  that
    applications for revocation will also be considered  in  light  of  the
    "new rules",  that  is  to  say  the  framework  for  consideration  of
    deportation set out at paragraphs 398-399A, found  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 to  constitute  a  "complete  code"  for  the
    consideration of Article 8 and deportation.

 8. The provisions relating to revocation are at paragraphs 390-391A:
         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
         considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
         following:
           (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
           circumstances.
         390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.
         391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
         conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:
           (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
           years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the
           deportation order when, if an application for revocation is
           received, consideration will be given on a case by case basis to
           whether the deportation order should be maintained, or
           (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
           years, at any time,
         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
         the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional
         circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed by
         compelling factors.
         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
         information coming to light which was not before the appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order
 9.  The relevant parts of paragraphs 398 and 399 are here  highlighted  in
    bold:
         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and
           (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because they have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because they have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only be
           outweighed by other factors where there are very compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
           and 399A.
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -
           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                 immigration decision; and in either case
                       (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                       the country to which the person is to be deported;
                       and
                       (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                       in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                       or
10. The question before me is therefore whether the situation  has  changed
    since the decision to deport the Appellant  was  upheld  in  2008.   It
    being accepted that a sentence of 12  months  imprisonment  brings  the
    Appellant within paragraph 398(b), the question is whether he can bring
    himself within the exception at 399(a)(i). It is for the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate that it would be unduly harsh for his British son  to  have
    to live in Zimbabwe, and that it would be unduly harsh for his  British
    son to live without him here.


11. The meaning of the term "unduly harsh" has recently been considered  by
    the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) & Anor v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  450.
    The Court favoured the approach taken in KMO  v  SSHD  (section  117  -
    unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC), that is to  say  that  the  term
    "unduly" invites a proportionality balancing exercise  into  the  Rule.
    The removal of a parent will very often be harsh for a  child,  whether
    it is unduly so will depend on a combination of factors, not limited to
    the impact on the individual.  The  whole  scheme  of  Part  V  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 invites the decision maker
    to weigh in the public interest:
      1. I turn to the interpretation of the phrase "unduly harsh". Plainly
         it means the same in section 117C(5) as in Rule 399. "Unduly harsh"
         is an ordinary English expression. As so often, its meaning is
         coloured by its context. Authority is hardly needed for such a
         proposition but is anyway provided, for example by VIA Rail Canada
         [2000] 193 DLR (4th) 357 at paragraphs 35 to 37.
      1. The context in these cases invites emphasis on two factors, (1) the
         public interest in the removal of foreign criminals and (2) the
         need for a proportionate assessment of any interference with
         Article 8 rights. In my judgment, with respect, the approach of the
         Upper Tribunal in MAB ignores this combination of factors. The
         first of them, the public interest in the removal of foreign
         criminals, is expressly vouched by Parliament in section 117C(1).
         Section 117C(2) then provides (I repeat the provision for
         convenience):
         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal."
      1. This steers the tribunals and the court towards a proportionate
         assessment of the criminal's deportation in any given case.
         Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in his removal,
         the harder it will be to show that the effect on his child or
         partner will be unduly harsh. Any other approach in my judgment
         dislocates the "unduly harsh" provisions from their context. It
         would mean that the question of undue hardship would be decided
         wholly without regard to the force of the public interest in
         deportation in the particular case. But in that case the term
         "unduly" is mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different
         idea. What is due or undue depends on all the circumstances, not
         merely the impact on the child or partner in the given case. In the
         present context relevant circumstances certainly include the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history.
12. Against that background and  legal  framework,  I  consider  the  facts
    relied upon by the appellant.



    The Evidence

13. The Appellant relied on his witness statement.   He  explains  that  in
    approximately June 2008 he entered into a relationship with P.  She was
    then a South African national with indefinite leave to remain.   B  was
    born in April 2009.  The Appellant has had  regular  contact  with  him
    since he was born. In 2011 the Appellant moved in with P and B and  his
    caring responsibilities increased substantially. P was required for her
    work to "live-in" which meant that she was away from home for up to two
    weeks at a time (I took this to mean that she was employed as a  carer)
    and during these periods the  Appellant  was  B's  primary  carer.  The
    situation remained like this until May  2013  when  the  Appellant  was
    detained.  Once he was released he resumed living  with  P  and  B.  he
    describes his day-to-day routine with his son as follows:


         "I would wash and iron his school uniform, bath him  and  cook  for
         him. I would put him to bed, reading him a story. I would take  him
         to school and pick him up every day. I would take him  to  football
         practice. I was a hands-on Dad and we enjoy a close relationship".

14. The Appellant and P split up in March 2016.  He  states  that  she  was
    placed under intolerable strain by having to work long hours as he  did
    not have permission to work. The split was not amicable.


15. The Appellant sought confirmation of his contact rights with B from the
    Family Court. On the 7th July 2016 Judge Hoath sitting  at  the  Family
    Court in Oldham heard evidence from the Appellant, from P, and  from  a
    CAFCASS officer. It was noted  that  the  parties  had  been  conducted
    contact but required formalisation of those arrangements.  Judge  Hoath
    ordered, by consent, that B is to live with his mother.   She must make
    sure that he spends each Monday evening with his father  (from  5pm  to
    8pm) and the same period on one other evening each week to be arranged.
    Every second  weekend  B  will  be  collected  from  school  on  Friday
    afternoon and will spend the  whole  weekend  with  his  father,  being
    returned to his mother by 6pm on Sunday. There shall be further contact
    such that  the  parties  can  agree  between  themselves.   B  and  the
    Appellant are to spend a minimum of two hours with each other on  their
    respective birthdays.


16. The Appellant further relies upon a letter dated 20th January 2016 from
    Saint Hugh's Primary School in Oldham. The Headteacher  Mrs  S.  Taylor
    writes to confirm that the Appellant collects B on a  daily  basis.  He
    shows an "avid interest" in his  son's  education,  attending  parents'
    evenings, plays,  concerts  and  church  festivals.  He  also  supports
    fundraising activities.  A letter is also supplied from  Moston  Junior
    Football Club. It is undated and is from Mr Paul  Mitchell  who  states
    that he is the Chairman and Head Coach.   He  confirms  that  B  is  an
    amiable boy who is brought to practice by his Dad.

17. In respect of the Appellant's criminal conviction it is  accepted  that
    he was convicted for use of a false instrument in  June  2007.  He  was
    sentenced to 12 months in prison. It is accepted that he has  not  been
    convicted of any criminal offence since then.  The Appellant avers that
    he has not committed any offences not been  in  any  trouble  with  the
    police. I have no evidence to contradict that.



    My Findings

18. The Appellant is a foreign criminal  and  his  deportation  is  in  the
    public interest. He received a sentence of 12  months  in  prison.   He
    sought to enter the United Kingdom using a passport to which he was not
    entitled and sought to pass himself off as a  South  African  national.
    The use of false documents  to  circumvent  immigration  control  is  a
    serious criminal offence and it has wide ramifications for society  and
    the public purse.   The  Deportation  Order  was  signed  on  the  11th
    December  2007.  The  Appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed.


19. The Appellant now seeks revocation of that Order on  the  grounds  that
    his circumstances have changed. He now has an Article 8 life in the  UK
    and he submits that interference with it would  be  a  disproportionate
    response.

20. The exception the Appellant relies upon is paragraph 399 (a):
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -
           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                 immigration decision; and in either case
                       (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                       the country to which the person is to be deported;
                       and
                       (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                       in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                       or
21. I find as fact that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with B.   One need  look  no  further  than  the  generous
    contact order awarded by the Family Court for evidence of  that.   That
    order was made by a specialist court which had the benefit of  evidence
    from P, the Appellant and a CAFCASS officer. If further  evidence  were
    needed, then it comes from Mrs Taylor who confirms that  the  Appellant
    has had a substantial involvement in his son's  school  life  since  he
    started there.


22. It is not in issue that B is under 18, that he is in the UK and that he
    is British.

23. It has never been the Secretary of State's case that  B  could  go  and
    live in Zimbabwe. For the avoidance of doubt I find that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for him to do so, given that he is currently resident with
    his British mother who has no intention of moving. The child  would  be
    preserving his relationship with one parent at the  expense  of  losing
    that with another.

24. I find as fact that it would be unduly harsh for B to remain in the  UK
    without his father. My starting point is the offending behaviour of the
    Appellant. He committed a serious criminal offence. Having done that he
    remained in the UK for a number of years without permission to  do  so.
    These are factors which  weigh  heavily  in  the  balance.  The  weight
    attached to them is not however monolithic. As the Court of  Appeal  in
    MM (Uganda) makes clear, the more serious the offence and  the  greater
    the public interest in removal, the more difficult it will be  to  show
    that removal would be unduly harsh.  If that is so, then  the  converse
    must be true. The less serious the offending behaviour,  and  the  less
    pressing the public interest, the  easier  it  will  be  to  show  that
    removal would have an unduly harsh impact. In this case  the  Appellant
    has undeniably committed a serious offence which would ordinarily merit
    deportation, but it is plain from the structure of paragraph  398  that
    it is at the lower end of the spectrum as far as  offences  which  will
    result in deportation go, attracting as it did a sentence of 12 months.
     It was a single offence, and there is no indication of any  propensity
    to reoffend, since the Appellant has received no convictions since.

25. With those factors in mind I weigh the impact on B. B has grown up with
    both of his parents around and has had the benefit of a  caring  father
    who has played a significant role in his life. The  Appellant  has  not
    been, as Ms Smith puts it, an absentee father. He has been in his son's
    life since he was born, and has continued to be so. Although I have, in
    light of the view taken by the 2008 Tribunal,  viewed  the  Appellant's
    own  evidence  with  some  circumspection,  his  evidence   about   his
    relationship with B is supported by all  of  the  other  evidence:  the
    confirmation from school that he plays a  significant  role,   that  he
    takes him extracurricular activities such as football and of course the
    order of a specialist court.   I do not  doubt  that  B  has  a  strong
    attachment to his father. Add to this the fact that B has very recently
    been through the difficult life event of his parents splitting up,  and
    that he will imminently be the eldest child in a single  parent  family
    where his mother will be caring for a newborn on her own. Common  sense
    would indicate that it is important for B to have  his  father  in  his
    life, not on the end of a telephone, but in the real and present  sense
    of having him pick him up after school, take him to football, help  him
    with homework and all the other things that a father should  do.   This
    deportation would mean an effective severance of the relationship  that
    they have now. It would seem to be extremely unlikely that P  would  be
    willing to take B for visits to Zimbabwe. I consider that the impact on
    B would be severe and that weighed against  the  Appellant's  offending
    behaviour - including his period of overstaying - it would in  all  the
    circumstances be unduly harsh for B if his father is deported.


26. There is one other factor  that  I  have  not  considered  which  falls
    outwith the scope of 399(a)(i). That is that P  is  currently  pregnant
    with the Appellant's second child. In view of his commitment to B there
    is no reason to doubt that he will be  as  committed  the  second  time
    around.  Ms  Smith  indicated  that  her  instructions  were  that  the
    Appellant was advised by Judge Hoath to return to court shortly  before
    birth to work out an arrangement so that he can have contact  upon  the
    child's birth. Although I have not been called upon, in  the  structure
    of the provisions at 398-399 to consider this factor, it  is  one  that
    might properly be categorised as "exceptional".


      Decisions

27. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    and it is set aside.


28. The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


29. In order to protect the identity of the  child  involved  there  is  an
    order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               21st July 2016













                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                                 DA/00085/14


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 11th December 2015                        |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     XT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by Adamsons Law
                       Solicitors

                         DECISION ON 'ERROR OF LAW'
                             DECISION TO ADJOURN


30. The Respondent is a national of Zimbabwe date of birth [ ] 1981. On the
    14th September 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Mulvenna)  allowed
    his appeal against a decision to deport him from  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department now has permission[1] to
    appeal against that decision.


31. The Respondent arrived in the UK on the 8th June 2007 and attempted  to
    enter the country using a South African passport and claiming to  be  a
    musician on tour. When  enquiries  revealed  that  he  had  twice  been
    refused a visa for the UK he  was  refused  leave  to  enter.  He  then
    admitted that he was Zimbabwean and claimed asylum.  He was  prosecuted
    in respect of using an improperly obtained identity document and on the
    18th June 2007 was sentenced to 12 months  imprisonment  at  Manchester
    Crown Court. On the 2nd August 2007 the Secretary  of  State  served  a
    notice of intention to deport  and  the  Respondent  was  detained.  He
    pursued his appeal and in May 2008  was  granted  bail.   On  the  10th
    September 2008 the asylum claim was rejected.   The First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds and the Respondent  became  'appeal
    rights exhausted' on the 3rd November 2008.  On the 23rd December  2008
    the Respondent made an application for  his  deportation  order  to  be
    revoked. It was the refusal of that request, on the 28th November 2011,
    that was subject to challenge before Judge Mulvenna.

32. The Respondent's case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  his
    deportation would be a disproportionate interference with his Article 8
    rights. Since his arrival in the UK he had formed a relationship with a
    South African national with indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  and
    together they had a child, born on the 11th April 2009.   The  Tribunal
    found there  to  be  insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Respondent was in a subsisting relationship with this  claimed  partner
    but went on to examine his parental relationship with his child.    The
    evidence here was similarly lacking. The Respondent  claimed  that  the
    child's mother was away working for substantial  periods  of  time  and
    that he was then the primary carer; he claimed that  he  collected  his
    child from school on a regular  basis.  There  was  scant  evidence  to
    support either claim, leading the Tribunal to  conclude,  at  paragraph
    33: "there is no sustainable evidence that the child's mother could not
    provide care without undue hardship". Between  paragraphs 34 and 36 the
    Tribunal appears to accept that the biological relationship gives  rise
    to an Article 8 family life and that there is  "some,  albeit  limited,
    interaction and engagement between them".


33. Having made these findings the First-tier Tribunal goes  on  to  direct
    itself to various authorities on the  proper  approach  to  Article  8,
    including MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11. The Tribunal concludes that having regard to  the
    facts "there is no compelling evidence that the public  interest  would
    be served" by deportation. Central to that reasoning was a finding that
    the criminal conviction,  although  it  involved  dishonesty,  did  not
    expose the public to any risk. There was no evidence that there was any
    risk of reoffending or that the Respondent had a "deep-seated  criminal
    outlook".  This was balanced against his family  life  as  follows  [at
    56]:

         "On the other hand, the appellant's son would suffer  significantly
         from removal of the appellant. They would lose  the  vital  contact
         which is needed to discharge parental responsibility at a  time  of
         the child's life (the commencement of education) when the stability
         of home life is of paramount importance. The interests of the child
         in the appellant remaining in the United Kingdom, which is the only
         practical way in which family life  with  the  appellant  might  be
         maintained, far outweigh those of the respondent  in  securing  the
         appellant's removal. I conclude that the respondent's decision  was
         disproportionate. The appellant's Article 8 rights and those of his
         child would be breached if the appellant were to be removed.  There
         are circumstances which are sufficiently compelling (and  therefore
         exceptional), namely the need to safeguard and promote the  child's
         welfare and not to put him at risk, to outweigh the public interest
         in removal".

34. The appeal was thereby allowed.



    Error of Law

35. The grounds of appeal are detailed  and  lengthy  but  in  essence  the
    Secretary of State submits that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following material respects:


           a) In failing to give reasons for the  finding  that  there  are
              'exceptional circumstances' in this case;


           b) In failing to give due weight to the strong  public  interest
              in deporting foreign criminals;

           c)  In failing to make findings on material matters.


36. In response Ms Smith was instructed  to  defend  the  decision  on  the
    grounds that the reasoning could be upheld even in the absence  of  any
    reference to the relevant immigration rules.

37. We have no hesitation in finding that this decision must be set  aside.
    Although the determination contains a good deal of law it unfortunately
    omits to set out the most pertinent part of the legal framework in this
    appeal, namely paragraphs A398, 398, 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. Although  the  determination  makes  oblique  reference  to  the
    "exceptions" set out in these provisions, the failure to refer directly
    to the Rules meant that the Tribunal subsequently fell  into  error  in
    its assessment of the residual Article 8 claim.

38. The proper approach should have been  to  first  consider  whether  the
    Respondent could discharge the burden of proof in respect of any of the
    exceptions at paragraphs 399 and  399A.   In  relation  to  his  child,
    paragraph 399(a) required clear findings on whether it would be  unduly
    harsh to expect the child to live without his father  in  the  UK,  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  child  to  travel  to
    Zimbabwe. If these tests could not be met  the  appeal  could  only  be
    allowed if the evidence established "very compelling circumstances over
    and above" those matters identified in the Rules. In applying that test
    the Tribunal would need to remind itself that the weight to be given to
    public interest is likely to be substantial, having regard to the  fact
    that the Rules as they relate to deportation are to be  regarded  as  a
    complete code: see MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

39. In this case the Tribunal failed to make clear findings in  respect  of
    399(a) and did  not  consider  at  all  whether  the  "compelling  (and
    therefore exceptional) circumstances" mentioned at paragraph  56  could
    be said to be "over and above" those matters set out in the  Rules.  In
    fact paragraph 56 fails to explain  at  all  or  in  what  respect  the
    circumstances in this case could be termed exceptional.  The  reasoning
    on proportionality cannot therefore be upheld.

40. We are further satisfied that the Tribunal erred in law in finding that
    there was "no" public interest in removal. The weight to be attached to
    the public interest is not monolithic; it is incumbent  upon  Tribunals
    to gauge the weight to be attached to it with reference to matters such
    as the nature of the criminality, the propensity to  reoffend  and  the
    degree of rehabilitation. There was however no basis  for  the  finding
    that there was "no" public interest in deporting this  individual,  who
    had been convicted of a criminal offence attracting a  sentence  of  12
    months' imprisonment. We further note that the Tribunal here  fails  to
    have regard to the fact that the Respondent has never had any leave  to
    be in the United Kingdom, and that subsequent  to  his  conviction  and
    failed appeals he absconded from immigration control, only coming  back
    into contact with the authorities when apprehended trying  to  re-enter
    the mainland from Belfast on the 27th May 2008.

41. For these reasons the determination is set aside in its entirety.




    Decision to Adjourn

42. Before us Ms Smith requested that  the  re-making  of  this  appeal  be
    adjourned  to  enable  up  to  date  evidence  about  the  Respondent's
    relationship with  his  child  to  be  produced.  Mr  Harrison  had  no
    objection to this.  Given  that  over  a  year  has  passed  since  the
    hearing, and in view of the age of the child, we agreed that  it  would
    be in the interests of justice to adjourn the remaking.




    Decisions


43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


44. The decision in the appeal will be re-made by the Upper Tribunal  at  a
    date to be notified.

45. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  order  for  anonymity  because  the
    identification of the Respondent may lead to the identification of  his
    child. In the absence of any submissions to the  contrary  we  continue
    that order.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on the 13th
October 2014 'n fact paragraph 56 fails to explain at all or in what
respect the circumstances in this case could be termed exceptional. this

