
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00169/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 18 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  PAULO [C]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Schon instructed by Bail for Immigration
Detainees (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant, a male citizen of Portugal born on 16  August  1983,
        appeals with permission a decision of First-Tribunal Judge M A Khan
        promulgated on 11 July  2019  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to deport  him
        to Portugal.



Discussion


     2. Whilst brevity is often encouraged in decision writing it is  still
        important for judges to ensure they focus on and  deal  with  those
        aspects of an appeal relevant to their decision. It  is  important,
        for example, to ensure the correct factual and legal provisions are
        identified, that clear findings dealing with  relevant  issues  are
        made, and that such findings are supported by adequate reasons.
     3. In this appeal the Judge's conclusions are set out from [24] of the
        decision under challenge. At [27 -  31]  the  Judge  sets  out  the
        operative part of his findings in the following terms:

             "27.      The  appellant  adopted  his  very   short   written
                  statement and gave oral evidence. The appellant  has  been
                  convicted on two occasions and the third concerns him  not
                  complying with a Magistrates Court  order.  The  appellant
                  seeks to explain his criminality  by  alleging  conspiracy
                  against him by the police and the Magistrates Courts  that
                  found him guilty  and  sentenced  him.  I  find  that  the
                  appellant is under some sort of illusion that  the  system
                  is against him. The appellant simply does  not  understand
                  his wrongdoings.


             28.  The purpose of the Tribunal  is  not  to  go  behind  the
                  appellant's criminal convictions, but it is  clear  to  me
                  that this appellant does not understand the gravity of his
                  offending. There is no remorse or any feeling of guilt  on
                  his part for what he has done. For these circumstances,  I
                  find that there is a real risk  that  the  appellant  will
                  continue to reoffend in the UK.


             29.  Considering the appellant's age, state of health,  family
                  and economic situation, his length  of  residence  in  the
                  United Kingdom, his social and cultural  integration  into
                  the United Kingdom, I find that the appellant is extremely
                  likely to repeat his criminal behaviour in the future.


             30.  In the circumstances, the respondent has established that
                  the appellant's deportation under Regulation 23 (6)(b) and
                  Regulation 27 (5) and 27 (6) of the EEA Regulations,  that
                  the decisions to deport the appellant to  the  country  of
                  his origin, Portugal is proportionate.


             31.  The appellant has two brothers living in the UK but there
                  is no communication or contact  with  them  since  he  was
                  convicted of battery against them. His only  other  family
                  consist of his 85-year father and two sisters, all of whom
                  live in Portugal. The appellant has previously worked in a
                  factory in Portugal and I find that the appellant will  be
                  able to secure employment on his return to Portugal."

     4. Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant  on  a  number  of
        grounds and granted by another judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,
        the operative part of which is in the following terms:

             "2.  It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in;


                   a. Failing to assess whether the Appellant represents  a
                      genuine present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to
                      the fundamental interests of society


                   b. It's assessment of the risk of reoffending


                   c. The proportionality assessment, in that little or  no
                      consideration is given to the findings made as to his
                      private and family life in the UK in that assessment


                   d. Procedural unfairness. The Appellant's representative
                      withdrew from representing him  the  day  before  the
                      hearing. The Tribunal may not have been aware of  the
                      Appellants  mental  health  difficulties  which   are
                      apparent from the medical records now submitted.  The
                      matter  proceeded  in  the   absence   of   a   legal
                      representative and there is no reference  to  whether
                      the Tribunal considered if an adjournment  should  be
                      granted   to   enable   the   Appellant   to   secure
                      representation. It is arguable that  there  may  have
                      been procedural unfairness."

     5. In an EEA deportation appeal it is  essential  that  the  decision-
        maker makes clear findings on whether an  appellant  constitutes  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental
        interests of society. There is arguable merit  in  the  appellant's
        contention that although the Judge lists factors to be  taken  into
        account there is no clear reasoned  finding  in  relation  to  this
        issue.
     6. There is also with an EEA deportation appeal the need  to  consider
        the proportionality of the decision in relation to which  prospects
        of rehabilitation are ordinarily considered. There is no  reference
        to any risk of reoffending reports, and it does not appear from the
        determination whether the issue  of  rehabilitation  was  discussed
        with the appellant.
     7. There is merit in the appellant's assertion the Judge confused  and
        conflated the issue of reoffending with proportionality, with those
        matters listed at [29] being considered more in relation to risk of
        reoffending than the proportionality question.
     8. There is merit in the appellant's assertion  the  Judge  failed  to
        make findings of fact on whether the appellant's deportation  would
        amount to a breach of article 8 ECHR or to provide adequate reasons
        to support  the  finding  the  appellant  could  secure  employment
        without difficulty in Portugal, in light of the facts.
     9. Although many appellants who loose legal representation late in the
        day can properly be  expected  to  represent  themselves  before  a
        tribunal it is necessary for a judge to give  proper  consideration
        to whether, in the circumstances, it is appropriate in light of the
        overriding objectives and the principle of fairness to  proceed  in
        such a case. There is merit in the appellant's assertion that it is
        not clear from  the  determination  whether  the  Judge  considered
        whether the case  could  be  justly  determined  in  light  of  the
        appellant's lack of readiness  and  lack  of  documentary  evidence
        submitted. It is also not clear from the  decision  what  documents
        are actually before the Judge as they are not listed.  It  is  also
        not clear from the determination whether  there  was  any  evidence
        before the Judge relating to the appellant's health and it  is  not
        clear whether the appellant was asked whether  he  had  any  health
        issues. A simple investigation to ascertain whether  the  appellant
        was capable of representing himself or whether he should have  been
        treated as a vulnerable witness might have disclosed the following:

               i. In November 2018, while in HMP Cardiff, the appellant  was
                  prescribed Mirtazapine, an antidepressant, and Propranolol
                  to assist with anxiety.


              ii. In March 2019 that the appellant believed that people were
                  interfering with his food as a  result  of  which  he  was
                  referred to a medical practitioner


             iii. A Rule 35 report  dated  4  April  2019  stating  'I  have
                  concerns that the detainee  may  have  been  a  victim  of
                  torture. This is a factual report'.


              iv. A letter of Detention Action dated 12  June  2019  stating
                  that A 'says he suffers from  nightmares,  flashbacks  and
                  PTSD from abuse on his brothers between 2015  -  2017.  It
                  further states that, 'A consistent observation of our work
                  with him over the past 5 months has been his lack of trust
                  in distress at his ongoing detention'.


               v. A letter from Healthcare dated 28 June 2019 by Ms A  Slade
                  Smith, Practice  Manager,  stating  the  appellant  had  a
                  Psychological Therapies Consultation on 25 June  2019  and
                  that the doctor who carried out the consultation requested
                  that the Mental Health Services become involved.

    10. I find the cumulative effect  of  the  failings  disclosed  in  the
        determination, highlighted in the grant of  permission  to  appeal,
        make the Judge's  findings  unsafe  as  it  is  not  made  out  the
        appellant received a fair hearing or that the Judge considered  and
        has made properly reason findings upon those  matters  relevant  to
        the issues in this appeal. The appellant is an EEA  national  whose
        deportation will interfere with his right of free  movement  within
        the EU. This is not a domestic  deportation  case  where  different
        tests apply.
    11. In light of the above concerns it was announced at the hearing that
        the decision of the Judge is infected by arguable legal  error  and
        shall be set aside. In light of the concerns arising there shall be
        no preserved findings. In accordance with the Presidential Guidance
        and the need for comprehensive findings of fact to  be  made  at  a
        fresh hearing in which the appellant's vulnerability and any  other
        relevant issues can be  considered,  it  is  appropriate  for  this
        matter to be remitted to be reheard by another judge of the  First-
        Tier Tribunal other than Judge M A Khan.


Decision

    12. Judge M A Khan materially erred in law. I set aside the decision of
        Judge M A Khan. I remit the appeal to Hatton Cross to be reheard by
        another judge nominated by the Resident Judge at a suitable venue.


   Anonymity.


    13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 October 2019
