
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00394/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 29th October 2013                          |on 9th December 2013         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              MOSHIN RAZA SYED
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Mair instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of FTT Judge I Taylor and Mr M  J  Griffiths
        JP (hereinafter referred to as "the Panel") who in a  determination
        promulgated on the 14th June 2013 dismissed the  Appellants  appeal
        against the order for his deportation from the United Kingdom  made
        pursuant to the UK Borders Act 2007.



Background


     2. The Appellant, a citizen in Pakistan,  was  born  on  14th  October
        1987. On 5th October 2008 he entered the United  Kingdom  illegally
        using a false passport.  He remained in  this  country  until  11th
        November 2011 when he was  stopped  trying  to  board  a  plane  at
        Heathrow destined for Canada. He was found to be in possession of a
        United Kingdom passport in the name  of  another  and  so  on  15th
        November 2011 he was sentenced  at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  to  12
        months imprisonment for possession and/or use of a false instrument
        namely a UK passport in the name of Mohamad Akbar.


     3. The Panel noted that the Appellant was sentenced in the name of Ali
        Mohammed which is an alias and that there  was  considerable  doubt
        about his actual date of birth. The Appellant continued to use this
        alias and a false date of birth until his screening and substantive
        interviews which were conducted on 29th November 2012.  Indeed,  in
        the deportation questionnaire served in February 2012 the Appellant
        maintained the use of a false  name,  a  false  date  of  birth  14
        September 1993, and claimed his country of  birth  was  Afghanistan
        and not Pakistan.  He also gave false names for both his mother and
        father.


     4. The Panel note the Appellant's medical history  and  refer  to  the
        medical  evidence  provided  in  paragraphs  12  to   16   of   the
        determination before setting out their  findings  at  paragraph  17
        onwards, the core elements of which can be summarised as follows:


              i.  The Appellant's account is broadly  internally  consistent
   although                credibility issues do arise [17].


               ii.  The  Appellant's  claim  not  to  have  known  who   his
   girlfriend's  father                    is   lacked   credibility   [19].
   Despite claiming to be in regular                      contact  with  his
   brothers in Canada neither were asked to submit  a                witness
   statement   and    photographs    provided    could    have    been    of
   anybody [19].


              iii.     His  claim  to  have  been  able  to  escape  as  his
   assailant forgot to  lock                   the  door  was  found  to  be
   incredible in all the circumstances [21].


              iv. His claim that a poster or leaflet demanding his death  by
   means  of  a                    Fatwa  in  Islamabad  shortly  after  his
   mistreatment and in Gujrat                whilst he  was  in  the  United
   Kingdom was not accepted as there was                  no explanation for
   why the poster should  be  circulated  in  Gujrat                    many
   years  after  the  incident  and  despite  a  friend   stating   he   had
   sent the poster by e-mail neither the e-mail or leaflet/poster  had  been
          submitted in evidence [21].


              v.  The use of  the  false  identity  indicates  a  number  of
   falsehoods not                   only relating to whom he was, his family
   members, and place of                 birth, but also to key  aspects  of
   his claim [22].   The  Panel  did  not                  accept  that  any
   satisfactorily      explanation      had       been       given       for
   maintaining false personal details over such a long  period  of  time  to
          the police, a Crown Court Judge, and the Immigration  Authorities.
              Inconsistencies in his evidence are also noted [23].


              vi. The Appellant did not apply for asylum  for  nearly  three
   years.  No                   satisfactory explanation for the  delay  has
   been provided [25].


              vii.     Entry to the United Kingdom with a false passport and
   lies told to                 the Immigration Authorities  were  noted  as
   was the fact that it was                  only after  being  notified  of
   liability to deportation that the asylum               claim was made  in
   which  the  Appellant  admitted  fabricating                     numerous
   elements    of    his    claim    set    out    in    the     deportation
   questionnaire. This damages his credibility  pursuant  to  section  8  of
          Asylum, Immigration (Treatment of claimants etc) Act 2004 [26].


              viii.    The Appellant is not a credible witness. The core  of
   his account to be                at risk  upon  return  is  not  accepted
   subject to one important caveat               that  the  evidence  of  Dr
   Playforth  with  regard  to  scars  was   found   to                   be
   "compelling".  The   Panel   accepted   the   Appellant   had   at   some
   point suffered  injuries  by  being  repeatedly  attacked  with  a  knife
     attached to a stick but how or why  they  were  caused  was  not  found
     to  have  been  satisfactorily  demonstrated  by  the  Appellant.   The
          Panel concede it may have something to do  with  the  relationship
          with his girlfriend and family reaction to her pregnancy  although
   the                 Panel were not satisfied it was anything other than a
   localised matter                 and were  not  satisfied  that  Sipah-e-
   Sahaba are involved. The Panel                was not  satisfied  that  a
   Fatwa has been pronounced on the appellant                  [27].


              ix. The Panel accept there may  be  some  small  risk  to  the
   Appellant in his                 home area [28] but are also satisfied he
   can re-locate to Islamabad                where there  will  be  no  risk
   from the family or their relations [29].


              x.  The Panel accept the Appellant is a Shia Muslim  but  find
   there is                insufficient evidence to find that he is at  risk
   solely on the basis of his                religion which accounts for  up
   to 25% of the population  and  having                 considered  country
   guidance case law [30].


              xi. In relation to the claim that Article 3 will  be  breached
   on return due                to his physical and mental health, the Panel
   note  the  existence  of                  services  and   treatments   in
   Pakistan, including  neurology                           departments  and
   neuro-rehabilitation services. The Panel  did  not                 accept
   the  Appellant  will  be  destitute   as   suggested   in   the   country
   experts report.  The Panel find  that  although  the  Appellant  may  not
     have family in Islamabad but the uncle of a friend was able  to  afford
          him great assistance before and there is no reason to  suppose  he
          would not be able to do the same in the future.  The Panel do  not
              accept that the Appellant will not be able to continue to rely
   on the                  financial support of his brothers in  Canada  who
   have supported him               to date [36].


              xii.     The Panel accepted the Appellant is suffering from  a
   serious                      condition which gives rise to a  great  deal
   of  personal  sympathy                       although  they   found   his
   condition falls short of  satisfying  the  test                 both  the
   cases  of  N  v  UK  and  GS  and  EO.   The   Panel   did   not   accept
   that humanitarian considerations which  apply  are  on  a  par  with  the
     circumstances of the Appellant in the case of D v UK [37].


              xiii.    In relation to suicidal ideation  and  mental  health
   issues, the Panel                found that in light of the  availability
   of treatment  in  Pakistan  and                   having  considered  the
   Appellants circumstances  cumulatively  it  had                 not  been
   shown  that  Article  3  was  breached  [38].   The   Panel   also   note
   there was  no  recent  or  indeed  any  psychiatric/psychologists  report
     and information regarding  his  psychiatric  condition  could  only  be
     gleaned from his medical  records.  As  a  result  they  did  not  know
     what his mental state/condition was at the date of the hearing [39].


              xiv.     In relation to Article 8 ECHR the  Panel  accept  the
   Appellant has a                  private life in the United  Kingdom  but
   state that apart from his                     hospitalisation it  is  not
   clear what he has been doing in the United                   Kingdom  for
   the  five  years   he   has   been   here   [42].    The   Panel   accept
   the question is one of proportionality [43] and that  the  Appellant  has
          no legitimate expectation that  the  treatment  he  receives  will
   continue                from the NHS, even if in Pakistan  the  treatment
   is of  inferior  quality.                    In  such  circumstances  the
   decision is proportionate [43].


              xv. The comments by the Consultant Neurologist  regarding  the
              provision of medical services in Pakistan were  noted  but  it
   not found               the Consultant has the  credentials  to  give  an
   opinion on this topic                 and so no    weight can be given to
   his comment [44].


              xvi.     Very little is said regarding the country report from
   Uzma MOEEN                   as her findings are predicated on the  basis
   the Appellants account is                 credible, which it is not [45].
   If  the  Appellant  has  committed  an                       offence   by
   impregnating    his    girlfriend    the     Panel,     following     the
   country guidance case of KA and  others  and  the  lack  of  evidence  of
     any formal complaints being made in the  past  five  years,   found  it
          highly unlikely that if returned he would  face  any  criminal  or
   Islamic                 sanction.  The Panel also refer to the Country of
   Origin Information               Report entry that Sipah-e-Sahaba  is  no
   longer a significant force in                 Pakistan and there  was  no
   evidence  to  suggest  that  it's  more                      contemporary
   manifestations    would     be     interested     in     a     relatively
   minor incident that happened five years ago [45].


     5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  initially  refused
        but granted on a renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
        on 14th August 2013.




Discussion



     6. The first issue raised by Miss Mair related to the Panel's  finding
        at paragraph 29 that if the Appellant faced  a  risk  in  his  home
        area, identified  as  a  small  risk  in  paragraph  28,  he  could
        internally reallocate. The Panel considered the  reasonableness  or
        harshness of such a proposal in light of his medical condition when
        considering the Articles 3 and 8 elements but it is submitted  that
        by doing so they applied too high a threshold.  Miss Mair submitted
        that the correct test should have  been  that  of  'reasonableness'
        which is suggestive of a lower threshold.


     7. The facts relied upon in support of this submission are to be found
        in paragraph 8 of the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal;  that
        the Appellant is (a) wheelchair-bound and (b) in need  of  constant
        specialist medical care which it is stated is either unavailable or
        not widely available in  Pakistan.   The  Appellant  is  much  more
        easily identifiable, less  likely  to  be  able  to  escape,  would
        repeatedly have to access a small  number  of  health  institutions
        where he could easily be traced and as such would be much easier to
        discover than somebody without these characteristics.


     8. The Panel clearly noted the medical evidence which  suggested  that
        whatever caused the injuries  to  the  Appellant's  spine,  he  was
        mobile and improving and that his  current  situation  arose  as  a
        result of a biopsy on his spinal-cord for which  he  gave  informed
        consent.  It was submitted that his future prognosis is unclear but
        the Panel clearly considered the medical  evidence  made  available
        with the correct degree of care, anxious scrutiny, required  in  an
        appeal of this nature. I accept they stated in  paragraph  29  that
        they would consider the reasonableness of relocation  in  light  of
        his medical condition without making a specific reference  back  to
        this statement but it is clear from reading the determination  that
        they considered this element as  part  of  the  Articles  3  and  8
        considerations, neither of which they found afforded the  Appellant
        a right to remain in the United Kingdom.


     9. Miss Mair submitted this is capable of amounting to legal error  as
        the test for the reasonableness  of  relocation  in  terms  of  the
        Refugee Convention is different from that  applicable  in  a  human
        rights case.


    10. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007] UKHL 49 the House  of  Lords
        pointed out that the test to determine whether internal  relocation
        was available was the test set out in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL  5,
        namely that  the  decision  maker  should  decide  whether,  taking
        account of all relevant circumstances pertaining  to  the  claimant
        and his or her  country  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
        claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect
        him or her to do so.  The test was one  of  great  generality.   In
        applying the test enquiry had to be directed to  the  situation  of
        the  particular   claimant;   very   little   was   excluded   from
        consideration other than the standard of rights protection which  a
        claimant would enjoy  in  the  country  where  refuge  was  sought.
        Baroness Hale said that all the circumstances of the case had to be
        assessed  holistically,  with  specific   reference   to   personal
        circumstances  including  past   persecution   or   fear   thereof,
        psychological or health conditions, family and  social  situations,
        and survival capacities, in the context of the  conditions  in  the
        place of relocation, including basic  human  rights,  security  and
        socio economic conditions, and access to  health  care  facilities:
        all with a view to  determining  the  impact  on  the  claimant  of
        settling in the  proposed  place  of  relocation  and  whether  the
        claimant  could  live  a  relatively  normal  life  without   undue
        hardship.  The House of Lords  said  that  it  was  not  a  correct
        application of the test to only focus  on  the  comparison  between
        conditions in a claimant's  home  country  as  a  whole  and  those
        prevailing in the proposed area of relocation.  Nor was it  correct
        to only compare conditions in the place of habitual residence  from
        which a claimant had  fled  and  those  in  the  safe  haven.   The
        decision in Januzi supported both those bases of comparison and did
        not suggest that one was to be preferred: the weight to be given to
        each was a matter to be judged by the decision maker in the context
        of a particular claim.  It was an incorrect formulation of the test
        to equate unreasonable or unduly harsh conditions in the  place  of
        intended relocation with  a  real  risk  of  inhuman  or  degrading
        treatment or punishment within the meaning  of  Article  3  of  the
        ECHR.


    11. The House of Lords in AH (Sudan) support  the  general  proposition
        that an assessment of  reasonableness  based  upon  the  Article  3
        threshold only may be susceptible to challenge although overall  if
        an asylum seeker will face a standard of living in the  safe  haven
        which a significant proportion of his  countrymen  have  to  endure
        then, absent individual  characteristics  making  him  particularly
        vulnerable, it will not be unduly harsh for him to relocate there.


    12. In AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
        Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal held that there is
        no legal burden on the Secretary of State to prove that there is  a
        part of the country of nationality etc of  an  appellant,  who  has
        established a well-founded fear in their home area,  to  which  the
        appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  go  and  live.  The
        appellant  bears  the  legal  burden  of  proving  entitlement   to
        international protection; but what  that  entails  will  very  much
        depend upon the circumstances of the particular case. It will  then
        be  for  the  appellant   to   make   good   an   assertion   that,
        notwithstanding the general conditions in  the  proposed  place  of
        relocation, it would not be reasonable to relocate there.


    13. In relation to the internal flight argument in a human rights case,
        in R (Mansini) v Tribunal [2003] EWHC 2940 Admin  Beatson  J  held,
        relying on AE and FE, that the  extension  of  internal  flight  to
        Article 3 cases was misconceived and  the  appellant  must  show  a
        breach of Article 3 wherever he may be returned to or  required  to
        live.  That was the view of the Tribunal in WD (Syria) [2005] UKIAT
        00034 (Ouseley) too.


    14. In VNM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 47 the Court of Appeal noted that the
        concept of reasonableness was not really involved in this  exercise
        under Article 3, but suggested that Article 8 may  come  into  play
        here.  The Court indicated that when  applying  Article  8  to  the
        issue of internal relocation, Baroness Hale's  test  of  "the  most
        compelling humanitarian considerations" is the correct one.


    15.  The  Panel  found  the  decision  to  deport  proportionate   when
        considering the Article 8 element of the appeal. In doing  so  they
        state in paragraph 43 "Although the compassionate circumstances  of
        this case are obvious, we are also satisfied that the  decision  of
        the Secretary of State is in all the circumstances of  the  case  a
        proportionate one.


    16. The Panel could have taken more care in relation  to  the  language
        used, for example in paragraph 28 stating there may be  some  small
        risk to the Appellant  returning  to  his  home  area  rather  than
        specifying whether the risk was sufficient to  engage  the  Refugee
        Convention but they did consider  the  issue  of  relocation.  They
        found that the Appellant has support available to him in  Pakistan,
        which is a finding  within  the  range  of  those  the  Panel  were
        entitled to make on the evidence and, in paragraph 36, that he will
        receive financial support.  The Panel correctly  accept  there  are
        medical facilities available  to  meet  the  Appellant's  needs  in
        Pakistan. The Panel  clearly  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
        substantiated his claim that he was at risk in all of Pakistan  and
        had not proved that he would be at risk in a  major  city  such  as
        Islamabad which is where the Appellant lived in the past and  where
        he may have to live to  access  appropriate  medical  treatment  on
        return.  He has not proved that he is  likely  to  be  targeted  in
        Islamabad and the fact he may be in a wheelchair  or  have  limited
        mobility is noted but as it has not been proved that he was  likely
        to be targeted and therefore that he  would  need  to  escape,  the
        significance of this submission is somewhat muted. As the case  law
        shows the burden  is  upon  the  Appellant  to  prove  that  it  is
        unreasonable in all circumstances to expect  him  to  relocate  and
        having considered all material made available  to  the  Panel,  the
        evidence on which they found they  could  attach  due  weight,  and
        their conclusions in relation to the  availability  of  assistance,
        and in relation to Article 3 and 8, it cannot  be  said  that  this
        burden was discharged such as to show that a finding  that  it  was
        reasonable in all the circumstances is perverse or  irrational.  It
        has  not  been  shown  that  the   most   compelling   humanitarian
        considerations are present making internal relocation  unreasonable
        in all the circumstances.


    17. Paragraph 10 of the grounds acknowledges that the Panel  considered
        the medical evidence although claims this was limited to Article  3
        considerations and not the reasonableness  of  internal  relocation
        but that is an issue I have commented upon  above.   I  accept  the
        Appellant's medical condition makes life more difficult and  trying
        for him than it may for others and that he  may  face  difficulties
        such as infections, but I do not accept Miss Mair's submission that
        he will be unable to access medical facilities to provide  for  his
        needs.  Miss Mair stated at the outset that the Appellant  was  not
        at court on the day of the hearing as he had been re-housed in NASS
        accommodation but allegedly could not cope as a result of which  he
        was moved  to  Social  Services  accommodation  but  has  now  been
        readmitted to hospital, although there was no medical  evidence  to
        prove the same. There is no evidence that adequate  services  would
        not be available to the Appellant in Pakistan  which  includes  the
        availability of hospitalisation, if  required,  to  flush  out  any
        blocked catheters or to deal with acquired infections.


    18. I find no merit in the argument the Panel failed  to  consider  the
        long-term need for medical care as the  evidence  shows  that  such
        facilities are available and there was no evidence to prove to  the
        contrary.


    19. It was also submitted the Panel had  made  findings  regarding  the
        seriousness of the crime and in paragraph 27 of  the  determination
        has stated that it was "localised".  The core finding of the  Panel
        is that the Appellant was  not  credible  which  is  a  sustainable
        finding based upon the catalogue of lies and  deceit  practised  by
        him relating not only to his  identity  but  also  the  country  of
        nationality and his account.  The Panel accept that he had scars on
        his back and found the evidence to be probative of the presence  of
        scarring but not causation.  The Panel accepted that  it  may  have
        something to do with  the  relationship  with  his  girlfriend  and
        family's reaction but was not satisfied it was anything other  than
        a localised matter  involving  their  respective  families  in  the
        village.


    20. Miss Mair's submitted that the Panel erred in not  considering  the
        expert evidence provided in relation to this issue, that being  the
        report of Uzma Moeen, has not merit  for  the  Panel  were  clearly
        aware of the existence of the report and set out  in  paragraph  45
        why they chose to place very little weight on it.   I  accept  that
        the report was predicated on the basis that the Appellants  account
        was credible and although most of the account was rejected not  all
        of it was. The Panel, however, go  on  to  consider  the  situation
        facing the appellant as if he has committed an offence  by  getting
        his girlfriend pregnant by reference to the country  guidance  case
        and set out their findings in paragraph  45  of  the  determination
        which have not been shown to be perverse, irrational,  or  contrary
        to the evidence.


    21. Having read the determination as a whole I  am  not  satisfied  the
        Panel has erred in law as suggested  by  Miss  Mair.   It  must  be
        remembered that the core of the claim under the Refugee  Convention
        was religious and political. In paragraph 30 the Panel accepted the
        appellant is a Shia Muslim and the finding he had not substantiated
        his claim to be at risk as a result of his religious identity is  a
        sustainable finding.  The conclusion in paragraph 27  that  at  its
        best the Appellant was complaining of a localised issue removes any
        suggestion of a political element in all  of  Pakistan.  Mr  Lister
        submitted the fact the Appellant  was  found  not  to  be  credible
        damages his claim to be a member of a Particular Social Group (PSG)
        and the fact the Panel considered the country guidance case law  is
        a relevant factor.


    22. As stated above, the Appellants claim that he fears the family must
        be considered in light of his overall credibility and  I  find  the
        finding that it had not been  proved  that  he  would  be  at  risk
        outside his home village has not  been  shown  to  be  perverse  or
        irrational.  The reference the core account the Appellant sought to
        rely upon is that contained in paragraph 11  of  the  determination
        which is not challenged before me as being  an  inaccurate  record.
        Credibility findings are set out in paragraphs 18, 19, 20 and 21.


    23. In relation to the submission the Appellant's  circumstances  on  a
        compassionate basis are similar to those of  the  appellant  in  D,
        which was rejected by the Panel, I find no legal error in doing so.
         Such cases involving medical treatment where it  is  necessary  to
        consider N and D  are  cases  more  about  death  than  life.   The
        Appellant's circumstances, however difficult for him, come  nowhere
        near to approaching this threshold.


    24. Mr Lister submitted there was no direct challenge to the Article  8
        findings in the grounds which is correct.


    25. In her response Miss Mair referred to the Convention  reason  of  a
        PSG which had not been argued before the Panel and as  such  it  is
        not an error if the Panel failed to deal with  it.   Even  if  they
        did, their sustainable finding  show  that  the  fact  there  is  a
        relocation option  available  and  the  findings  of  little  risk,
        suggesting the  necessary  threshold  of  persecution  may  not  be
        crossed, would mean it would fail in any event.  So  even  if  they
        should have dealt with this element any failure is not material.


    26. Miss Mair also submitted that if the  Appellant  failed  under  the
        Refugee Convention the Panel  should  have  considered  whether  he
        qualified for a grant of Humanitarian Protection which  applies  in
        any event if there is no Convention reason.  I  accept  this  as  a
        statement of the law and the fact the Panel did not consider it may
        suggest legal error although the question of internal relocation is
        as applicable to humanitarian protection as  it  is  to  a  Refugee
        Convention claim.  The sustainable finding that there is  a  viable
        internal relocation option is equally fatal  to  that  argument.  I
        therefore find such a failing not material to the decision.


    27. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states:

         "A person will be granted humanitarian protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom if        the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


         (i)  he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of entry
    in the United              Kingdom;
         (ii)     he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation
    2  of  The  Refugee            or  Person  in  Need  of   International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations           2006;
         (iii)    substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that
    the person                 concerned, if returned  to  the  country  of
    return, would face a real risk of            suffering serious harm and
    is unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to           avail himself
    of the protection of that country; and
          (iv)      he  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.


         Serious harm consists of:


         (i)  the death penalty or execution;
         (ii)     unlawful killing;
         (iii)    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment  or  punishment
    of a person in             the country of return; or
         (iv)     serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or
    person by reason of             indiscriminate violence  in  situations
    of international or internal armed           conflict.


    28. Even of the risk of serious harm was proved paragraph 339O  of  the
        Immigration Rules states:


          "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:


          .... (b) a grant of humanitarian protection  if  in  part  of  the
   country of return a           person  would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
   suffering serious harm, and the person can         reasonably be expected
   to stay in that part of the country.


          (ii) In examining whether a part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
   country of return       meets the requirements in (i)  the  Secretary  of
   State, when making his decision        on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
   humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the         general
   circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to the  personal
     circumstances of the person.


          (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to
   the country of          origin or country of return.


    29. At the hearing Miss Mair was referred to the recent decision of SHH
        v UK 60367/10 ECtHR (Fourth Section) the judgment in which was made
        final on 8th July 2013. In  that  case  the  Court  considered  the
        appeal of  a  disabled  man  fighting  to  prevent  his  return  to
        Afghanistan where  he  claimed  he  will  be  more  susceptible  to
        violence and homelessness. The Court found  that  the  difficulties
        for disabled people were not the fault of  the  Afghan  authorities
        and that the problems facing an  applicant  would  be  largely  the
        result of inadequate social provision and so the  approach  adopted
        in N was the appropriate one. The Court found that the  applicant's
        case does not disclose very exceptional circumstances  as  referred
        to  in  the  applicable  case-law  (N.  v.  the  United   Kingdom).
        Accordingly, the implementation of the decision to  remove  him  to
        Afghanistan would not give rise to a violation of Article 3 of  the
        Convention.


    30. The approach of the Panel and their analysis  of  the  evidence  is
        supported by this judgment as it is by the guidance provided in  GS
        and EO (Article 3- health cases) [2012] UKUT 397 reported  on  24th
        October 2012.


    31. I agree with the comment by the Panel and Miss Mair that this is  a
        case involving an Appellant for whom there is sympathy although  he
        has not helped his cause by his lies and dishonesty. If  compassion
        per se was all that was required he may succeed but it is not.  The
        Panel either applied the correct  legal  tests  or  made  decisions
        which, although infected by legal error, are sustainable as it  has
        not been shown such error is material to the  decision  to  dismiss
        the appeal. The determination shall stand.


Decision

    32. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper        Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22nd November 2013












