
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DA/00554/2014
                                                DA/00555/2014, DA/00556/2014
                                                DA/00557/2014, DA/00558/2014
                                                DA/00559/2014, DA/00560/2014
                                                DA/00568/2014, DA/00569/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 16 June 2015                     |On: 26 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    MNG, YM, HM, HM, HM, MM, SM, MNM, IMM
                         (anonymity directionS made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  us  to
    rescind the order and we  continue  it  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).

 2. This is the continuation of an appeal by the Secretary of State against
    the decision of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cresswell and
    Mr J H Eames) in which the panel allowed the appeals of  MNG,  YM,  HM,
    HM, HM MM, SM, MNM  and  IMM,  citizens  of  Afghanistan,  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision that section 32(5) UK Borders Act applied
    and to deport a family consisting of  two  married  parents  and  their
    seven children to Afghanistan. Since the Secretary of State's  decision
    two further children IDM and IQM (twins) were born on 31  August  2013.
    For convenience we will continue  to  refer  to  the  parties  as  they
    appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

 3. At a hearing on 31 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  decided  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in allowing the  appeals  and  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade by the Upper
    Tribunal and in doing so upheld the primary findings of fact.

 4. At the hearing before us Mr Bandegani appeared for the  Appellants  and
    submitted a written skeleton  argument.  Mr  Richards  represented  the
    Secretary of State and did not submit any additional documents.

Submissions

 5. For the Appellants Mr Bandegani  submitted  an  additional  psychiatric
    report in respect of the Second Appellant, referred to the  conclusions
    starting at paragraph 55 and offered to call the  Second  Appellant  to
    give evidence if Mr Richards wished to cross examine. Mr Richards  said
    that he had no questions.

 6. Mr Bandegani said that on the basis of the First-tier Tribunal findings
    the critical issue relates to paragraphs 399(a)(i)  and  399(a)(ii)  of
    the Immigration Rules and whether it is 'unduly harsh' for the children
    to stay or go. Mr Richards  interjected  accepting  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children or any of them to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without their parents so the only issue  was  whether  all  the
    family should stay or all the family should go.

 7. Mr Bandegani referred to the meaning of 'unduly harsh' in  the  context
    of the Immigration Rules. There may be an approach other than  that  of
    'reasonableness' by analogy to refugee law. AG Nigeria [2015] EWCA  Civ
    250 at paragraph 70 referring back to MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State
    for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  suggests  that  the
    assessment of proportionality  is  ultimately  an  assessment  for  the
    Tribunal. MF (Nigeria) at paragraph 35 holds that the 'unduly  harsh  '
    test is  not  simply  the  imposition  of  a  high  hurdle  but  it  is
    evaluative.  The  Secretary of State's approach to  'unduly  harsh'  is
    that it means 'very severe' but that the decision maker should look  at
    the impact on the child and the family and  in  deciding  whether  that
    impact is unduly severe the undueness of the severity must be  informed
    by the nature and seriousness of the  offence.  The  structure  of  the
    rules means that there must be an evaluation with regard to a range  of
    factors. In this case however it makes little difference because of the
    findings of fact by the Tribunal. It is clear  that  the  children  are
    studying in Wales and have successfully integrated. They have known  no
    other way of life. There is stark evidence  from  their  teachers.  The
    question is whether they  should  go  to  Afghanistan  where  there  is
    limited access or right to education for children and young women.

 8. For the Respondent Mr  Richards  said  that  there  was  a  measure  of
    agreement as to approach. He  departed  only  in  the  conclusion  when
    striking the  balance.  The  findings  include  a  wealth  of  positive
    findings in particular concerning the children and he did not  seek  to
    undermine those findings. However this is a serious offence striking at
    the heart of immigration control impacting upon the economic welfare of
    the country. The family is here as a result of that  offence  and  they
    have become integrated into the community partly as  a  result  of  the
    prison sentence passed upon the First Appellant. The requirement  is  a
    finding of unduly harsh. Given the nature of the offences  there  is  a
    strong public interest in deportation.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  said
    that the victim was the public purse. The cost to the public  purse  is
    significant. Whether the removal of the children is unduly  harsh  must
    be looked at in the context of the offence committed by their father.

 9. We reserved our decision.

Discussion

10. The factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal are not challenged. The
    First Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 October  2006  with
    his wife (the Second Appellant) and three of their children (the Fifth,
    Sixth and Seventh Appellants) and claimed asylum.  They  we  joined  by
    their two eldest children (the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants)  on  31
    October 2009. Their other 4 children have all been born in  the  United
    Kingdom (on 9 April 2007, 5 October  2010  and  31  August  2013).  The
    asylum claim made on arrival was refused and the  appeal  against  that
    refusal dismissed on 15 March 2007.  On  1  September  2008  the  first
    Appellant was convicted of obtaining leave by deception  and  assisting
    unlawful immigration. There were four offences and the First  Appellant
    was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment in respect of each offence with
    the sentences to run concurrently. As a result of  these  offences  the
    Secretary of State decided to make  a  deportation  order  against  the
    First Appellant (and the other Appellants as his family members) on  13
    March 2014 under the automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.

11.  The  First  Appellant  has  significant  sight   and   mental   health
    difficulties. The Second Appellant also has significant  mental  health
    difficulties. In these respects there are unchallenged medical  reports
    in respect of  both  the  First  and  Second  Appellants.  All  of  the
    Appellants have substantially integrated into their local community. In
    this respect the evidence given by the witnesses was  overwhelming  and
    the First-tier Tribunal concluded  (at 26(vii))

         "A crystal clear picture was painted of a very special and talented
         family, treasured by all who know and deal with them, the  children
         being fine examples to their peers."

    This was not the end of the wholly positive findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal. The eldest child was found to be

         "... a quite exceptional young woman who has outstanding results in
         her studies to date and has gone a very long way to help other less
         fortunate than herself... she is studying AS levels at  school  and
         has prospects of study at Oxford and a career in medicine."

    The Respondent does not challenge these findings and Mr  Richards  very
    fairly said in submissions that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
    wealth of positive findings, in particular concerning the children, and
    he did not seek to undermine those findings.

12. The issue now to be decided is narrow. The First-tier Tribunal  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules finding (at paragraph  39)  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect three of the appellants (the three
    children who arrived with the  First  and  Second  Appellants  and  had
    therefore lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven years at  the
    date of the Respondent's decision) to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    there was no family member (other than the First and Second Appellants)
    able to care for them in the United Kingdom. In doing so the First-tier
    Tribunal  applied  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration   Rules   as
    pertaining prior to 28 July 2014 and that was  an  error  of  law.  The
    Tribunal should instead have had regard  to  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules  as  in  effect  on  and  after  28  July  2014.  The
    difference is highlighted in the error of law decision and  we  do  not
    need to repeat it in detail here. The question is no longer whether "it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom"
    but rather whether "it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live  in
    the country to which the person is to be deported".

13. So the question we now need to determine is whether, on the same facts,
    it would be unduly harsh for the three children who have lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for at  least  seven  years  preceding  the  immigration
    decision to live in the country (Afghanistan) to  which  their  parents
    are to be deported the Respondent having  accepted  that  there  is  no
    question of those children remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    their parents.

14. We have dealt with the facts in some detail above. In summary this is a
    large family comprising father, mother  and  nine  children.  Three  of
    those children (two female and  one  male)  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 26 October 2006 and  as  such  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over seven years at the date of the Respondent's  decision.
    The two eldest children (both female) have been in the  United  Kingdom
    since 31 October 2009. The other four  children  (two  female  and  two
    male) were all born here, the eldest was  4  weeks  short  of  her  7th
    birthday at the date of the Respondent's decision. The children are  of
    course innocent of any wrongdoing attributable to  their  parents.  The
    overwhelming evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was of  remarkable
    educational progress and social integration into United Kingdom society
    in respect of all children.

15. Much was made in submissions of the meaning of 'unduly harsh'. We  have
    considered this meaning at length in our reported  decision  MAB  (para
    399; "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT 435. Our conclusion  by  reference  to
    the change in the wording of paragraph 399(a)  from  28  July  2014  at
    paragraph 72 was as follows

         ...We do not consider that the replacement of "reasonableness" with
         "unduly harsh" had changed the approach  to  the  Rules.   Now,  as
         then, the focus is on the impact  upon  the  individual  child  (or
         partner).  That said, we accept that the amendment  has  made  some
         changes, for example phrase "unduly harsh"  is  intended,  and  may
         well, impose a heightened  hurdle  from  that  of  "reasonableness"
         which was part of the Rules between 9 July 2012 and 28  July  2014.
         That is, in our judgment, reflected in [46] of MK and [109]  of  BM
         and Others.  In our judgment, albeit to add a gloss of our own, the
         word  "unduly"  requires  that  the  impact  upon  the   individual
         concerned be 'inordinately' harsh.  By that we mean that the impact
         would be "unusually large" or "excessive".  We do not  intend  that
         to be a definition but rather a 'gloss' to assist  decision  makers
         applying para 399, and indeed, s.117C(5).  That is, as the Tribunal
         recognised in MK at [46] "an evaluative assessment" but bearing  in
         mind the "elevated" or "heightened" standard that must be  applied.
         It is necessarily fact sensitive but is focussed upon the impact on
         the individual (whether child or partner) concerned.

Decision

16. Addressing this approach to the facts of the case now before us we have
    no hesitation in finding that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the
    three Appellants who had spent more than  seven  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom  by  the  time  of  the  Respondent's  decision  to   live   in
    Afghanistan. The children were aged 6, 4 and 2 on arrival  and  13,  11
    and 9 at the time of the Respondent's decision. They are all at  school
    and all speak English and Welsh. Two  of  the  three  are  female.  The
    disruption caused to their lives by a removal to Afghanistan where  not
    only the security situation is vastly different from the United Kingdom
    but the social and education systems are also vastly different and,  in
    the case of females, severely restricted would undoubtedly  be  of  the
    greatest severity.  Indeed it is difficult  to  imagine  an  impact  on
    their lives that could be greater  than  a  move  from  a  settled  and
    peaceful English/Welsh speaking environment with unrestricted access to
    education to an unstable and war torn Pushto/Dari speaking  environment
    with severe  restrictions  on  access  to  education  particularly  for
    females.

17. So far as these three children are concerned we take particular note of
    the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 40 - 45 of
    the determination. Whereas the concluding finding was that it would not
    be reasonable to expect these children to return to Afghanistan  it  is
    in our judgement incontrovertible that, on the same facts, it would  be
    unduly harsh to expect them to return.

18. It must follow that if  it  is  unduly  harsh  to  expect  these  three
    children (the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Appellants) to return then their
    appeal must be allowed and the appeals of their parents the  First  and
    Second Appellants must also be allowed by  virtue  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (paragraph 399(a)(ii)).

19. This leaves the Third and Fourth Appellants (the  two  elder  daughters
    who arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 October 2009), the  Eighth  and
    Ninth Appellants (born in the United Kingdom on  9  April  2007  and  5
    October 2010) and the two youngest children who are not parties to this
    appeal. Mr Richards did not seek  to  distinguish  any  of  the  family
    members it being the Secretary of State's  position  that  they  are  a
    family unit and that either they all go or they all stay.   This  is  a
    sensible  and   pragmatic   approach   although   one   that   requires
    consideration of their position outside the terms  of  the  Immigration
    Rules by virtue of Article 8 ECHR which, in the particular and  unusual
    circumstances of this matter is clearly justified. Bearing in mind  the
    Respondent's approach it is not necessary for us to add to  the  detail
    already apparent or to findings  already  made  on  the  depth  of  the
    integration of these Appellants. The Respondent accepts that they  have
    an established family and private life in the  United  Kingdom.  Taking
    into consideration section 117A-D of the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 it would in our judgment be wholly disproportionate  to
    require the Third, Fourth, Eight and  Ninth  Appellants  or  their  two
    infant siblings to be separated from the family unit and to be returned
    or in the case of those  four  children  born  in  the  United  Kingdom
    relocated to Afghanistan. Their appeals succeed by virtue of Article  8
    ECHR.

Conclusion

20. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and has been set aside.

21. We remake the decision in the following way

          i) The appeals of the First, Second,  Fifth,  Sixth  and  Seventh
             Appellants are allowed under the Immigration Rules.

         ii) The appeals of the Third, Fourth, Eighth and Ninth  Appellants
             are allowed by virtue of Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
