
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00947/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2014                                 |On 9 May 2014              |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, instructed by ABL Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe  born  in  August  1969.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 October 2002 and claimed  asylum  on
    that  date.   This  application  was  refused  and  Adjudicator  Verity
    dismissed a subsequent appeal on 28 March 2003. When doing so she found
    the evidence given by the appellant to be lacking in credibility.

 2. On 11 January 2007 the appellant was convicted of possession and/or use
    of a false instrument and sentenced  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment.
    She was subsequently served with a notice of intention  to  deport  her
    from the United Kingdom. An appeal brought against  this  decision  was
    dismissed in a determination of 28  August  2007.   On  7  May  2008  a
    deportation order was signed against the appellant. On 13 October  2010
    the Secretary  of  State  made  a  decision  refusing  to  revoke  this
    deportation order.  A subsequent appeal against that decision was  also
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Head and Mr P Bompas - non-
    legal member), in a decision of 22 December 2010.

 3. The appellant thereafter made further representations to the  Secretary
    of State in support of another request that the  deportation  order  be
    revoked and on 24 April 2013 the Secretary  of  State  made  a  further
    decision refusing to revoke the deportation order.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Flynn heard an appeal against this decision
    on 19 September 2013 and dismissed it on all grounds in a determination
    promulgated on  26  September.   In  summary  the  judge  concluded  as
    follows;

      i) Whilst living in Zimbabwe the appellant worked  for  a  Danish  NGO
         called Total Control of the Epidemic (TCE), counselling victims  of
         AIDS;

     ii) This work did not bring the  appellant  to  the  attention  of  the
         Zimbabwean authorities as claimed, or at all;

    iii) The appellant had no involvement with the MDC in Zimbabwe;

     iv) The appellant began her activities in support of  the  MDC  in  the
         United Kingdom in 2006;

      v) She attended MDC meetings in Crawley, Luton, Bedford, Charing Cross
         and outside of the South African Embassy in London;

     vi) She attended the Zimbabwe Vigil in London;

    vii) Just one month after the Tribunal's determination of December  2010
         the  appellant  was  interviewed  by  the  Zimbabwe  Human   Rights
         Television for ZBN News;

   viii) The appellant undertook activities in the United Kingdom in support
         of the MDC in "bad faith";

     ix) The appellant's brother and daughter are living in the family  home
         in Harare.  The appellant could return to Zimbabwe  and  live  rent
         free in the family home;

      x) The appellant's  brother  is  employed  as  a  prison  officer  and
         supports ZANU-PF;

 5. As to the appellant's time in the United  Kingdom  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Flynn made the following relevant findings of fact:

      i) The appellant has been in a relationship with a Mr C since 2007 and
         they have lived together since August 2008;

     ii) Mr C is HIV positive;

    iii) Mr C has no lawful right to remain in the United Kingdom;

     iv) The couple have a child together, N, who was  born  on  9  December
         2012.  Their daughter has had several HIV  tests  and  so  far  the
         results are negative.

 6. On  the  basis  of  these  factual  findings  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    concluded that the appellant's deportation would not lead to  a  breach
    of the Refugee Convention or of Articles 3 or 8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

Error of law and scope of re-making

 7. Upper Tribunal Martin granted the appellant permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal by way of a decision dated 16 October 2013.  The  appeal
    initially came before me on 26 November 2013.

 8. At that hearing Ms Frances of Counsel withdrew reliance on all  of  the
    pleaded grounds of appeal save for the ground which had been identified
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin as  being  arguable  i.e.  the  asserted
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  take  into  account  an  expert
    report when coming to its conclusions on  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.

 9. Ms Martin, at that time representing the Secretary of  State,  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take into account, or indeed
    even mention, the expert report from Dr  Aguilar,  but  submitted  that
    such failure was not material to the determination given  the  findings
    in the recent country guidance decision of  CM  (EM  country  guidance;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC).

10. Having observed some deficiencies in  the  report  from  Dr  Aguilar  I
    nonetheless concluded that the determination in the First-tier Tribunal
    should be set aside as a consequence of its failure to take account  of
    the evidence contained therein: setting out my reasons for doing so  in
    'Decision and Directions' of 26 November 2013. Having first  considered
    the exercise of my discretion as to the scope of the  remaking  of  the
    decision, I then said as follows at paragraph 13:

         "The findings of primary fact made by the First-tier Tribunal  are,
         however, to remain standing; the thrust of which I have  summarised
         in paragraph 4 above.  The  remaking  of  the  decision  is  to  be
         limited to the consideration of whether, on the findings of primary
         fact made by the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant  faces  a  real
         risk of suffering treatment upon return to  Zimbabwe,  contrary  to
         the Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR."

11. The scope of the remaking was so limited given that there had  been  no
    challenge maintained as against (i) the findings of primary  fact  made
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  (ii)  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration, and subsequent dismissal, of the Article 8 ECHR  ground.
    At the hearing of 26 November 2013 neither party sought persuade me  to
    take a contrary position.

12. The hearing of the appeal was then adjourned for Dr Aguilar to  provide
    further evidence.

13. When the matter came back before me on 9 April Mr Ball,  by  this  time
    representing the appellant, initially sought to  argue  that  I  should
    remake the decision on Article 8 grounds; however, when reminded of the
    terms of, and the reasoning behind, the Decision and Directions it  was
    agreed that Article 8 ECHR was not a matter now in issue.

Re-making

Appellant's Submissions

14. Turning  to  the  respective  parties'  cases:   Mr  Ball  clearly  and
    carefully set out the appellant's case in his skeleton  argument  dated
    26 February 2014, which he supplemented orally  at  the  hearing  of  9
    April.

15. In his skeleton argument Mr Ball sets  out  several  relevant  passages
    from the Tribunal's decision in CM; accepting  when  doing  so  that  a
    failed asylum seeker with no MCD profile would not, as a general  rule,
    face a real risk of having  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to  ZANU-PF  upon
    return to Zimbabwe.  He further accepted that, in the instant case, the
    appellant had not been  found  to  have  'an  MDC  profile'.   Mr  Ball
    continued by observing that the appellant's home area of  Zhombe  is  a
    rural area, submitting that following  the  decision  in  CM  a  person
    returning to a rural area of Zimbabwe may find it  difficult  to  avoid
    adverse attention if they do not have ZANU-PF connections and that such
    persons are  likely  to  face  a  loyalty  test,  with  the  consequent
    prospect, in this case, of the appellant being subjected to persecutory
    treatment because she  is  not  positively  disposed  to  Zanu-PF.   He
    identified Zhombe as being in the Midlands province.

16.  As  to  internal  relocation  to  Harare,   Mr  Ball  cited  from  the
    conclusions of the Tribunal in CM in this regard; in  particular  those
    to the effect that a returnee  to  Harare  would  in  general  face  no
    significant difficulties if returning  to  live  in  a  low  or  medium
    density area.  He accepted, applying this country  guidance,  that  "in
    general" MM would not face any significant problems in Harare.  It  was
    asserted, however, that:

         "Given her brother's ties to ZANU-PF there  is  a  heightened  risk
         that her sur-place activities will come to the adverse attention of
         the authorities.  The supplementary expert report makes clear  that
         'it is important to note that ZANU-PF is not  a  faceless  army  of
         people.  ZANU-PF activists are  present  in  every  city  and  town
         across the country.  They are neighbours and family  members.   Her
         risk increases when one ZANU-PF member chooses to identify  her  as
         not being loyal to ZANU-PF'.  There is a very  real  risk  that  an
         associate of her brothers will come to doubt her loyalty  to  ZANU-
         PF, and she may well be subject to a loyalty test."

17. It is said that it follows from this, and the conclusions in  CM,  that
    the appellant would face a real risk of being ill-treated  if  returned
    to Harare, which would compound the already  unreasonable  circumstance
    of the serious level economic deprivation she would face whilst  living
    there.

18. At the hearing Mr Ball referred me to a recent witness statement  drawn
    in the name of the appellant's  brother,  submitting  there  to  be  no
    reason why this statement should be disregarded. The evidence contained
    therein  was  not,  it  was  said,  inconsistent  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings given the date the statement was written.  In short
    Mr Ball  submitted  that  the  tribunal  should  accept  (i)  that  the
    appellant's brother had sold the family house  in  2009  for  5,700  US
    Dollars in order to pay for  medical  treatment  that  his  father  had
    received  prior  to  his  death,  (ii)  that  the  appellant's  brother
    thereafter built a property with two rooms, where  he  currently  lives
    with his wife and youngest child as well as  the  appellant's  daughter
    when she is on school holidays from boarding school,  (iii)  that  this
    property is too small to accommodate the appellant  and  her  daughter,
    (iv) that it is vulnerable to demolition by  the  authorities  and  (v)
    that the appellant's brother is now unemployed and  unable  to  provide
    any financial support to the appellant should she return to Zimbabwe.

19. I was then taken through Dr Aguilar's report of 26  February  2014,  in
    addition to a number of the news articles attached to that report.   It
    was accepted  that  the  report  from  Dr  Aguilar  did  not  give  the
    impression that  it  had  been  produced  with  as  much  care  as  the
    appellant's case deserved  but,  nevertheless,  submitted  that  weight
    ought to be given to it, particularly when viewed in  conjunction  with
    the news articles attached thereto.

20. In summary, it was submitted that (i) the appellant would be  perceived
    as a member of the MDC upon return,  (ii)  she  would  be  at  risk  of
    suffering persecutory treatment in her home  area  and  (iii)  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for her to move  to,  and  live  in,  Harare.  In
    relation to the latter submission Mr Ball asserted  that  this  was  so
    because (i) the appellant's brother's friends in the  ZANU-PF  may  ask
    her questions and she would be unable to pass a loyalty test, (ii)  she
    would be returning to a high density area which has previously been the
    subject of 'cleansing' and (iii) she would be returning  with  a  young
    child to circumstances of economic depravity.

21. Mr Ball accepted that in order to succeed on the basis of pure economic
    hardship the appellant would have to meet the exceptionality  threshold
    identified by the House of Lords in N v Secretary of State [2005]  UKHL
    31 (HL).

22. In reply Ms Holmes relied upon a skeleton argument drawn up by her on 6
    April 2014.  In that document she observed that the  appellant  had  no
    involvement with MDC prior to leaving Zimbabwe and submitted  that  her
    involvement with the MDC in the UK was purely superficial; amounting to
    14 meetings in four years.  She asserted that even  if  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities were aware of the appellant's UK-based  MDC  activity  this
    would  not  attract  their  adverse  attention.    She   continued   by
    identifying a number of features of Dr  Aguilar's  report  of  February
    2014 that, it was said, ought to lead to the tribunal to attach  little
    weight to it. She further  submitted  that  there  is  no  identifiable
    reason why the appellant would be subjected  to  a  loyalty  test  upon
    return to Zhombe, particularly if it is known that  her  brother  is  a
    ZANU-PF member.  As a consequence there would be no real  risk  of  the
    appellant suffering persecutory or other ill-treatment in that village.
     In the alternative, the appellant could internally relocate to  Harare
    where she could live with her brother in the family accommodation.

23. At the hearing Ms Holmes maintained reliance on her skeleton  argument.
    As to the statement from the appellant's brother,  she  submitted  that
    little weight should be placed on it for reason that (i) he was not  in
    attendance before the  Tribunal  and  therefore  could  not  be  cross-
    examined, (ii) the terms of his statement were  vague,  and  (iii)  its
    terms were inconsistent with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

24. As to the articles attached to Dr Aguilar's  expert  report  Ms  Holmes
    submitted that little weight should be placed on these as a consequence
    of (i) a number of the  articles  being  very  old,  (ii)  all  of  the
    articles appearing to derive  from  posts  on  an  unknown  website  by
    someone identifying themselves as  Zimsitrep  J,  and  (iii)  that  the
    articles are  general  in  nature  and  broadly  relate  to  those  who
    undertake MDC activities in Zimbabwe, which the appellant have not done
    in the past, and would not do so upon return.

25. Turning to Dr Aguilar's report, in addition to those matters identified
    in her skeleton argument Ms Holmes  referred  to  the  limited  sources
    referred to by Dr Aguilar, and submitted that the  conclusions  in  the
    report are so general in nature so as to be of little assistance to the
    Tribunal.

Discussion

Legal Framework

26. This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  of  24
    April 2013 refusing to revoke a deportation order.  The refusal  letter
    identifies a request having been made by the appellant in  this  regard
    on 5 March 2013 but I note that further representations  were  in  fact
    made by the appellant as long ago as 8 May 2012.

27. The First-tier Tribunal treated the Immigration  Rules  as  amended  by
    HC194 (from 9 July 2012) as being the relevant Rules for consideration.
    No submissions were made before me to the effect that this was not  the
    correct approach.  In any event nothing turns on the issue  of  whether
    these are the correct Rules for consideration in the  circumstances  of
    this case, given that the scope of the re-making is limited to  Article
    3 ECHR and Refugee Convention grounds.

28. It is for the appellant to show that she  is  a  refugee.   By  Article
    1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person who  is  out  of
    the country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a  well-founded
    fear of persecution for reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,  or
    membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is unable
    or unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of  the  country
    of origin.

29. Under the Qualification Directive a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition as set out in Article 1A  of
    the Refugee Convention and not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E  or  1F  of
    that Convention.

30. I remind myself that the degree of likelihood of persecution needed  to
    establish an entitlement to asylum is decided on a basis lower than the
    civil  standard  of  the  balance  of  probabilities.   This  has  been
    expressed  as  a  "reasonable  chance",  "a  serious  possibility"   or
    "substantial grounds for thinking" in various authorities.  That  basis
    of probability not only applies to historical fact,  but  also  to  the
    question of persecution in the future were the appellant to be returned
    to Zimbabwe.

31. The appellant also raises Article 3 ECHR grounds.  It  is  for  her  to
    show that her removal to Zimbabwe would breach Article 3 of  the  Human
    Rights  Convention.   She  need  only  demonstrate   that   there   are
    substantial grounds for believing that there is a real  risk  that  she
    will be subjected to treatment proscribed by Article 3.  This creates a
    burden on the appellant akin to that under the Refugee Convention.

Home Area

32. I accept that the appellant comes from the village  of  Zhombe  in  the
    Midlands province. This has not been disputed before me and is  a  fact
    that the appellant has maintained throughout.  I also accept that  this
    is a rural area.  The Tribunal in the country guidance decision  of  CM
    concluded as follows in  relation  to  the  risks  in  rural  areas  of
    Zimbabwe:

         "(1) As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
             motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared  with  the  situation
             considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular the evidence  does
             not show that, as a general matter, the  return  of  a  failed
             asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, having  no  significant
             MDC profile, would result in that person facing a real risk of
             having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

         (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in a case  of
             a person  without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the
             United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area  of
             Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.
              Such a person may well find it  difficult  to  avoid  adverse
             attention, amounting to serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF
             authority  figures  and  those  they  control.   The   adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might be necessary to demonstrate such loyalty.

         (3)  The situation is not uniform across the relevant  rural  areas
             and there may be reasons why a particular individual, although
             at first sight appearing to fall within the category described
             in the preceding paragraph, in reality does not  do  so.   For
             example the evidence might disclose that, in the home village,
             ZANU-PF power structures or other means of coercion  are  weak
             or absent."

33. I have not been drawn to any  evidence  relating  specifically  to  the
    appellant's home village of  Zhombe,  and  neither  can  I  locate  any
    material evidence in the documents before me. There is however evidence
    relating to the Midlands province.  Reference is made in  the  evidence
    to incidents of post-election retributive violence against MDC election
    candidates and their agents, as well as incidents of assaults by  ZANU-
    PF supporters and war veterans on MDC supporters.

34. Zhombe is a rural area and the appellant would  be  returning  to  that
    area after a significant period of absence. Given the evidence relating
    generally to the Midlands province, and the guidance given in CM, I  am
    prepared to accept that there is a real risk that the appellant will be
    subjected to a ZANU-PF loyalty test if  she  now  returns  to  live  in
    Zhombe. I  also  find,  given  that  she  does  not  have  any  Zanu-PF
    allegiances, that there is a real risk that she would fail that test.

35. Consequently, following the rationale of the Tribunal in CM, I conclude
    that there is a real risk of the appellant being subjected to treatment
    contrary to the Refugee Convention, and Article 3 ECHR, if she were  to
    return to her home area.

Internal relocation

36. In reality this appeal turns on whether the  appellant  can  internally
    relocate within Zimbabwe i.e. whether it is unreasonable and/or  unduly
    harsh for her to live  in  another  area  of  her  home  country.   The
    Secretary of State, for obvious reasons, commends  the  possibility  of
    the appellant living in Harare.

37. In  its  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    appellant has a family home in Harare, where her  brother,  his  family
    and the  appellant's  daughter  presently  live.   In  coming  to  this
    conclusion the tribunal rejected the evidence given  by  the  appellant
    that the family home had "gone down because nobody had taken care of it
    but it is still there".  When  the  appellant's  nephew  gave  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal he stated that he  had  lived  with  the
    appellant in Harare and that the house that they lived in had  belonged
    to her father.  He went on to  say  that  the  family  still  has  that
    property in Harare, that the appellant had lived  there  for  free  and
    that other rooms in the house  had  been  rented  out.   He  also  gave
    evidence that he had telephoned the appellant's brother and had  learnt
    from that conversation that the appellant's youngest daughter is  still
    living with the appellant's brother in the family home in Harare.

38.  As  I  identified  earlier  the  appellant  has  recently  obtained  a
    statement, dated 13 March 2014, from her brother dealing primarily with
    his current living arrangements.  In summary  the  appellant's  brother
    says as follows in that statement:

      i) His (and the appellant's) father died in 2007 after suffering  from
         a long illness,  the  medical  bills  relating  to  which  totalled
         approximately 3,400 US dollars;

     ii) His father had a house in Chitungwiza, Harare with four rooms.   He
         took the decision to sell this house for 5700 US Dollars in 2009 to
         pay for his father's medical bills;

    iii) With the remainder of  the  money  he  joined  the  Joshua  Muqauko
         Cooperative and built a property with two rooms in 2009.  He  lives
         in this property with his wife and two daughters;  the  appellant's
         daughter lives with them when  she  returns  from  boarding  school
         during the school holidays;

     iv) The property is not large enough to accommodate the  appellant  and
         her United Kingdom based child;

      v) He is currently unemployed and unable to provide financial  support
         to the appellant;

     vi) He believes that the appellant will face difficulties  in  Zimbabwe
         if she returns because the area in which he lives is  predominantly
         occupied by ZANU-PF;

    vii) He does not want the appellant to live with him because  this  will
         create problems for him;

   viii) The property he lives in was built on land belonging to  a  tobacco
         company, and was the subject of a  land  grab.   After  the  recent
         elections the government carried out a land audit in the cities and
         the local housing officer has told him that the Cooperative had not
         been legally allocated the land.  He  believes  that  the  property
         will be demolished, although  he  does  not  know  when  this  will
         happen.

     ix) The evidence given by the  appellant's  nephew  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was not accurate.

      x) He lives in an area which he believes to be high density.

39. I attach no weight to the contents of this statement for the  following
    reasons.

40. The evidence contained therein is totally at odds with the findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and inconsistent with the evidence given by the
    appellant's nephew to that Tribunal.  Although the appellant's  brother
    gives evidence in  his  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  nephew's
    evidence to the  Tribunal  was  inaccurate,  no  explanation  has  been
    proffered by either the appellant's brother or, more significantly,  by
    the appellant's nephew as to why this was so.  The  appellant's  nephew
    specifically identifies in his evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    that he spoke to the appellant's brother on the telephone and  that  it
    was during that conversation  that  he  learned  that  the  appellant's
    brother was still living in the family home in Harare. However,  it  is
    now said by the appellant's brother that he sold the  family  house  in
    2009.  Although there is good  reason  why  the  appellant's  brother's
    evidence could not be tested in cross-examination, no  explanation  has
    been provided as to why an application  was  not  made  to  recall  the
    appellant's nephew to provide evidence in relation to  the  appellant's
    brother's statement;  not  least  to  explain  the  clear  and  obvious
    discrepancy between  the  evidence  that  he  gave  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the evidence now given by  the  appellant's  brother.  The
    appellant's brother's evidence is also inconsistent with  the  evidence
    given by the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  on  this  issue,
    although such evidence was in any event rejected.

41. As to the evidence that the appellant's brother is unemployed, this  is
    not consistent with the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that  he  is  a
    prison officer [38]. The brother's evidence in this regard  is  in  the
    briefest of terms. No explanation is given as to when or  why  he  lost
    his employment as a prison officer, or  how  the  family  are  said  to
    economically survive given his claimed unemployment.

42. Looking at the appellant's brother's statement in the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole, I  reject  the  truth  of  the  evidence  provided
    therein.

43. I therefore proceed on the  basis  of  conclusions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal i.e. that if the appellant returns to Harare she could live in
    the family home, with her brother and her daughter, rent free.  I  also
    proceed on the basis that her brother is not unemployed as claimed  and
    that he is in fact a prison officer who supports ZANU-PF.

44. Turning back to the Tribunal's decision in CM, the following is said in
    relation to Harare:

         "5.  A returnee to Harare will in general face no difficulties,  if
             going to a low density or medium  density  area.   Whilst  the
             socioeconomic  situation  in  high  density  areas   is   more
             challenging in general a person  without  ZANU-PF  connections
             will not face significant problems there (including a  loyalty
             test), unless he or she has a significant MDC  profile,  which
             might cause him or her to feature on a list of those  targeted
             for  harassment,  or  would  otherwise  engage  in   political
             activities likely to attract the adverse attention of ZANU-PF,
             or would be reasonably likely to engage  in  such  activities,
             but for a fear of thereby coming to the adverse  attention  of
             ZANU-PF."

45. On the accepted evidence I find that the appellant does not have a,  or
    a significant, MDC profile, she is not reasonably likely to feature  on
    a list of those targeted for harassment and neither is  she  reasonably
    likely to engage in political activities liable to attract the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF.

46. In coming to these conclusions I remind myself that the activities  she
    has undertaken on behalf of MDC in the United  Kingdom  were  found  to
    have been embarked on in bad faith.

47. Mr Ball submits that the situation and circumstances identified  in  CM
    no longer prevail and that the situation in Harare has deteriorated.

48. I observe at this juncture of the  terms  of  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
    Directions 12.2 and 12.4 which state as follows:

         "[12.2]  A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
                IAT  bearing  the  letters  CG  shall  be  treated   as   an
                authoritative  finding  on  the   country   guidance   issue
                identified in the determination,  based  upon  the  evidence
                before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT  that
                determine the appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
                expressly  superseded  or   replaced   by   any   later   CG
                determination, or is inconsistent with other authority  that
                is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case  is
                authority in any subsequent appeal so far as that appeal:-

                (a)    relates to the country guidance  issue  in  question;
                    and

                (b)    depends upon the same or similar evidence.

         [12.4]   Because of the principle that like cases should be treated
                in like manner, any failure to follow  a  clear,  apparently
                applicable country guidance case or to show why it does  not
                apply to the case in question is likely to  be  regarded  as
                grounds for appeal on a point of law."

49. The Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Guidance  Note  2011
    No. 2, at paragraphs 11 and 12, states:

         "[11]    If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the  issue
                that has not been considered in the  country  guidance  case
                or, if a subsequent case includes further issues  that  have
                not been considered in the CG case, the judge will reach the
                appropriate conclusion on the evidence, taking into  account
                the conclusion in the CG case so far as it remains relevant.



         [12] Where country  guidance  has  become  outdated  by  reason  of
                developments in the country in question, it  is  anticipated
                that a judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  have  such
                credible fresh evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above."

50. In DSG and Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00148  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  [UTJ  Allen  and  UTJ  Storey]
    concluded that a  judge  may  depart  from  existing  country  guidance
    authority in circumstances described in  Practice  Direction  12.2  and
    12.4 and the UT (IAC) Guidance Note 2011 No. 2, paragraphs 11  and  12.
    This is an approach that I have followed  in  the  instant  appeal  and
    neither party suggested to the contrary.

51. In making his submissions Mr  Ball  relies  ostensibly  on  the  expert
    report of Dr Aguilar of 26 February 2014, and its attachments.

52. Broadly speaking, in relation to the general situation in Zimbabwe,  Dr
    Aguilar provides evidence that ZANU-PF no longer contends with a viable
    opposition party; what is read in  the  news  about  the  situation  in
    Zimbabwe is the tip of the iceberg; that there is an  entrenched  elite
    unwilling to let go of the privilege and riches from pillaging land and
    resources and ZANU-PF members control by fear and by force and a member
    of the ZANU-PF can  commit  a  crime  against  a  non-member  including
    killing with impunity.  It is further said that MDC members  have  been
    persecuted with impunity since  the  election,  and  demonstrators  are
    still beaten.  MDC members, activists and those present  at  the  polls
    during the election are known by their ZANU-PF neighbours  and  are  at
    risk at any  time.   There  is  ample  evidence  of  ongoing  political
    violence and disregard for human rights, including  beatings,  arrests,
    partisan food  distribution,  food  insecurity,  evictions,  deaths  in
    prison from lack of food, and disruptions of homes which is  widespread
    across the country.

53. In relation to the appellant Dr Aguilar opines that  she  will  not  be
    able to engage freely in the political system as an opposition  member.



54. Dr Aguilar concurs with the country guidance in EM that  (i)  a  person
    returning after a long absence will be at higher risk than a person who
    has been absent for a short period of time and (ii) a person  returning
    from the United Kingdom will be at increased risk on return.   Further,
    it is said that a Shona speaking person will have  more  difficulty  in
    relocating to an Ndebele  speaking  area,  including  Matabeleland  and
    Bulawayo.  The appellant is Shona speaking.

55. In relation to Harare Dr Aguilar concludes that in an area of medium to
    low density there will be less risk, although the  risk  would  not  be
    eliminated.  It is said that certain areas in  Harare  are  subject  to
    violence and mass evictions, such  as  occurred  in  the  Murambatsvina
    evictions that led to one million displaced persons in 2005.

56. He opines that upon her return the appellant is  highly  likely  to  be
    recognised by persons that knew her, especially if  she  returns  to  a
    place where she has previously  lived  or  joins  her  family  members.
    Wherever the appellant settles she is likely to be asked questions, and
    will be of interest to the local leadership, traditional chiefs or town
    and city ward leaders.  Newcomers are easily identified  by  neighbours
    and in local markets.  Dr Aguilar continues by observing  that  ZANU-PF
    activists are present in every city and town across the  country.   The
    appellant's risk increases when one of the ZANU-PF members  chooses  to
    identify her as not being loyal to ZANU-PF.   As  her  arrival  becomes
    known and the appellant is identified or questions are asked, she  will
    be at risk of someone in the ZANU-PF knowing her.   Her  treatment  may
    well depend on the interest that a ZANU-PF member has in her activities
    in the United Kingdom, or perceptions that person has about her absence
    or imputed political beliefs.

57. In paragraph 4.9 of his report Dr Aguilar also concludes:

         "In my ongoing research I  have  seen  various  reports  about  the
         increase in monitoring of modern communications in all  its  forms.
         Phone use and internet use in Zimbabwe is closely  monitored.   The
         government has dedicated considerable  resources  to  sophisticated
         monitoring  technologies  training  Zimbabwean  CIO  and   military
         personnel in Iran and building a military spying complex  built  by
         the Chinese.  Iran and China are two  of  the  worst  offenders  of
         internet censorship, monitoring and blocking in the world ...

         I have no  doubt  the  sophisticated  monitoring  of  all  internet
         activity in Zimbabwe will  easily  collect  information  about  the
         Zimbabwean diaspora in the UK.   Sur-place  activities  in  the  UK
         showing support for MDC or any other opposition will  be  available
         to CIO in Zimbabwe.  On return, in my opinion based on the  ongoing
         reports of monitoring over several years up  to  the  current  time
         with the first graduates  of  the  National  Defence  College,  the
         appellant will be perceived as a member of MDC  and  an  opposition
         activist in the diaspora whether this activism was genuine or not."

58. Dr Aguilar goes  on  to  conclude  that  internal  relocation  for  the
    appellant would not be a viable option because each village,  town  and
    city ward has leaders  responsible  for  knowing  the  people  therein.
    There are ZANU-PF agents and abuses across the country.  Relocating  to
    Harare is no protection.  She may face eviction from any home if she is
    perceived to be a member of the opposition  and  is  targeted  for  any
    reason including having a personal enemy who is a ZANU-PF activist.

59. As to the economic situation in Zimbabwe Dr Aguilar states:

         "I will note that the ability of the appellant to survive on return
         with a  young  child  may  depend  on  refraining  from  opposition
         politics.  If she and her child require food aid, she may be denied
         that aid in certain situations as  in  reports  attached.   If  she
         seeks to enter the informal work sector trading  or  setting  up  a
         market stall she may be forced to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF as
         in attached reports.  The informal  sector  is  more  difficult  to
         enter than appears, as traders rely on established networks, ethnic
         and kinship ties ..."

60. Dr Aguilar attaches a number of documents  to  his  report,  under  the
    heading "Research on  current  situation  relied  upon  for  opinions".
    These reports, on the whole, relate to assaults  on  MDC  activists  by
    various manifestations of the Zimbabwean  state  or  its  agents.   The
    reports in the  main,  although  not  exclusively,  emanate  from  news
    organisations. He indicates [3.1] that he gleans "current  information"
    ... "primarily from ongoing internet research  reviewing  NGO  reports,
    human rights reports, government reports, jstor scholarly publications,
    and news from the Zimbabwean government as  well  as  the  most  recent
    documents available, largely in news reports."

61.  It is said by Dr Aguilar that the  documents  attached  to  the  report
    provide ample evidence of ongoing political violence and disregard  for
    human rights. On analysis they  are,  in  general,  reports  from  news
    organisations regarding particular incidents  where  MDC-T  members  or
    activists have suffered human rights abuses at  the  hands  of  Zanu-PF
    supporters. The documents also include limited reports of the targeting
    of gays, lesbians and National Constitutional Assembly activists, Women
    of Zimbabwe Arise activists, as well  as  threats  being  made  against
    journalists.   The  appellant  does  not  fall  within  any  of   these
    categories of persons neither, in my conclusion, is there a  reasonable
    likelihood she would be perceived to do so.

62. I find that, when looked as a whole, neither the articles  relied  upon
    by Dr Aguilar or the content of his report itself support a  contention
    that the situation in Zimbabwe  has  deteriorated  to  any  significant
    extent from that identified by the tribunal in CM.

63. Much of the evidence provided by Dr Aguilar broadly  accords  with  the
    circumstances found to be present in Zimbabwe by the tribunal in CM and
    it is notable that in paragraph 8 of his report Dr Aguilar opines  that
    "little has changed for people that are not known or seen, that live in
    towns and villages, farms and high density areas." This is position  is
    also re-iterated in paragraph 5.6 of the report.

64. Turning particular  attention  to  Dr  Aguilar's  opinions  as  to  the
    appellant's fate upon return, I accept that returning to Zimbabwe after
    a long absence from the country, and in particular returning  from  the
    United Kingdom in such circumstances, are two features  which  increase
    the likelihood of individual being thought of as not being loyal to the
    Zanu-PF. I remind myself, however, that these features alone would not,
    according to the tribunal in CM, create a real risk of persecution  for
    a person returning, or moving, to Harare.  The  evidence  given  by  Dr
    Aguilar does not lead me to conclude otherwise.

65.  Dr Aguilar opines that the risk to the appellant  will  depend  on  the
    interest that a Zanu-PF member, and in particular one  who  is  already
    known to her, has of her activities  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  the
    perception that such a person has of her absence or  imputed  political
    beliefs. Paragraph 4.1 of his report he reads, however:

         "The appellant may suffer any of the above abuses of  human  rights
         on return, or none of the above abuses of human rights  on  return.
         And she may not suffer any abuses of human rights on arrival, or in
         the first week, or in the first year.  She may suffer in the  fifth
         year after return.  This cannot be objectively known, but there are
         factors that will contribute to the risk."

66. A claimed risk which relies upon a speculative assessment of whether an
    as yet unidentified Zanu-PF  supporter  -  whether  this  be  a  person
    previously known to the  appellant  or  a  friend  of  the  appellant's
    brother - would take a particular interest in the  appellant  upon  her
    return such that this  person  would  become  aware  of  her  political
    activities in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  impute  particular  political
    beliefs to her, and then will act in a persecutory manner  towards  her
    as a consequence, cannot, in my conclusion, be categorised  as  'real'.
    Consequently  it  does  not  engage  the  protection  of  the   Refugee
    Convention or Article 3 ECHR.

67. In paragraph 5.4 of his report Dr Aguilar alludes to the prevalence  of
    internet and phone cell monitoring by the Zimbabwean authorities.  This
    is not a trait of the Zimbabwean  authorities'  actions  that  featured
    with any  significance  in  the  decision  in  CM,  or  indeed  in  its
    predecessor country guidance determinations. It is said by Mr  Ball  to
    be of particular  relevance  in  the  instant  appeal  because  of  the
    appellant's MDC activities in the United Kingdom and her appearance  on
    ZBN news in early 2011.

68. The evidence  provided  in  relation  to  the  monitoring  of  Diaspora
    activities by the Zimbabwean government, including  the  monitoring  of
    the internet in relation to such activities, is limited.  The  evidence
    on this issue attached to Dr  Aguilar's  report  comprises  of  a  news
    article from 2009, which indicates that  the  government  has  obtained
    sophisticated phone tapping,  radio  jamming  and  internet  monitoring
    equipment from China, and an article from 2013 identifying the  setting
    up of the National Defense College, which Dr Aguilar describes  as  the
    'spy college'. No evidence is provided therein as  to  the  extent  and
    reach of the monitoring or as to actual or even  claimed  instances  of
    such monitoring resulting in the detention and/or ill treatment  of  an
    individual.

69. Whilst Dr Aguilar opines [4.9] that "Sur place activities in the United
    Kingdom showing support  for  MDC  or  any  other  opposition  will  be
    available to the CIO in Zimbabwe" this is  unsourced  and,  as  I  have
    identified above, the articles attached to the report are both  limited
    in the number and in  the  assistance  they  provide.  One  would  have
    thought that if information about sur place activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the scale suggested by Dr Aguilar were available to the  CIO
    then this  would  be  more  widely  reported.  Alternatively,  if  such
    information is available to the CIO and this  had  caused  difficulties
    for those returning  to  Zimbabwe,  then  once  again  one  would  have
    expected the reporting of such difficulties to be in the public  domain
    and available to this tribunal. Further, there is also no  satisfactory
    evidence to support a contention that even if the CIO  had  information
    about the MDC activities of an individual in the United  Kingdom,  such
    information would  be  more  widely  available  to  Zanu-PF  supporters
    generally.

70. Looked at as a whole, I find that the appellant will  be able  to  live
    in the family home in Harare, with  her  child,  her  brother  and,  if
    necessary, her partner. It is not asserted that the family home is in a
    high density area of Harare but, even if it is, I do  not  accept  this
    would lead to the appellant being at risk, given the guidance  provided
    in CM and the findings I have made above.  The appellant  will  not  be
    living in Harare in a situation  of  economic  depravity.  Her  brother
    works as a prison officer and no doubt will be able to support her,  at
    least until she re-establishes herself in her home  country.  Returning
    the  appellant's  young  child  to  Zimbabwe   will   not,   in   these
    circumstances, amount of itself to a breach of Article 3.

71. I do not accept that there is a real likelihood that the appellant will
    be required to undertake a loyalty test in Harare. She had no actual or
    imputed affiliations or connections to MDC before  her  departure  from
    Zimbabwe and I do not accept that the activities for the MDC  that  she
    undertook in bad faith in the United Kingdom are reasonably  likely  to
    become known to Zanu-PF members or sympathisers  in  Zimbabwe.  In  any
    event, I find that  even  if  such  activities  were  to  come  to  the
    attention of Zanu-PF sympathisers or members in Harare, this would  not
    lead the appellant to have significant difficulties and, in particular,
    would not lead to a real risk of her suffering persecutory treatment.

72. For the sake of completion I observe that no submissions were  made  to
    the effect that there is  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  the  appellant
    suffering ill treatment at the airport upon return and I find that  she
    would not. In coming to this conclusion I have considered  and  applied
    the guidance given in HS [2007] UKAIT 00094, which has been affirmed by
    all of the country guidance decisions that have followed thereafter.  I
    do not accept that the initial questioning  of  the  appellant  at  the
    airport will reveal a  political  profile  considered  adverse  to  the
    Zimbabwean regime. She will not therefore be taken for the second stage
    of the interrogation process, but rather she will be allowed  to  enter
    Zimbabwe and go on her way. Even if she is the  subject  of  monitoring
    thereafter, given that  she  has  no  pro-MDC  sympathies  and  is  not
    reasonably likely to engage in any  activities  that  will  lead  to  a
    perception she has such sympathies, there is no real risk of her  being
    picked upon at a later date and further interrogated.

73. For these reasons I find that there is not a real risk of the appellant
    suffering from treatment contrary to the Refugee Convention or  Article
    3 of the Human Rights Convention if returned to Zimbabwe.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  for  the  reasons
given in my decision of the 26 November 2013

Upon re-making the decision I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

I make an anonymity direction in this appeal. Unless and  until  a  Tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her  or  any
member of her family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 27 April 2014























