
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 01 December 2015                  |On 15 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                   Between

                               VLADYMYR BUCHAK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Dellar, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Buchak appeals with permission against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") promulgated on the 7  October  2014.
    By its decision the FtT dismissed the appeal against what is  described
    as the making of a deportation order.

 2. In our judgment the decision of the FtT suffers from two incurable  and
    fundamental errors of law.  The first is the failure  to  consider  the
    appeal properly under the EEA regulations  and  to  make  findings  and
    conclusions accordingly. The second is the unfairness of the  procedure
    adopted by the FtT.  This latter issue is addressed in paragraph  5  of
    the determination.  It is clear from this  part  of  the  determination
    that the judge fundamentally misdirected himself in law.  The criterion
    which he applied to  the  Appellant's  late  arrival  at  the  Tribunal
    building was whether a satisfactory explanation for the tardiness could
    be provided.  This is fundamentally flawed in law.  As the decision  of
    this Tribunal in  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  makes  abundantly  clear  the
    criterion is that of fair hearing and the test which the Judge  had  to
    apply at that stage, given that the interpreter  has  been  prematurely
    and precipitously released from the premises was whether the Appellant,
    should, in fulfilment of his inalienable right to  a  fair  hearing  be
    granted an adjournment.  An adjournment was the  only  feasible  option
    whereby he could be given a  fair  hearing  given  the  absence  of  an
    interpreter.

 3. The judge did not even consider the  option  of  an  adjournment.   The
    determination contains the following conclusion:

         "I was satisfied that the appeal could be justly determined without
         a hearing in all the circumstances".

    This conclusion is unsustainable in law by virtue of  its  infringement
    of the Appellant's right to a fair hearing.  It is also unreasoned  and
    unparticularised and duly analysed attracts the rather exceptional  and
    unusual appellation of irrational.  For this combination of reasons the
    decision of the FtT is unsustainable in law.

 4. Our decision is to set aside the decision of the lower  Tribunal.   The
    appeal to this Tribunal succeeds to that extent.  We  shall  remit  the
    appeal to a differently formed lower Tribunal. This  means  that  there
    will have to be a further hearing by the  lower  Tribunal.   Mr  Buchak
    would be very well advised to obtain legal  representation  if  at  all
    possible.  He should actively investigate all options on that issue.


                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date:  04 December 2015
