


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00207/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4 September 2014                         |On: 8 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               lesego boloang
                            (NO aNONYMITY oRDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Taiwo of Ajan Immigration Advisory Service
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following a grant of permission to appeal on  26
June 2014.

The appellant is a citizen of  South  Africa,  born  on  23  July  1991.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 August 2002, aged  11  years,  to  visit
his mother who had been residing in the United Kingdom since  December  1999
on a work permit visa. He was granted leave to  enter  for  six  months  and
subsequently limited leave to remain  in  line  with  his  mother  until  16
December 2004, followed by indefinite leave to remain.

On 11 August 2011 the appellant was convicted at Snarebrook Crown  Court  of
offering and supplying controlled Class  A  drugs  and  conspiracy  to  sell
prohibited weapons. On 19 March  2012  he  was  sentenced  to  three  years'
imprisonment for the drugs  offences  and  two  years  consecutive  for  the
firearm conspiracy, making a total of five years' imprisonment.  On  6  July
2012 he was served with a notice of liability to  deportation  to  which  he
responded.  Further representations were made on  his  behalf  on  1  August
2013 on Article 8 grounds. A decision was  made  on  20  January  2014  that
section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied  and  a  deportation  order
was signed against him on 22 January 2014. He appealed against the  decision
of 20 January 2014.

The representations of 1 August 2013 gave details of the appellant's  family
and private life ties in the United Kingdom. It was stated  that  he  had  a
daughter, born whilst he was in prison, from a  previous  relationship  with
Nikita Louise Brown, a British citizen. Ms Brown had been convicted  of  the
same offences as the appellant and was also in  prison  and  their  daughter
had been placed in the care of a family member,  Chinneal  Collins.  It  was
claimed that the appellant maintained contact with his daughter  through  Ms
Collins by way of telephone calls  and  Christmas  and  birthday  cards  and
intended to take on  his  responsibilities  as  a  father  on  release  from
prison. Reference was also made to his relationship with his mother who  was
settled in the United Kingdom and was employed by the NHS  as  a  registered
nurse and who visited him in prison. It was claimed that he  had  no  family
or other ties to South Africa and that his deportation would interfere  with
the family and private life established in  the  United  Kingdom  and  would
breach his Article 8 rights.

The respondent, in making the deportation  decision,  considered  paragraphs
398, 399 and 399A of  the  immigration  rules.  With  regard  to  paragraphs
399(a) and (b),  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  retained
parental responsibility for his daughter or that he enjoyed  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with her, and it was not  accepted  that  he  had  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with either the mother of his  child  or
his current partner Latisha Samuel  referred  to  in  his  response  to  the
notice of liability to automatic deportation. With regard to paragraph  399A
it was considered that the appellant retained ties to South Africa and  that
he could not, therefore, meet  the  requirements  of  that  provision.  With
respect to paragraph 398, the  respondent  considered  that  there  were  no
exceptional circumstances that would outweigh the  public  interest  in  his
deportation.  It  was  accordingly  not  accepted   that   the   appellant's
deportation would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal, by a  panel
consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell  and  Mr  Olszewski  JP.  The
panel heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  his  mother  but  found
neither to be credible witnesses. It was noted that neither Ms Brown nor  Ms
Collins were in attendance and the reasons given for their absence were  not
accepted. Accordingly little weight was attached to  the  evidence  provided
in their letters of support, including evidence  of  claimed  telephone  and
other contact between the appellant and his  daughter.  The  panel  did  not
accept that the appellant and Ms Brown were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship and did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with his daughter.  The  requirements  of  paragraph
399 were therefore found not to have been  met.  With  regard  to  paragraph
399A the panel found the appellant and his mother to  have  been  untruthful
about his family ties in South Africa and in  particular  in  his  claim  to
have had no contact with his father and they  considered  that  he  retained
ties to  that  country.  The  panel  found  nothing  exceptional  about  the
appellant's  circumstances  and,  having  gone  on  to  consider  all  other
relevant matters including the nature of the  appellant's  offence  and  the
risk of re-offending,  concluded  that  his  deportation  would  not  breach
Article 8. The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  the  grounds  that
the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to pay enough attention to  the
assessment of risk of re-offending in the  pre-sentencing  report;  that  it
had erred in its decision on Article 8; that it had  erred  by  ignoring  an
adjournment request; and that there had been errors  on  the  interpretation
and application of relevant cases.

Permission to appeal was initially refused on 9 May 2014,  but  following  a
renewed application was granted on 26 June  2014  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Perkins.

The reasons for the grant of permission  focussed  upon  additional  grounds
submitted on 4 June 2014 alleging that  there  had  been  misrepresentations
made by the respondent in the  decision  letter  of  22  January  2014  with
respect to evidence given by Chinneal Collins,  the  appellant's  daughter's
carer. The grant of permission  indicated  that  there  were  concerns  that
evidence provided with the additional grounds "might reflect  badly  on  the
integrity of the respondent's officers".

It is necessary at this stage to provide more details about  the  additional
grounds and the attached evidence. That evidence consists of  a  handwritten
letter from Ms Collins disputing that a statement relied upon  by  the  Home
Office at the appeal hearing, and stated to be her statement,  was  in  fact
her own  statement.  The  additional  grounds  clarify  that  that  "letter"
(referring to the said statement) was  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  at
paragraph 27 of the refusal decision and by the Tribunal at paragraph 54  of
its determination.

In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins was  clearly  concerned
about the respondent's production of, and reliance upon  a  statement  whose
provenance was being challenged by its claimed author and  it  was  on  that
basis that he made the decision to grant  permission.  However,  having  had
the benefit of an opportunity to consider the evidence in  more  detail,  it
became clear to me that there had been a misunderstanding of that  evidence,
in that the document referred to at paragraph 27  of  the  refusal  decision
and paragraph 54 of the determination was not in fact a  statement  from  Ms
Collins but an email  from  a  social  worker  at  Hackney  Social  Services
Children's Unit to the Home Office referring to information provided to  her
from Ms Brown and Ms Collins in regard to the nature of the contact  between
the appellant and his daughter. The social worker,  in  that  email,  stated
that Ms Collins maintained that the appellant had not made any contact  with
her in regard to his daughter, either directly or indirectly.  As  such,  Ms
Collins' letter appended to the  additional  grounds  was  no  more  than  a
challenge to the social worker's record of the information she had  provided
to her.

Both Ms Taiwo and Ms Isherwood agreed that that was the case.  Nevertheless,
Ms Taiwo continued to rely upon Ms Collins' denial  of  the  information  in
the social worker's email, submitting that  the  correct  information  about
the contact between the appellant and his daughter had been set  out  in  Ms
Collins' previous handwritten letters. She  sought  an  adjournment  of  the
proceedings in order to await the response to a Subject Access Request  made
to the Data Protection Unit of the Home Office on 8 July 2014  to  obtain  a
copy of the social worker's email which she stated had never  been  provided
to the appellant's representatives, despite  several  requests  having  been
made. She submitted that the respondent's appeal  bundle  had  not  in  fact
been made available prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and
that the bundle, when received, did not contain the email.

However, when Ms Isherwood referred Ms Taiwo to a letter dated  27  February
2014 from Ajan  Immigration  Advisory  Service  confirming  receipt  of  the
papers from the Home Office, Ms Taiwo conceded  that  the  bundle  had  been
produced. Further, it was  apparent  that  Annex  P1,  the  social  worker's
email, had been included in her copy of the respondent's appeal  bundle.  Ms
Taiwo was furthermore unable to explain why,  if  the  document  had  indeed
been missing from the bundle at the time of the hearing  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal, that had not been raised as a concern at that  time.  It  was
accordingly clear that the document had been  provided  to  the  appellant's
representatives prior to the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
that there were no grounds for an adjournment on that  basis.  I  considered
that Ms Taiwo's submissions in that regard were misleading.

Ms Taiwo nevertheless  pursued  the  adjournment  request  relating  to  the
Subject Access Request, submitting that  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  all
information relating to the appellant's case.  However  she  was  unable  to
suggest what information or evidence was required from the Home Office.  She
also requested an adjournment in order for Ms Brown to attend  the  hearing,
but was unable to explain how Ms Brown's presence was relevant to the  issue
of error of law. She agreed, in the circumstances, that  she  was  ready  to
proceed with the appeal.

Having accepted that the grant of permission was made  on  the  basis  of  a
misunderstanding in relation to Ms Collins' evidence,  Ms  Taiwo  relied  on
the initial grounds and submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in
its assessment of the family life between the appellant  and  his  daughter.
She referred to various cards and letters sent to  the  appellant  from  his
daughter but when pressed on the issue accepted that that evidence had  only
been produced with the application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal and was not before the First-tier Tribunal. She submitted that  the
First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing to give due  weight  to  the
low risk of re-offending stated in the  OASys  report,  to  the  appellant's
efforts at rehabilitation, to the fact  that  he  had  spent  his  formative
years in the United Kingdom and to the impact of his removal on him and  his
family members. She submitted that if the Tribunal had given due  weight  to
those factors, it would have come to a different conclusion  on  Article  8.
Ms Taiwo submitted that an adjournment request should have been made to  the
Tribunal at the hearing to enable Ms Brown and Ms  Collins  to  attend,  but
she accepted that no such request had been made. She stated that  a  request
had been made prior to the  hearing,  but  when  referred  to  the  relevant
letter from Ajan Immigration Advisory Service dated 27  February  2014,  she
agreed that it did not refer to problems experienced  by  the  witnesses  in
attending on the given date and that it was no more than a  general  request
for more time to prepare the case.

Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
decision and that  the  allegation  of  misconduct  by  the  respondent  was
unfounded and was based on confusion. With  regard  to  the  other  grounds,
there was no error of law in the Tribunal not  adjourning  the  proceedings,
given that the representative had been specifically offered  an  opportunity
to make an adjournment request but indicated that  an  adjournment  was  not
required. The Tribunal had considered all relevant matters and was  entitled
to attach the weight that it did to  the  evidence,  in  particular  in  the
light of the adverse credibility findings which had not been challenged.

Ms Taiwo, in response, submitted that due weight had not been placed on  the
appellant's relationship with his daughter  and  that  it  would  have  been
better if Ms Brown and Ms Collins had been present at the hearing.

I advised the parties that, in my view, the Tribunal had made no  errors  of
law in its decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

As stated above, it is now quite clear that  the  grant  of  permission  was
made in the mistaken belief that paragraph 27 of  the  respondent's  refusal
decision and paragraph 54 of the  Tribunal's  determination  relied  upon  a
statement from Ms Collins of  which  she  was  arguably  unaware  and  whose
provenance was challenged, when in fact the evidence referred  to  in  those
paragraphs was an email from a social worker confirming the information  she
had been given by Ms Collins about the appellant's lack of contact with  his
daughter. In her letter  dated  3  June  2014  appended  to  the  additional
grounds of appeal, Ms Collins denied that she had provided such  information
and claimed that the evidence given in her previous handwritten  letters  to
the Home Office, confirming contact by telephone and cards, was in fact  the
true account. The Tribunal,  however,  in  its  findings  at  paragraph  54,
referred to Ms Collins' previous evidence  and  was  clearly  aware  of  the
inconsistencies between that and the evidence in the social worker's  email,
but decided to place weight upon the latter rather than the former  for  the
reasons set out in some detail at paragraphs 53 to 56 of the  determination.
The Tribunal was perfectly entitled to attach the  limited  weight  that  it
did  to  Ms  Collins'  evidence,  noting   that   there   had   been   other
inconsistencies in her evidence, that she had not attended  the  hearing  to
submit to cross-examination and to respond to queries and that  inconsistent
and inadequate reasons had been given for her absence.

Likewise, the Tribunal was entitled to attach the weight that it did to  the
social worker's email. The email had been produced by the respondent in  the
appeal bundle, at Annex P1, and as  stated  above,  it  is  clear  that  the
appellant's  representatives  had  been  in  possession  of   that   bundle,
containing the email, for a period  of  six  weeks  prior  to  the  hearing.
Accordingly, and for the reasons fully and properly given at  paragraphs  53
and 58 to 61, and on the  basis  of  the  unchallenged  adverse  credibility
findings made against the appellant and his mother and  in  particular  with
respect to the appellant's relationship with the mother of  his  child,  the
Tribunal was entitled to conclude  that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with his daughter.

Turning to the other grounds  of  appeal,  Ms  Taiwo  acknowledged  that  no
request was made to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  an  adjournment  of  the
hearing in order for Ms Brown and Ms Collins to attend and the  grounds  are
therefore misconceived in asserting that the Tribunal erred  by  failing  to
adjourn the proceedings. Indeed  it  is  clear  from  paragraph  44  of  the
determination  that  the  Tribunal  went  to  some  lengths  to   offer   an
opportunity to request an adjournment  but  the  appellant's  representative
indicated that none was required. Ms Taiwo appeared to rely upon a  previous
written request for an adjournment, made in the letter of 27 February  2014,
but it is clear from the contents of that letter that no reference was  made
to any witnesses or to problems in regard to attendance at the hearing.  The
request made in that letter was simply for additional preparation time,  but
as the Tribunal stated in refusing the request,  there  was  ample  time  to
prepare the case. In any event there  was  no  indication,  at  the  hearing
before the First-tier Tribunal, that Ms Brown or Ms Collins were  likely  to
attend a hearing on another date and the reasons given for their absence  at
that time were wholly inconsistent. The Tribunal was  accordingly  perfectly
entitled to proceed as it did with the  hearing  and  to  give  the  limited
weight that it did to the evidence from Ms Brown and Ms Collins.

The remaining grounds relied upon by Ms Taiwo are simply disagreements  with
the weight  the  Tribunal  attached  to  the  evidence.  The  Tribunal  gave
detailed and careful consideration to the appellant's  offending,  including
the risk he posed to the public, the seriousness  of  the  offence  and  the
risk of re-offending. Consideration was  specifically  given,  at  paragraph
97, to the indications in the OASys  report  as  to  the  low  risk  of  re-
offending.  The  Tribunal  also  gave  consideration  to  the  question   of
rehabilitation and considered the courses undertaken  by  the  appellant  in
prison. Those  were  all  factors  fully  and  properly  considered  by  the
Tribunal and the weight to  be  attached  to  them  was  a  matter  for  the
Tribunal. Likewise, the  weight  attached  to  the  appellant's  family  and
private life ties was a matter for the Tribunal and the conclusions  reached
in that regard  followed  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the  evidence,
including the family relationships in the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant's
length of residence in the United Kingdom, the age at which  he  first  came
to the United Kingdom and the family and other ties to South Africa.

Having taken account of  all  relevant  matters  and  having  made  cogently
reasoned findings of fact, the Tribunal was fully entitled to conclude  that
the appellant was unable to meet the requirements of paragraphs  399(a)  and
(b) and 399A of the immigration rules and that  there  were  no  exceptional
circumstances outweighing the public interest in his  deportation,  for  the
purposes of paragraph 398. The conclusion, that the appellant's  deportation
would not breach Article 8, was one that was entirely open to  the  Tribunal
on the evidence before it. The grounds of appeal do not disclose any  errors
of law in the Tribunal's decision.


DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed. The  making  of  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of  law,  such  that
the decision has to be set aside. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's deportation appeal therefore stands.


























                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
