
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00398/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                      |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Connolly, instructed by Harte, Coyle & Collins,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated on 17 May 2018 allowing
    the appeal of MP against the decision of the Secretary of State made on
    3 July 2017 to refuse his human rights claim.  It is I  think  sensible
    to set out some of the facts that gave rise to  this  case  given  that
    they are somewhat unusual.

 2. The respondent is  a  citizen  of  Lithuania  who  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, on his account, in 2010.  He has a  lengthy  criminal  history
    which, after a conviction resulting in his imprisonment, resulted in  a
    deportation order being made against him for  reasons  he  says  of  an
    inability to get legal aid.  He did not challenge that order and he was
    removed.  He requested voluntary return to Lithuania.  It appears  that
    he did in fact then travel from Northern Ireland to Dublin and flew  to
    Lithuania on his own account.   A  deportation  order  was  signed  and
    enforced on 8 June 2015.  At some point he then returned to the  United
    Kingdom and was arrested in 2017 for drug possession, was given a five-
    month concurrent sentence and was again in May 2017  served  notice  of
    removal as an illegal entrant.  He applied to  revoke  the  deportation
    order but that was rejected by the Secretary of State on the basis that
    this was a case to which Regulation 34(4) of the European Economic Area
    Regulations applied, in that the application could be made  only  after
    he had been removed from the United Kingdom.

 3. The applicant, and this does not now appear to be in dispute, is  in  a
    relationship with a joint British/Irish national, Ms  O  who  lives  in
    Armagh city.  They have a child and his partner also has a  child  from
    an earlier relationship.  The applicant's case  was  that  his  removal
    would be disproportionate in terms  of  Article  8,  particularly  with
    regard to the effect this would  have  on  his  relationship  with  his
    partner and with the two children.  The judge heard extensive  evidence
    from a number of witnesses including  the  appellant,  the  appellant's
    partner's father and also unusually in this  case,  extensive  evidence
    from the expert  witness  Professor  Iwaniec  who  was  cross-examined.
    Professor Iwaniec  is  an  emeritus  professor  at  Queens  University,
    Belfast, who  describes  herself  as  having  extensive  experience  in
    childcare and child protection work for over  forty  years.   She  gave
    extensive evidence  and  her  conclusions  as  to  the  worst  possible
    scenario is set out in the judgment at paragraph 45.

 4. It is clear that the expert witness, who did have  concerns  about  the
    appellant's criminal behaviour and the likelihood of his being able  to
    reform without help, and she also concluded that it was clearly in  the
    best interests of both children for the relationship with the father to
    be maintained.  The judge's findings are relatively brief, set  out  at
    paragraphs [49] to [51].

 5. In summary, he found that there is no evidence that the  appellant  had
    worked for a sustained period in Northern Ireland, that  little  weight
    must be attached in the claimed difficulties in challenging the  making
    of the deportation order and that he took into account the convictions.
     At [49] of his decision the judge said:

         "Against this  background,  both  the  appellant  and  Mr  [O](sic)
         restate what they have been advised about the pronouncements of the
         Courts;  that  their  daughter  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  their
         behaviour, frankly a statement best not coming from themselves.  It
         is an unprepossessing picture.  However, to dwell on these  issues,
         it seems is to allow the appellant's criminal history to intrude on
         the interests of the two children."

 6. The judge then went on to say that he did not attach much weight to the
    expert's evidence as to the optimism, as to the respondent's ability to
    reform, but was satisfied that she is an expert in child attachment and
    had clearly carried out a thorough and  thoughtful  investigation  into
    the family's background and circumstances, as evidenced by her  lengthy
    report, stating

         "I find myself having to give  weight  to  the  considerations  she
         believes are relevant to [the children's] best  interests  and  the
         fostering of the same. Accordingly I conclude that if the appellant
         is removed to Lithuania this will have  a  significant  detrimental
         effect upon the interests of the children to which the  authorities
         are bound to take into account as a primary  consideration  and  to
         both safeguard and promote.

         51.  The issues in this case are finely balance and I  respect  the
         caseworker's firmness of purpose but weighing all of the issues  in
         accordance with Razgar I conclude the appellant's removal would  be
         disproportionate against Article 8 rights of all the family members
         and therefore find myself having to allow this appeal."

 7. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision on  a  number  of
    grounds, one of which was not pursued before me.  In essence the  first
    point is that the judge carried out a freestanding Article 8 assessment
    without having had regard to the Immigration Rules of  Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act, that being a  duty  incumbent  on  him  by  operation  of
    Section 117A.

 8. It is also submitted, that whilst it is  generally  accepted  the  best
    interests of the children is  to  remain  in  contact  with  biological
    parents, it is also well-established that the deportation  context  far
    more has to be shown in essence that the effects of  deportation  would
    have unduly harsh consequences for the child or children and  that  any
    Article 8 assessment must take into account the  public  interest.   In
    this case the public interest, where a foreign national  has  committed
    crime repeatedly, it is averred that the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the criminality properly but there was no indication in in  the
    body of the determination that the judge has  given  due  consideration
    that all the family returning to Lithuania as an EEA state, or what the
    unduly harsh consequence of separation would be.  Finally,  that  there
    is no consideration of the public interest where the scales are heavily
    weighted in favour of deportation, instead relying on the  freestanding
    Article 8 assessment.

 9. For whatever reason the judge did not make reference to Section 117  of
    the 2002 Act.  It is incumbent on the judge to have done so, given  the
    terms of Section 117A of that act.  That of course is  not  necessarily
    fatal to the decision if it can be shown that he properly  applied  the
    relevant principles.

10. I note that in this case, as Ms  Connolly  submitted,  it  was  clearly
    accepted that this was a case to which the  Immigration  Rules  do  not
    apply, but that does not  absolve  the  judge  from  not  referring  to
    Section 117C.  There is also, I accept, a degree of unfortunate, to put
    it at its best, ambiguity in the Secretary of State's decision.  It  is
    not entirely clear whether the Secretary of State is stating  that  the
    applicant was a persistent offender and that thus Section 117C would be
    engaged.  There are indications that that was considered in the refusal
    letter given the references to paragraph 398(a), but while Section 117A
    requires the judge to take into certain matters, that does not  absolve
    him from looking at the public interest in the wider sense.

11. In this case, I have no doubt that the judge was right to  accept  that
    it was in the children's best interests to remain in the United Kingdom
    but there is no indication of any proper  balancing  exercise  in  this
    case of the best interests of the children with the public interest  in
    removing somebody who had, and there is no dispute about this,  entered
    the United Kingdom in flagrant breach of a deportation order.  There is
    simply no proper mention of the public interest in the decision at  all
    and I do not accept that it can be inferred that the  judge  took  that
    into account, still less can it be inferred what weight he attached  to
    that.  The judge's view of the appellant's offending is  also  unclear.
    That is something which he should have taken into account

12. I have been taken very helpfully through much  of  Professor  Iwaniec's
    report.  It concentrates on the  importance  of  children's  attachment
    behaviour, particularly in the early years, to  both  parents  and  the
    consequences that may flow from that.  But it does not specify anything
    particular which may or may not happen as a result of  that  attachment
    being broken, either by part of the family going to live in  Lithuania,
    although I accept that that could be difficult because  the  older  boy
    has a relationship with his father.  But again, that is  not  something
    which is addressed at all.  I bear in mind that this  is  after  all  a
    deportation appeal, in that there is  a  deportation  decision  in  the
    background.

13. I conclude within this case the judge has  simply  failed  properly  to
    address the weight to be attached to the public interest and has failed
    properly to explain why the best interests of the children outweigh the
    public interest in deportation.  The  reasoning  is  defective  because
    there is simply no statement made of what the judge considered on  each
    side of the balancing and why he considered one outweighed  the  other.
    To state that it is in the best  interests  of  the  children  for  the
    family to stay together  is  simply  not  adequate,  even  taking  into
    account the extensive evidence and report of Professor Iwaniec.

14. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it
    aside

15. Given that there will need to be an extensive new fact-finding exercise
    with respect to the , I conclude that it is appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  another  judge.  The
    Secretary of State needs to formulate his case properly and that  there
    needs to be clarity as to whether it  said  that  the  appellant  is  a
    persistent offender or not.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
    on all issues

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  respondent
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family. The  purpose  of
    this decision is to protect the  children  involved.    This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
