
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00873/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at                                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                             mr george montague
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Chris & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr t Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 20 August 1989.

2.   The respondent  on  11  April  2013  made  a  deportation  order.   The
    appellant seeks to appeal against  that  decision,  which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron  and  Mrs  J  Holt  (Non-Legal
    Member) on 2 September 2013.  In a  detailed  determination  the  panel
    considered  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  criminal   record
    together with his own personal situation and family circumstances.  The
    appeal was dismissed in all respects.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal made an error in not concluding that there
    were  exceptional  circumstances  which  made  the  activation  of  the
    deportation order disproportionate.  It was argued  that  the  Tribunal
    had failed to consider both the personal and private  circumstances  of
    the appellant and his family and the low risk of his offending.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the assessments at paragraphs 126  to  130  of  the  determination
    failed to apply Masih in the light of  the  findings  of  fact  by  the
    panel.

5.   Thus, the matter  comes  before  me  in  pursuance  of  that  grant  of
    permission.

6.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 June  1994  with  his
    mother and older sister and was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on
    arrival.  He had therefore been in the United Kingdom since  he  was  4
    years old and is now some 24 to 25  years  of  age,  having  spent  the
    majority of his life in the United Kingdom.  It is common  ground  that
    the appellant's main family grouping is in the United Kingdom and  that
    he has very little, if any contact with Jamaica.  He  himself  has  not
    been back to Jamaica since he first arrived in the United Kingdom.

7.   The appellant demonstrated  a  pattern  of  offending  as  a  juvenile,
    particularly with his involvement in drugs.  Indeed, he  was  sentenced
    in April 2008 at the Inner London Crown Court for a further offence  of
    possession of drugs, with intent to supply, and given twelve months  in
    a young offenders' institute.

8.    Those  matters  led  to   the   respondent   instituting   deportation
    proceedings  against  him.   That  led  to  an  appeal  hearing  before
    Immigration Judge Freestone and Mr Richardson JP (Non-Legal Member)  on
    15 July 2008.

9.   The Tribunal on that occasion considered  the  applicant's  history  of
    offending against his personal  circumstances  and  private  life.   It
    stated in particular at paragraph 33 of that determination that at  the
    time of that hearing the applicant was 19 years old, having been in the
    United Kingdom for fourteen years.  His lack of connection with Jamaica
    was also noted.  It was considered, therefore, by the Tribunal on  that
    occasion that his personal circumstances outweighed the presumption  of
    his deportation.  Thus, the  court  was  satisfied  that  that  was  an
    exceptional case such as to allow the appeal.

10.  Unfortunately that was not the end of the matter because the  appellant
    then went on to re-offend notwithstanding the  warning  that  had  been
    given  to  him  and  he  committed  further   offences,   including   a
    particularly  serious  robbery  for  which  he  received   64   months'
    imprisonment.  This was  the  offence  which  triggered  the  automatic
    deportation provisions under statute and brings him before the Tribunal
    once again.

11.  Mr Muquit, who represents the appellant, invited my  attention  to  his
    detailed skeleton argument.  He relied particularly on MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.   He  submitted  that  even  within  the
    Immigration Rules there was a two-stage process,  namely  to  determine
    firstly whether or not the appellant's offending behaviour was such  as
    to bring him within the deportation provisions.  It is  also  important
    however  to  move  to  a  second  stage  namely   to   consider   other
    circumstances specific to the appellant and to his family which may  be
    so  compelling  as  to  amount  to  exceptional  circumstances  not  to
    implement the deportation.

12.  He seeks to contend that the legislation has  made  it  entirely  clear
    that the public interest in deportation  may  be  outweighed  by  other
    factors and that they should be considered as having importance in  the
    overall assessment of proportionality.

13.  He submits that in this particular case there  are  many  such  factors
    that can be held to the favour of the appellant, not least the findings
    of Judge Freestone that there were exceptional circumstances to prevent
    deportation.  Since that time there is the closer family group  of  the
    appellant  as  evidenced  by  various  members  of  his  family  giving
    evidence.  He has spent most of his time in the United Kingdom and  has
    no  contact  with  Jamaica.   He  has  been  addressing  his  offending
    behaviour and there are good reports as  to  his  response  to  various
    initiatives in custody.

14.   He  submits  that  although  the  appellant's   offending   behaviour,
    establishes under the statute the general proposition that  the  public
    interest in his deportation will be satisfied, that is predicated  upon
    the basis that there are no other compelling circumstances which  would
    make that disproportionate.  Mr Muquit seeks to argue that  the  judge,
    in considering those factors, has failed to  recognise  that  they  are
    factors capable of being compelling in their  own  right.   He  submits
    that what the Tribunal did in the assessment of the matter was to allow
    an overlap between the offending and the personal  circumstances.   The
    panel  did  not  give  full  consideration  to  the  personal   private
    circumstances of the appellant nor to remind itself that  such  matters
    in their own right may  be  compelling  enough  so  as  to  defeat  the
    operation of the statute.

15.  Mr Wilding, on behalf of the respondent, also invited my  attention  to
    two authorities, the first being that of SS  (Nigeria)  v  SHHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550This is a helpful  case  when  considering  the  importance
    attached to the deportation of foreign criminals by the legislature  as
    reflecting a public interest.  The operation of the statute and  indeed
    of the Immigration Rules are not such as to deprive an individual  from
    all remedy.  The considerations in relation to Article 8 remain  as  to
    the balance  between  public  interest  and  the  private  rights,  the
    legislation indicating to  the  decision-maker  where  the  legislature
    considers that the balance should lie.

16.  Set out in paragraph 46 of that decision:

         "Thus while the authorities demonstrate that there is  no  rule  of
         exceptionality; they also clearly show that the more  pressing  the
         public interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the
         claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail.  This antithesis, in  my
         judgment, catches  in  the  present  context  the  essence  of  the
         proportionality test required by Article 8(2)."

17.  Mr Wilding drew my attention to the summary at  paragraph  47  of  that
    judgment and also paragraph 55.

18.  He also draws my attention to MF (Nigeria), in particular to  paragraph
    8 thereof, which sets out the details of paragraphs 398 and 399 of  the
    Immigration Rules.

19.  Particularly he relies upon  the  wording  of  paragraph  398(c)  which
    provides:-

         "(c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law, the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by  other
             factors."

20.  Mr Wilding reminds me that the appellant was convicted  of  an  offence
    which carried imprisonment of more than four years.   He  asked  me  to
    find  that  what   were   exceptional   circumstances   or   compelling
    circumstances should  be considered looking at the matter as a whole.

21.  He invited my attention to paragraph 14 of  MF,  which  indicated  that
    "exceptional means circumstances in which deportation would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  or  their  family
    such that deportation would not be proportionate".  That would be  only
    rarely he submits.

22.  My attention was also drawn to the comments the  Tribunal  set  out  in
    paragraph 38 which reads as follows:-

         "38.  The  first  point  to  make  is  that  para   398   expressly
             contemplates a weighing of 'other factors' against the  public
             interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  It has long
             been recognised by the  ECtHR  that  states  are  entitled  to
             decide that there is generally a compelling public interest in
             deporting foreign criminals.  Article 8 requires  a  decision-
             maker to weigh the factors which  favour  deportation  against
             those which do not.  This is inherent in  the  proportionality
             test that,  according  to  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,  is
             demanded by Article 8.  The central question  is  whether  the
             use the phrase  'exceptional  circumstances'  means  that  the
             weighing exercise contemplated by  the  new  Rules  is  to  be
             carried out compatibly with the Convention."


23.  Mr Wilding submits that it is  not  a  requirement  that  the  Tribunal
    separate private and family considerations from  other  considerations.
    What is needed is to consider all factors in favour and not  in  favour
    of the appellant to decide where in the nature of  proportionality  the
    balance is to be struck.  In this connection my attention was drawn  to
    paragraph 50 of MF which says as follows:-

         "50. Although we have disagreed with the UT on the question whether
             the new Rules provide a complete code, the differences between
             our approach and theirs is one  of  form  and  not  substance.
             They conducted a meticulous assessment of the factors weighing
             in favour of deportation and those weighing against.  As  they
             said, the factors in favour of deportation  were  substantial.
             They gave sufficient weight to the serious view taken  by  the
             Secretary  of  State  of  MF's  criminality   and   his   poor
             immigration  history.   On  the  other  hand,  they   attached
             considerable importance to the interests of F.   The  decision
             was finely balanced and a contrary decision  would  have  been
             difficult for the appellant to challenge.  But  they  did  not
             take into account any irrelevant factors and they did not fail
             to  take  into  account  any  relevant  factors.    In   these
             circumstances, the UT were entitled to strike the  balance  in
             favour of MF.  We can find no basis for interfering with their
             decision."

24.  Mr Wilding invited me to find that, contrary to  the  contentions  made
    on behalf of the appellant, the determination of  the  Tribunal  was  a
    very thorough and careful one looking  at  all  factors  both  for  and
    against the appellant.

25.  The Tribunal looked at the nature of the appellant's offending  and  to
    the extent to which a repetition of  that  offending  was  or  was  not
    likely.  It considered the various reports that had  been  prepared  on
    the appellant from those in custody.  It considered particularly how he
    had responded to supervision.  It considered the review plan and  other
    relevant comments that were made by those assessing  the  appellant  to
    determine his likely future behaviour.  An up-to-date NOMS Report dated
    March 2013 was also considered in addition to the OASys Report.

26.  The Tribunal noted the determination of  Judge  Freestone  and  of  the
    lifestyle of the appellant as was set out in  that  determination.   It
    recognised at paragraph 103 in particular that the appellant  had  come
    to the UK when he was 4  and  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  It also recognised that the appellant did not have  any  close
    relatives in Jamaica and had no connection with that country.  It noted
    the findings of Judge Freestone.

27.  At paragraph 11 the issue as  to  whether  or  not  the  appellant  has
    matured since 2008 was considered,  particularly  in  relation  to  his
    potential drug-taking.

28.  It is to  be  noted  however  that  the  judgment  of  Judge  Freestone
    predated the index offence for which the appellant  faces  deportation.
    The Tribunal looked at the appellant's family  and  private  life.   It
    recognised that  the  appellant's  removal  would  interfere  with  his
    private life and relationship with family and  friends.   At  paragraph
    129 the Tribunal yet again reminded itself of  the  fact  that  he  had
    spent most of his life in the United Kingdom and had little  ties  with
    Jamaica.

29.  Mr Wilding submits that following  the  decision  in  MF  the  Tribunal
    looked at all relevant factors and came to the  conclusions  they  were
    entitled to that there was nothing compelling to overturn  deportation.



30.  It is to be noted that in the submissions made there is heavy  reliance
    by  the appellant upon the decision  in  Masih  (deportation  -  public
    interest - basic principles - Pakistan) [2012] UKUT  46.   Reliance  is
    placed particularly upon the headnote (f)  in considering the  relevant
    factors on "private and family life"  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention, "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or
    the major part of his or her childhood and youth in this country,  very
    serious reasons are required to justify expulsion".

31.  Mr Muquit in reply relied heavily upon the findings of Judge  Freestone
    that there were compelling reasons why  the  appellant  should  not  be
    deported in 2008.  He submits that  those  reasons  continue  and  that
    accordingly a number of  matters  should  have  been  afforded  greater
    weight in the proportionality exercise as conducted  by  the  Tribunal.
    Failure to give adequate consideration to such powerful and  compelling
    factors was, he submits an error of law in the circumstances.


32.  It is to be noted  that in its determination   the  Tribunal  sets  out
    the relevant case law to this matter.  That includes the case of Maslov
    v Austria ECHR 23 June 2008 and Masih (deportation - public interest  -
    basic principles - Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC).

33.  Maslov sets out a number of factors which should be considered  in  any
    proportionality assessment.  Those factors include:-

    -    the nature and seriousness of the offence;

    -    the length of the appellant's stay in the country;

    -     the  time  elapsed  since  the  offence  was  committed  and  the
         appellant's conduct during that period;

    -    the appellant's family situation;

    -    the solidarity of social, cultural and family ties with  the  host
         country and with the country of destination.

34.  It is clear that when  the  appellant  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Freestone and Mr Richardson on 15  July  2008  the  Tribunal  had  such
    matters very much in mind.  Generally speaking most  of  the  offending
    behaviour had been committed by the appellant as a juvenile.  After his
    arrest in October 2007 there had been no further offending for the  six
    months that he had remained on bail.  He was assessed at that  time  as
    representing a medium risk to the public and community.  The  appellant
    was 19 years of age and had been in the United Kingdom with his  family
    for most of his life  were  matters  which  weighed  heavily  with  the
    Tribunal resulting in his appeal being allowed.

35.  That having been said ,however, matters then moved on.   The  appellant
    failed to heed the chance that had been provided to him and went on  to
    offend in an even more serious manner.  Maslov itself was more  focused
    towards offending as a juvenile whereas for the target offence of  this
    matter the appellant was an adult.  The serious nature of the offending
    is considered by the Tribunal and indeed the judgment of the sentencing
    judge is set out in paragraph 82 of the determination.   The  appellant
    used a weapon in an aggravating situation, namely that he had  attacked
    the victim with more intensive purposes in his own home.

36.  It seems to me therefore that although the decision of Judge  Freestone
    is a  starting  position  and  properly  so  under  the  provisions  of
    Devaseelan, the findings made by that judge do not bind any  subsequent
    Tribunal.  Matters had moved on both in terms of  the  appellant's  age
    and also his offending.  Robbery is a particularly serious  offence  as
    was reflected by the length of sentence.

37.  Although the element of risk is clearly a relevant factor to  be  borne
    in mind, it  was  the  finding  of  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant
    continued to present some risk to society.  In many ways that  analysis
    has been overtaken by the provisions of  the  statutory  framework.  By
    virtue of paragraph 398(a) the deportation of persons from  the  United
    Kingdom is deemed conducive to the public  good  when  they  have  been
    convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment of at least four years.

38.  The stronger the factors in support  of  the  public  interest  so  the
    stronger needs to be the countervailing factors, said to be  compelling
    factors making deportation disproportionate.

39.  It is clear from the determination, and I so find,  that  the  Tribunal
    bore in mind all those factors which  were  to  the  advantage  of  the
    appellant, in particular his longstanding connection  with  the  United
    Kingdom, his family contacts in the United Kingdom and the lack of ties
    in Jamaica.  It seems to me that fundamental to the submissions made on
    behalf of the appellant by Mr Muquit is the suggestion that  inadequate
    weight was given by the Tribunal to such factors.

40.  Time had, however, moved on from  2008  to  2013.   The  appellant  was
    older and seemingly had not modified his criminal behaviour.  It  would
    seem his criminality had worsened rather than improved.

41.  The case of Masih is relied upon.  It seems to me that that is  a  case
    which sets out the general principles rather than being  compelling  in
    its facts in favour of the appellant.  It sets out that for  a  settled
    migrant, who has lawfully spent all or the major part of  his  life  in
    the United Kingdom,  very  serious  reasons  are  required  to  justify
    expulsion  More so when the person  concerned  committed  the  relevant
    offences as a juvenile.

42.  In this case the appellant was not a juvenile  when  he  committed  the
    offences. The was indeed a  serious  offence  in  commonsense  and  one
    deemed so by the legislature.

43.  A number of factors are helpfully set out in Masih which  are  relevant
    to proportionality.

    (a)  in the case of automatic deportation full account must be taken of
         the strong public interest in removing foreign  citizens  convicted
         of serious offences which  lies  not  only  in  the  prevention  of
         further offences on the part of the individual  concerned,  but  in
         deterring others from committing them in the first place.

         It is clear that the Tribunal bore those matters in mind.

    (b)  Deportation of foreign criminals expresses society's  condemnation
         of serious criminal activity and promotes public confidence in  the
         treatment of foreign citizens who have committed them.

    (c)  The starting point for assessing the facts of the offence of which
         an individual has been committed and their effect on others and  on
         the public as a whole, must be the view  taken  by  the  sentencing
         judge.  It is clear that the Tribunal focused upon that  matter  in
         its determination.

    (d)  The appeal has to be dealt with on the basis of the  situation  at
         the date of the hearing.  The Tribunal in this case heard from  the
         family members of the appellant and the appellant himself.

    (e)  Full account should also be  taken  of  any  developments  in  the
         sentence as passed, for examples the  result  of  any  disciplinary
         adjudications in prison or detention,  or  any  OASys  or  licensed
         report.  The Tribunal dealt at length with the various reports that
         had been prepared.

    (f)  In considering the relevant facts on  "private  and  family  life"
         under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  for  a
         settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part of his
         childhood and youth in (this)  country  very  serious  reasons  are
         required to justify expulsion.

44.  It is clear to me that in the assessment of  the  matter  the  Tribunal
    has carefully considered  all  that  can  be  said  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and balanced that with the nature of his  offending  and  the
    risk which he poses to society.  Significantly  at  paragraph  129  the
    Tribunal notes that the appellant was aware from the  previous  hearing
    and the warning that he had been given ,that if he re-offended  he  was
    at risk of being removed.  He was an appellant who was given one chance
    and who nevertheless proceeded to offend in a very serious way  indeed.



45.  Mr Muquit submits that the Tribunal erred in not paying greater  regard
    to the interests of the appellant's family as well as to the  appellant
    himself.  I note however that the evidence of Mr Cardavan Serinash, the
    appellant's brother, was set out in detail as was the evidence from his
    mother, Georgia Montague.  His sister,  Virginia  Montague,  also  gave
    evidence.  It was recognised by the Tribunal at paragraph 66  that  the
    family have been supportive of the appellant.  It  noted  in  paragraph
    102 that there were no more than  normal  emotional  ties  between  the
    appellant's mother  and  her  sibling.   Again  that  was  repeated  at
    paragraph 117.  He accepted that there was substantial private life  in
    the United Kingdom at paragraph 118.

46.  It is difficult, without more, to see  what  further  could  have  been
    considered in relation to the applicant's private and  family  life  as
    set out by his mother and siblings.  They spoke as  to  his  increasing
    maturity and the  issue of the appellant's drug-taking  was  considered
    particularly in paragraph 111.

47.  The offence for which the appellant was convicted  was  a  particularly
    violent and nasty offence as indicated by the length of  sentence.   It
    is clearly of importance for the  public  to  be  protected  from  such
    behaviour as indeed is reflected in the legislation.  He had  the  help
    of his family after the previous hearing but had not heeded the advice.
     The Tribunal were not persuaded that the appellant was not at least  a
    moderate or low risk to the public of re-offending.  The appellant  had
    been given opportunities to reform his behaviour and to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He had not chosen to do so.

48.  In the circumstances I can see no reason why  the  conclusion  that  it
    was proportionate to expect him to  return  to  Jamaica,  albeit  to  a
    country that he had a connection with, was  proportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances.  That was a finding properly open to the  Tribunal,  the
    Tribunal having properly considered as I  so  find,  all  factors  that
    could be  weighed  both  for  and  against  the  appellant.   That  was
    precisely the way in which it should come to its conclusion.

49.  I find the findings were therefore properly open to the  Tribunal.   No
    error of law is disclosed.

50.   In  the  circumstances  the  appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.   The
    findings of the Tribunal shall stand, namely that the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules is dismissed, the appeal against the  making  of  the
    deportation order is dismissed and that in relation to Article 8 of the
    ECHR is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
