

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA /00013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2015                            |On 10 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                  Between:

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |SOA                                               |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)                       |             |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. F. Allen, of Counsel, instructed by Barnes
Harrild & Dyer Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M  J  Gillespie  who,
    following a hearing on 9 October 2014, allowed the  appeal  of  SOA  (a
    national of Ghana born in February 1987)  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 20 December 2013 that SOA was liable to automatic
    deportation. The judge allowed the appeal on the ground that  SOA  came
    within exception 3 from automatic deportation under s.33  of  the  U.K.
    Borders Act 2007 (the "2007 ACT"), i.e. that his deportation  would  be
    in breach of  Article  8  of  the  1950  European  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 2. I shall hereafter refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT), the Secretary of State as the respondent  and  SOA
    as the appellant.




    The appellant's criminal convictions

 3. The appellant claimed to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    infant, in about 1988. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on  19
    January 1998. His application in January 2005 for  British  nationality
    was refused because he had received a  caution  for  shoplifting  as  a
    minor, in 2000. His second application  for  naturalisation  (in  April
    2008) was also refused. By this time,  he  had  been  convicted  of  an
    offence  of  driving  whilst  disqualified,  using  a  vehicle   whilst
    uninsured and failing to give his name and address. He was sentenced to
    unpaid work.

 4. On 14 September 2010, the  appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  offences  of
    possession with intent to supply a quantity  of  cocaine  and  cannabis
    (together valued at about �2,000) and of  possession  of  a  prohibited
    weapon (a canister of CS gas). The offences of September 2010 triggered
    deportation action. On 2 November 2010, he was sentenced  to  3  years'
    imprisonment. On 12 January 2012, when he was due to be  released  from
    his sentence of imprisonment on licence, the appellant was  taken  into
    immigration detention and served with documents informing  him  of  his
    liability to an order of automatic deportation. On 21 May 2012, he  was
    admitted to bail by a judge of the FtT.

    The respondent's grounds and submissions at the hearing

 5. The respondent's grounds contend (in summary) as follows:

    i)     The judge misdirected himself in law, in that, he commenced  his
         consideration of the appellant's Article  8  claim  by  considering
         s.117 of Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 (the "2002 Act") as opposed  to  the  requirements  under  the
         relevant provisions of the Statement of Changes in the  Immigration
         Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the "IRs").

    ii)    In reaching his finding that there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the appellant's integration into Ghana, the judge  had
         taken into account the fact that the appellant does not  speak  any
         indigenous language of Ghana but he failed to take into account the
         fact that he speaks  English  and  that  English  is  the  official
         language of Ghana.

    iii)   The  grounds  contend  that,  as  the  appellant's  family  were
         originally from Ghana, it was reasonable to assume  that  he  would
         have some familiarity with social and cultural customs in Ghana  by
         virtue of his upbringing within a Ghanaian family; that he would be
         able to seek emotional and financial  assistance  from  his  family
         members in the United Kingdom with integration; and that  it  would
         be open to family members to accompany him, in an interim  capacity
         or more permanently if they chose to do  so,  to  assist  with  his
         integration.

    iv)    The judge erred in finding that s.117C(5) of the  2002  Act  was
         satisfied. In reaching his finding that it would  be  unduly  harsh
         for Ms SF (the appellant's  partner)  and  their  daughter,  S,  to
         remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant, the judge  took
         into account that it would not be in the best interests of S to  be
         without her father and that Ms SF needed the emotional  support  of
         the appellant. The grounds contend that these  considerations  were
         not sufficient to establish undue harshness. The judge  had  failed
         to balance the  best  interests  of  S  against  the  wider  public
         interest. The grounds make reference to AR (Pakistan) v SSHD [2010]
         EWCA Civ 816 at [18] and Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 at [27]  to
         the effect that it would be contrary  to  principle  if  a  child's
         interests  must  always  take  precedence  over  the  wider  public
         interest where the two are in conflict and that deportation can  be
         proportionate even if it brings about the permanent  separation  of
         families.

 6. The respondent's grounds did not raise the issue  that  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong version of the IRs. Ms Allen, who appeared before the
    judge on the appellant's behalf, did not raise any  objection  to  this
    issue which I raised at the commencement of the hearing.

 7. Mr Tufan said that it was not clear whether the judge  had  before  him
    the  respondent's  guidance  in  a  document   entitled:   "Immigration
    directorate instructions Chapter 13: criminality guidance in Article  8
    ECHR cases" version 5.0 dated 28 July 2014 (hereafter the  "Guidance").
    In fact, I noted from  the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  that  the
    submissions of Ms Allen before the judge referred to the  "IDIs"  (page
    12 at letter E) and, in particular, the  20-year  continuous  residence
    requirement and the "no ties" stipulation. It follows therefore that Ms
    Allen in her submissions before the judge relied on the 2012 IRs.

 8. However, it is also clear from the judge's Record of  Proceedings  that
    the respondent's representative (Mr Archie) clearly had the  provisions
    of para 399 of the 2014 IRs in mind. This  is  because  the  Record  of
    Proceedings shows that he referred in his submissions to  para  399  in
    the following terms (and I quote) (page 12, letter B):

         ".. 399 reflects 117C"

 9. Given that para 399 of the 2012 IRs cannot possibly be said to  reflect
    s.117C, Mr. Archie must have been referring to the 2014 IRs.

10. The judge did not apparently  realise  that  the  representatives  were
    addressing him on different versions of paras 398, 399 and  399A.  This
    would account for the fact that he considered the version  of  the  IRs
    under the 2012 IRs not realising that he was focusing on the  incorrect
    provisions.

11. Ms Allen accepted that the judge had applied the wrong version  of  the
    IRs. He should have applied the version  as  amended  by  HC  352  with
    effect from 28 July 2014 (which I shall hereafter refer as to the "2014
    IRs"). He applied instead the version of the  IRs  that  was  in  force
    immediately before 28 July 2014 (which I shall hereafter  refer  to  as
    the "2012 IRs").

12. The relevant provisions of the 2012 IRs and the 2014 IRs are set out in
    Annex A hereto in a form which makes it easy  to  see  the  differences
    between them. It will be obvious that paras 398, 399 and  399A  of  the
    2014 IRs are more difficult for an individual  to  satisfy  than  paras
    398, 399 and 399A of the 2012 IRs.

13. The judge therefore misdirected himself  by  incorrectly  applying  the
    less stringent requirements under paras 399(a), 399(b) and 399A of  the
    2012 IRs when he considered the appellant's Article 8  claim  based  on
    his relationships with Ms SF and S as well as his Article 8 claim based
    on his length of residence and ties,  as  explained  at  [24]  to  [32]
    below.

14. By applying the 2012 IRs, the judge found that there  were  disparities
    between the provisions of the IRs and s.117A-D.  He  said  he  resolved
    these disparities in favour of s.117 as it was primary legislation.  In
    fact, no such disparities existed between the  relevant  provisions  in
    the 2014 IRs and s.117.

15. The judge also considered s.117C(4). At [27-28] of  the  determination,
    he found that:

    i)     the appellant had been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom
    for most of his life;

    ii)    he was socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom;
    and

    iii)   there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
    into Ghana;

    and that he therefore satisfied s.117C(4) and fell within  Exception  1
    under s.117C(3).

16. Since  the  appellant  only  needs  to  succeed  under  one  applicable
    exception and given that Exception 1 under s.117C(3) is mirrored in the
    version of para 399A of the 2014 IRs, the parties addressed me  on  the
    question whether the errors explained in outline at [13] above  and  in
    more detail at [24] to [32] below were material.

17. In oral submissions, Mr  Tufan  raised  an  issue  to  which  Ms  Allen
    objected because it was not raised  in  the  respondent's  grounds.  Mr
    Tufan took issue with the fact that the judge had stated at [18] of the
    determination that the only factual issue concerned  the  date  of  the
    appellant's entry into the United Kingdom. He also submitted  that  the
    judge had not given  any  reasons  at  all  for  his  findings  in  the
    appellant's favour. He had accepted all of  the  evidence  before  him,
    including the evidence that the appellant has no ties in Ghana, without
    giving any reasons.

18. Mr Tufan also raised the following issues, to which Ms  Allen  did  not
    raise any objection:

    i)     Mr Tufan took issue with the fact that the judge had  stated  at
         [20] of the  determination  that  the  respondent's  representative
         before the judge, Mr Archie, had suggested that there  was  no  DNA
         evidence that the appellant was the father of S but had  said  that
         he preferred to take the appellant's case at its highest. Mr  Tufan
         informed me that Mr Archie's notes of the hearing  showed  that  he
         had pointed out that there was no DNA evidence and  that,  even  if
         the appellant's claim that he was the father of S was taken at  its
         highest, his Article 8 claim based on this relationship  could  not
         succeed. Mr Tufan submitted that this did not accord with  para  20
         of the determination.

    ii)    Mr Tufan submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  the
         Guidance. He referred me, in particular, to para 2.3.8 which states
         that, for the purposes of s.117B(4), a person's immigration  status
         is precarious if he is in the United Kingdom with limited leave but
         without settled or permanent status or if  he  has  obtained  leave
         fraudulently or if he has  been  notified  that  he  is  liable  to
         deportation or administrative removal. He submitted that this was a
         relevant consideration because the appellant's relationship with Ms
         SF began after the appellant had been served with papers  notifying
         him of his liability to automatic deportation. He also referred  me
         to the non-exhaustive list of factors set out at para 3.3.2  to  be
         considered in assessing whether a foreign criminal  has  a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with  a  child.   He  drew  my
         attention to the fact that the list included the following  factors
         which he submitted the judge had failed to consider:

             "(  where the foreign criminal lives in relation to the child;

             (   whether any evidence has been provided in support  of  the
             claimed parental relationship, e.g. views of the child,  other
             family   members,   social   workers   or    other    relevant
             professionals;

             (   the extent to which the foreign criminal makes  an  active
             contribution to the child's life - this may include financial,
             emotional and other forms of support  to  ensure  the  child's
             wellbeing."

    Summary  of  the  evidence  before  the  judge   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances

19. The basis of the appellant's Article 8 claim before the  judge  may  be
    summarised as follows:

20. Following his release on immigration bail on 21 May 2012, the appellant
    met Ms SF in August 2013. In about December 2013, she  became  pregnant
    by the appellant, and gave birth to S in about mid-August 2014.  Ms  SF
    and the appellant do not see each other every day; the  appellant  sees
    her and  the  child  every  other  day.  Ms  SF  has  her  own  council
    accommodation. The evidence before the judge was that the couple  hoped
    to settle together in their own home and live together  permanently  as
    husband and wife.

21. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant had  grown  up  in
    the United Kingdom and studied in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  had  also
    worked in the United Kingdom. His  mother  and  various  siblings  were
    British nationals. He had two brothers (R and G) and  one  half-brother
    (St) in the United Kingdom. The appellant's father left the family when
    the appellant was a child. He has not been seen or heard of  since  the
    appellant was a baby. The appellant had a  sister,  Sh,  in  Ghana  who
    married in July 2014 and subsequently settled with her husband  in  the
    United States of America. The appellant therefore has no family members
    left in Ghana. The appellant has no ties to Ghana.

22. The appellant has left the United Kingdom twice  since  his  arrival  -
    once to travel to France on holiday in June 1998 and once to travel  to
    Ghana with his mother for three weeks in 2002. His mother travelled  to
    Ghana in July 2014 to attend his sister's wedding and in September 2014
    to attend the funeral of her maternal aunt by whom she had been  raised
    and whom she referred to as mother. His brother, R,  has  travelled  to
    Ghana three times since his arrival, his last journey being  to  attend
    the wedding of his sister, Sh.  His brother, G, has never  returned  to
    Ghana. His half-brother (St) visited Ghana once when he was  ten  years
    old.

    Assessment

23. The judge found that the appellant satisfied the  following  provisions
    of  the  2012  IRs  for  the  reasons  explained  below.  However,   he
    misdirected himself in the ways I shall now describe  for  the  reasons
    given below. It is  plain  that  these  errors  were  material  to  his
    findings that the appellant satisfied the relevant requirements on  the
    basis of his relationships with S and Ms SF. Accordingly, I do not need
    to rely upon the argument summarised at my [18.i] above  and  the  non-
    exhaustive list of factors in para 3.3.2 of the Guidance to  which  Mr.
    Tufan drew my attention.

    As to the Article 8 claim based on the  appellant's  relationship  with
    the child, S:

24. The judge found ([31] of the determination) that  para  399(a)  of  the
    2012 IRs was satisfied because S was a British citizen and it would not
    be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom. He  also  said
    that the requirement in para  399(a)(b)  of  the  2012  IRs  (not  para
    398(a)(i)(b) as stated by the judge) - that "there was no other  family
    member who is able to care of the child  in the UK"  - was not repeated
    in s.117D. He therefore effectively disapplied para 399(a)(b).

25. I cannot see why the judge referred to s.117D at this juncture  in  his
    determination.  I  can  only  surmise  that  he  was  considering   the
    definition of a "qualifying  child"  under  s.117D  together  with  the
    provision in S.117B(6). This is the only provision in  ss.117A-D  which
    refers to the requirement of it not being reasonable to expect a  child
    to leave the UK, which was one of the requirements in paragraph  399(a)
    that the judge was considering. This is the only way of making sense of
    his observation at [31] that the provision in rule 399(a)(i)(b) -  that
    ""there was no other family member who is able to care of the child  in
    the UK"  - is not repeated in s.117D. If am right, that the  judge  had
    in mind a combination of s.117B(6) and  the  definition  of  qualifying
    child in s.117D, he plainly erred in relation to both. This is  because
    the opening words of s.117B(6) make it clear that it does not apply  to
    a  person  liable  to  deportation  and  because  s.117D  is  only   an
    interpretation section and therefore it does not provide a  stand-alone
    basis of qualification for an exception to automatic deportation.

26. In any event, even leaving this point aside, it is plain that the judge
    erred in finding that the appellant satisfied para 399(a) simply on the
    basis of his finding that it would be not reasonable  to  expect  S  to
    leave the United Kingdom. The version of para 399(a) under the 2014 IRs
    replaced this test of reasonableness with a requirement  that  was  not
    only more stringent (i.e. whether "unduly harsh") but two-fold  because
    it required consideration of  this  issue  from  two  angles.  The  new
    version of para 399(a) requires it to be shown that:


         "(a)     it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is to be deported]; and
         (b)      it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is to be deported".

27. The judge did consider whether deportation would be unduly harsh  on  S
    (as well as Ms SF) at [30] of his determination, which reads:

         "30.     I address the  issue  whether  the  effect  on  these  two
             persons of the appellant's deportation would be unduly  harsh.
             Although the child is in  the  care  of  a  person  who  is  a
             committed mother, her mother is herself a young person  of  19
             years, who enjoys a subsisting and genuine  relationship  with
             the appellant, and who enjoys his ongoing financial and  other
             support in the care of their child. She  seeks  to  raise  her
             child in co-operation  with  the  appellant  and  looks  to  a
             settled married life with him. In  addressing  this  issue,  I
             attach weight to the public interest in deportation  expressed
             by the Act, and to the increased public interest in this case,
             because of the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence.  As
             against that, I bear in mind the  favourable  finding  already
             made for the appellant in connection with the public  interest
             considerations under section 117B. I attach weight also to the
             circumstance, which I hold to be proven, that the appellant is
             a reformed person who  poses  no  ongoing  threat  of  further
             offending or  of  other  harm  to  the  public.  I  recognise,
             finally, the circumstance  that  the  appellant,  having  been
             sentenced to less than four years imprisonment, does not  fall
             foul of the provision 117C(6) which enacts that  in  cases  of
             sentences exceeding four years, the public  interest  requires
             deportation unless there  are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those enacted in the exceptions. In all of  the
             circumstances,  I  consider  that  the  deportation   of   the
             appellant would deprive [Ms SF] of the necessary  support  and
             companionship of the appellant and would leave  her  to  raise
             their child on her own, without his contribution and  support.
             It would leave the  child  without  a  committed  father.  The
             deportation would in [sic] circumstances have an  effect  that
             is undesirable and unduly harsh on mother and child and not in
             the best interests of the child."

28. It is plain from [30] of the determination that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether it would be unduly harsh for S to live in  Ghana  with
    the appellant. In itself, this error is material to his  findings  that
    para 399(a) was satisfied. It  is  also  plain,  as  contended  in  the
    grounds, that the judge effectively treated the best interests  of  the
    child as determinative. This last point is in itself an error that  was
    material to the judge's finding  that  para  399(a)  was  satisfied.  I
    therefore do not need to rely upon the argument summarised at my [18.i]
    and whether the judge should have considered the non-exhaustive list of
    factors set out at para 3.3.2 of the Guidance.

    As to the Article 8 claim based on the appellant's relationship with Ms
    SF:

29. The judge found ([31] of the  determination)  that  appellant  did  not
    satisfy para 399(b) because he had only  accrued  13  years'  residence
    with valid  leave.  However,  he  relied  upon  his  finding  that  the
    appellant satisfied s.117C(5), which provides:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

30. The judge decided that,  as  the  appellant  satisfied  s.117C(5),  his
    deportation was not in the public interest whether or not paras  399(a)
    and (b) were satisfied. This was  because  he  considered  that,  where
    there is a conflict between the IRs and ss.117A-D, the latter should be
    preferred because it is primary legislation.

31. However, there was no conflict between the IRs and s.117C  because  the
    version of para 399 (b) under the 2014 IRs sets out (in effect) how the
    phrase "unduly harsh" under s.117C(5) falls to be assessed. As  in  the
    case of para 399(a) of the 2014  IRs,  para  399(b)  of  the  2014  IRs
    provides for a two-fold test. However, in the case of  a  partner,  the
    test was more stringent still. Para 399(b) of the 2014 IRs provides

         "(b)     the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British  citizen,  or
             settled in the UK and


             (i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious;  and
             (ii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported  because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM;  and
             (iii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported."

32. The provisions of EX.2 are set out in Annex B hereto. It is plain  from
    [30] of the determination that the judge failed to consider whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for Ms SF to live in Ghana because of  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in para EX.2  of  Appendix
    FM. In itself, this error is material to his findings that para  399(b)
    was satisfied. It is also plain that he failed to take into account the
    fact that the relationship began after the appellant had been  notified
    of  his  liability  to  deportation  and  his  status   was   therefore
    precarious. Even if the Guidance was not before him, this issue fell to
    be considered on general principles. Finally, and as contended  in  the
    grounds, it is evident that the judge treated Ms SF's needs and desires
    as determinative. This last point  is  in  itself  an  error  that  was
    material to the judge's finding that para 399(b) was satisfied.

    As to the Article 8 claim based on the appellant's residence in the  UK
    and ties:

33. The judge found (at [32]  of  the  determination)  that  the  appellant
    satisfied para  399A  because  he  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least 20 years  and  "he  had  no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family)" with Ghana. He found  that  the  appellant
    did not have any connection to life in Ghana as constitute ties to that
    country as defined in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
    UKUT 00060 (IAC).

34. However, the "no ties" stipulation was deleted  in  the  2014  IRs  and
    replaced with the following:

         "399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -


             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
                  of his life;  and
             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK;  and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."

35. The requirements of the version of para 399A under  the  2014  IRs  are
    effectively the same as those set out in s.117C(4) which the judge  did
    consider, at [27-28] of the determination which read:

         "27.     On my finding,  the  appellant  has  been  in  the  United
             Kingdom for almost the entirety  of  his  life.  He  has  been
             lawfully resident with indefinite leave to remain for about 17
             years, although for some of this period he was  serving  [sic]
             sentence of imprisonment. He is fully socially and  culturally
             integrated into the United Kingdom. He has engaged in criminal
             activity  in  an  underclass  of  drug  dealers  but  has  re-
             established himself in law-abiding  circumstances  in  the  18
             months since his liberation.

         28.      There would, in my judgment, be very significant obstacles
             to his integration into the  country  to  which  he  would  be
             deported. Although a Ghanaian by origin, he has  not  been  in
             Ghana, save for a three week holiday with his mother as a  ten
             year old, since he was a babe in arms. He does not  speak  any
             indigenous language of Ghana. He has no acquaintance with,  or
             even knowledge of, any member of his extended family in Ghana.
             His maternal grandmother may be alive, but that woman did  not
             even bring up his own mother, who was raised by an "aunt". His
             paternal grandfather is deceased. He has no siblings in Ghana.
             He may have more distant  relatives  in  Ghana  but  even  his
             eldest brother, who has travelled to Ghana on about  three  or
             four occasions in the last two decades, is unable to  identify
             any such relatives and knew only their sister in  Ghana.  That
             sister is now in the United States of America.  The  appellant
             would be without means of support or accommodation in what  is
             effectively  a  foreign  country  to  him.  In  all   of   the
             circumstances, I hold that Exception 1 therefore does apply".

36. Ms Allen submitted that the judge had considered all of the factors and
    given adequate reasons for finding that there would be very significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Ghana. I put to Ms  Allen
    whether the judge's failure to consider  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for Ms SF and S to live in Ghana with the appellant was  relevant
    to an assessment of the requirement for there to  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Ghana.  In  response,  Ms
    Allen questioned how a 19-year old girl with  a  baby  could  help  the
    appellant integrate into Ghana.

37. In my judgement, the judge overlooked considering the following factors
    which, taken cumulatively, are material to his finding that there would
    be very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into
    Ghana:

    i)     As contended in the respondent's grounds, the judge fail to take
         into account the fact that the appellant speaks  English  and  that
         English is the official language in Ghana.

    ii)    As contended in the respondent's grounds, the  judge  failed  to
         take into account that the appellant's family members could  assist
         him, both emotionally and financially to reintegrate into Ghana. He
         also failed to consider the possibility of the  appellant's  family
         members accompanying him, either on a temporary or permanent basis,
         to help with his integration. This was of particular  relevance  in
         the instant case, given that various family members had made visits
         to Ghana since they first arrived in the United Kingdom  and  given
         that his sister lived in Ghana, at least until recently. Even if it
         is correct that she has left Ghana, that does not mean that she  is
         unable to assist him with his integration.

38. For these reasons,  I  concluded  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
    determination on a point of law such that his determination fell to  be
    set aside.

39. The next question is the extent to which the  determination  should  be
    set aside. This informs the extent of the re-making of the decision.  I
    stress that, in considering this issue, I have been careful to bear  in
    mind that the appellant should not lightly be deprived of  findings  in
    his favour.

40. I am satisfied that, although the issues raised by  Mr  Tufan  which  I
    have summarised at [17] above  were  not  raised  in  the  respondent's
    written grounds, fairness to both parties requires that the exceptional
    course of setting aside the entire determination be taken, for  reasons
    I will now give.

41. The mere fact that an  objection  is  not  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    application for permission does not, of itself,  mean  that  the  party
    wishing to rely upon it should be precluded from doing so. This  is  so
    whether it is the appellant or the respondent who wishes to rely upon a
    new matter. Ms Allen did not say that she had been caught  by  surprise
    and needed time to take instructions. She did not request further  time
    to consider her position.

42. At the hearing,  I  retrieved  the  judge's  typed  transcript  of  the
    proceedings and read to  the  parties  relevant  extracts  from  it.  I
    informed the parties that I would consider the transcript carefully and
    Ms Allen's submission  that  the  judge's  credibility  assessment  and
    findings of primary fact should be allowed to stand.

43. Having considered the judge's transcript, it is evident that:

    i)     The judge had erred in  stating  that  the  only  factual  issue
         concerned the  date  of  the  appellant's  entry  into  the  United
         Kingdom. There were other factual issues, as described at  ii)  and
         iv) of this paragraph, in addition to the fact that the  respondent
         did not accept paternity of S.

    ii)    Mr Archie had cross-examined the appellant  about  his  evidence
         that his sister in Ghana (Sh) had left Ghana and gone  to  live  in
         the United States of America (page 2, at letter G).  Mr. Archie had
         also cross-examined the appellant about his visit to Ghana in 2002.
         The appellant was asked:

             "With whom did you stay in Ghana"

         to which he replied:

             "I can't remember - I was pretty young"

         As the trip took place in 2002, the appellant was 15 years  old  at
         the time of the trip (not ten years old as the judge said  at  [28]
         of the determination). However,  the  appellant's  mother  said  in
         cross-examination (page 8, at letter F-G) that the appellant stayed
         with her at the home of her daughter, i.e. Sh.  This was  therefore
         a potentially important discrepancy between the  oral  evidence  of
         the appellant and his mother, which  the  judge  failed  to  engage
         with.

    iii)   It is also plain that Mr Archie probed in cross-examination   of
         the appellant and Ms SF whether  they  were  each  aware  that  the
         appellant faced the possibility  of  deportation  when  they  began
         their relationship  (page  3,  letters  E-F,  in  relation  to  the
         appellant and page 6, letter E in relation to Ms SF). Even  leaving
         aside the respondent's Guidance in which it is said (at para 2.3.8)
         that an individual's immigration status is  precarious  if  he  has
         been notified that he is liable to deportation,  this  fell  to  be
         considered  on  general  principles  as  I  have  said   above.   A
         relationship formed when an  individual  is  under  the  threat  of
         deportation  carries  less  weight.   Although   this   issue   was
         specifically raised by Mr. Archie's  cross-examination,  the  judge
         failed to engage with it.

    iv)    In cross-examination, the appellant's  mother  said,  variously,
         that she had one brother and two sisters still in  Ghana  (page  8,
         letter A) and also that she had only one sister in Ghana  (page  9,
         letter A). This was an obvious discrepancy which the  judge  failed
         to resolve. Furthermore, it was clear from her  evidence  that  she
         had at least one sibling in Ghana. This was  relevant,  given  that
         the evidence before the judge was that the appellant's sister  (Sh)
         had lived with one of his mother's immediate relatives.

    v)     Importantly, at [28]  of  the  determination,  where  the  judge
         considered whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         appellant's integration into Ghana, the judge failed to mention the
         sibling(s) of the appellant's mother. The closest he came was  that
         he said: "He [the appellant] has  no  acquaintance  with,  or  even
         knowledge of, any member of extended family in Ghana".

44. These  omissions,  taken  together  with  the  fact  that  the  judge's
    determination gives the reader no inkling at all  of  the  respondent's
    case nor is there any mention of the evidence summarised at  i)-iv)  of
    the  preceding  paragraph,  evidence  which  was  elicited  in   cross-
    examination and which took up a significant part of the  oral  evidence
    before  the  judge,  have  driven  me  to  the  conclusion   that   the
    respondent's case has not been considered at all by the judge.

45. In the exercise  of  my  discretion,  I  have  decided  to  permit  the
    respondent to rely upon the challenge to the judge's findings  of  fact
    on the ground that he gave no reasons for accepting the evidence before
    him. I am satisfied that the judge failed [to] resolve or consider  the
    factual issues summarised above and failed  to  give  reasons  for  his
    positive findings in the appellant's favour. For the reasons  given,  I
    am satisfied that the judge erred in law such  that  his  determination
    falls to be set aside. I set it aside in  its  entirety.  None  of  his
    findings shall stand.

46. However, the transcript of the judge's Record of Proceedings  shall  be
    before the FtT as the record of the evidence that was given before him.
    I shall therefore arrange for the transcript to be sent to the parties.



47. Ms Allen asked me to remit the case to the same judge. I  have  decided
    that this would be inappropriate and  unfair  to  the  respondent,  not
    least be the judge has already taken a view of  the  evidence.  I  have
    therefore decided that the decision is to be re-made by a  judge  other
    than Judge M J Gillespie.

    Anonymity

48. The judge made an anonymity order. I cannot see any good reason  for  a
    blanket anonymity order, given that  the  identity  of  the  claimant's
    alleged partner and their alleged child can be  anonymised  to  protect
    the child. However, as this was not raised at the hearing  me,  I  have
    decided to leave the anonymity order in place to give  the  parties  an
    opportunity to address the issue.

49. If the parties wish to make representations as to whether the anonymity
    order should be varied so that the prohibition on  direct  or  indirect
    identification relates only to the claimant's alleged partner and their
    alleged child, they must be ready to address the FtT on that  issue  at
    the resumed hearing.

    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside
    in its entirety. This case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the decision on the appellant's appeal to be re-made by a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal other than Judge M J Gillespie.



Signed      Date: 10 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   ANNEX A


     Paras 362, 397, 398, 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules, as  amended
     by HC 352 with effect from 28 July 2014
     showing the amendments made by HC 352 in bold (the "2014 IRs)  and  the
     text it replaced as crossed text and  in  square  brackets  (the  "2012
     IRs").


     A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation  under
     Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article  8  will  only  succeed
     where the requirements of these rules as  at  28  July  2014  are  met,
     regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or the deportation
     order, as appropriate, was served.'
     ...
     397. A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's  removal
     pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's  obligations  under
     the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human   Rights   Convention.   Where
     deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will only be
     in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation is
     outweighed.


     A.398.  These rules apply where:


      (a)   a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
              deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United   Kingdom's
              obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


      (b)   a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made  against
              him to be revoked.


     398.   Where a person claims that their deportation would  be  contrary
     to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,
     and


      (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because they have been
              convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
              a period of imprisonment of at least four years;


      (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because they have been
              convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
              a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
              months; or


      (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because, in  the  view
              of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious
              harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
              disregard for the law,
      the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will  consider  whether
        paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
        interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
        where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
        described  in  paragraphs  399  and  399A  [it  will  only  be   in
        exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation
        will be outweighed by other factors].


     399.   This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies  if
     -
      (a)   the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
              with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK and
            (i)   the child is a British citizen; or
            (ii)  the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least
                   the seven years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                   immigration decision;
            and in either case
            (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
                   country to which the person is to be deported  [it  would
                   not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK];
                   and
            (b)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
                   without the person who is to be  deported  [there  is  no
                   other family member who is able to care for the child  in
                   the UK];
     or
      (b)   the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
              partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, or settled
              in the UK [or in the UK with refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
              protection],  and
            (i)   the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
                   (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                   status was not precarious; and
            (ii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
                   country to which the person is to be deported because  of
                   compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
                   in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM;  and
            (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
                   UK without the person who is to be deported.
             [(i)  the  person  has  lived  in  the  UK  with  valid   leave
              continuously for at least the 15 years immediately  preceding
              the date of the immigration decision (discounting any  period
              of imprisonment) and
            (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
              partner continuing outside the UK]


     399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -




      (a)   the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
        life; and
      (b)   he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
      (c)   there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
              into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.
      [(a)  the  person has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20
              years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
              decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he  has
              no ties (including social,  cultural or  family  )  with  the
              country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
              UK;  or
      (b)   the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half of
              his life living continuously in the UK immediately  preceding
              the date of the immigration decision (discounting any  period
              of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties  (including  social,
              cultural or family) with the country to which he  would  have
              to go if required to leave the UK.]
                                   ANNEX B

                    Appendix FM, Exceptions EX.1 and EX.2

Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for leave to
remain as a partner or parent

EX.1. This paragraph applies if
      (a)
            (i)   the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                 (aa)  is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the  age
                       of 18 years when the  applicant  was  first  granted
                       leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;
                 (bb)  is in the UK;
                 (cc)   is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                       continuously for at least the  7  years  immediately
                       preceding the date of application; and

            (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave
           the UK; or

      (b)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

EX.2. For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
means the  very  significant  difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by  the
applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together  outside
the UK and which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
hardship for the applicant or their partner.
                                   ANNEX C

     Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, which with effect from 28  July
     2014, introduced a new Part 5A  to  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002 containing new sections 117A-D


     "117A Application of this Part


     (1)    This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
        determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
      (a)   breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
              under Article 8, and
      (b)   as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
     Rights Act 1998.


     (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
        tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
      (a)   in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
      (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
              considerations listed in section 117C.
     (3)    In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
        question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
        respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
        8(2).


     117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases


     (1)    The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
     public interest.


     (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
        seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
        English, because persons who can speak English-


      (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


     (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
        seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
        independent, because such persons-


      (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


     (4)    Little weight should be given to-


      (a)   a private life, or
      (b)   a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
              established by a person at a time when the person is  in  the
              United Kingdom unlawfully.


     (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
        person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
        precarious.


     (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-


      (a)   the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
              with a qualifying child, and
      (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
     United Kingdom.


     117C Article 8 additional considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
     criminals.


     (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


     (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
        the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


     (3)    In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
        public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
        Exception 2 applies.


     (4)    Exception 1 applies where-


      (a)   C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
     C's life,
      (b)   C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom,
     and
      (c)   there would be very significant  obstacles  to  C's  integration
              into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


     (5)    Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
        parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
        C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


     (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced  to  a
        period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
        requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
        circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
        2.


     (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
        into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
        deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
        the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
        been convicted.


     117D Interpretation of this Part
     (1)    In this Part-


     "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;


     "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-


      (a)   is a British citizen, or
      (b)   has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven
     years or more;


     "qualifying partner" means a partner who-


      (a)   is a British citizen, or
      (b)   who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of  the
              Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


     (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


      (a)   who is not a British citizen,
      (b)   who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
      (c)   who -
            (i)   has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
     12 months,
            (ii)  has been convicted of an offence that has  caused  serious
     harm, or
            (iii) is a persistent offender.


     (3)    For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person  subject  to  an
     order under-


      (a)    section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
     (insanity etc),
      (b)   section  57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
              (insanity etc), or (c)  Article  50A  of  the  Mental  Health
              (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 (insanity etc),  has  not  been
              convicted of an offence.


     (4)    In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a
        period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-


      (a)   do not include a person who has received  a  suspended  sentence
              (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or  any
              part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);


      (b)   do not include a person who has been sentenced to  a  period  of
              imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue  of  being
              sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to
              that length of time;


      (c)   include a person who is sentenced to detention,  or  ordered  or
              directed to be detained,  in  an  institution  other  than  a
              prison  (including,  in  particular,   a   hospital   or   an
              institution for young offenders) for that length of time; and




      (d)   include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or  detention,
              or ordered or directed to be detained, for  an  indeterminate
              period, provided that it may last for at least that length of
              time.


     (5)    If any question arises for the  purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
        whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
        asserting that fact to prove it."


