
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00615/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2020                           |On 6 January 2021             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                             SIGITAS STATAUSKAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Litigant in person
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Lithuania.  His date of birth is 5  April
    1972.

 2. The Secretary of State made an order  to  deport  the  Appellant.   The
    order was made pursuant  to  Regulation  23(6)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016  Regulations")  on
    17 August 2017.  The Secretary of State's view is that deportation  was
    justified  under  the  2016  Regulations  because  of  the  Appellant's
    criminality.  The Secretary of State certified the decision  to  remove
    the  Appellant  under  Regulation  33  of  the  2016  Regulations.  The
    Appellant was removed on 11 November 2017.  He has not  challenged  the
    certification decision by way of judicial review.  He has not  made  an
    application pursuant to Regulation 41 to return to the  United  Kingdom
    to attend his appeal.

 3. The Appellant appealed against the decision to deport him.  His  appeal
    was allowed by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  M  Paul.   The
    Secretary of State was granted permission. In a  decision,  promulgated
    on 11 December 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having found that  the  judge  materially  erred.   The  error  of  law
    decision reads as follows:-

             "20. The Appellant has committed several offences for which he
             received short custodial sentences and alternatives to
             imprisonment.  We have not set out the offences.  They are set
             out in the Secretary of State's decision letter.  The judge
             made an error of law because he did not determine whether the
             Appellant's integrative links had been broken as a result of
             his criminality.  This is a material omission.  Whilst we note
             what the judge said at [28], this cannot rectify the error.
             There must be a proper nuanced fact-finding assessment of risk
             affording the Appellant the appropriate level of protection
             (whether serious grounds of public policy under Reg 27(3) or
             imperative grounds of public security under Reg 27(4)).  We
             set aside the judge's decision to allow the appeal.

             21.  The starting point for the UT on the next occasion is
             that the Appellant had acquired permanent residence before he
             became a criminal and that he has been here for more than ten
             years.

             22.  The issue for the UT on the next occasion is whether the
             Appellant's integrative links have been broken because of his
             criminal behaviour so that he is not entitled to the highest
             level of protection.  It may be material that the Appellant
             has not served a lengthy term of imprisonment.  He has
             committed several offences that in isolation may not be
             particularly serious, but we will have to consider whether
             cumulatively such behaviour is capable of breaking integrative
             links despite the Appellant not having served a lengthy period
             of imprisonment.  It may be that it is material that if the
             Appellant came here in 2003, he did not complete ten years
             before he started to offend.  Once the level of protection is
             established the UT will go on to consider the risk presented
             by the Appellant and whether deportation can be justified.

             23.  We adjourned the hearing so that the Appellant would be
             able to attend the hearing via video link and so that he may
             have the opportunity to seek legal representation.  The UT on
             the next occasion will re-make the decision".

 4. The matter was adjourned until 12 March 2020.   On  this  occasion  the
    matter came  before  a  panel  comprising  Judge  McWilliam  and  Judge
    O'Callaghan. We were unable to proceed because of a  problem  with  the
    video link.

 5. The Appellant was not represented before  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant's Criminality

 6. Between August 2012 and 6 June  2017,  the  Appellant  amassed  sixteen
    convictions for 21 offences. They are set out in the  decision  letter.
    There is no challenge to the accuracy  of  this.   The  list  reads  as
    follows:-

         On 1 August 2012 he was convicted of being  drunk  and  disorderly.
         He was sentenced to a twelve-month conditional discharge and fined.



         On  9  January  2013  he  was   convicted   of   indecent   assault
         (intentionally touching a female  and  no  penetration).    He  was
         sentenced to a twelve-month  community  order  with  a  supervision
         requirement and unpaid work of 100 hours.  He was  ordered  to  pay
         costs, a victim surcharge and compensation.  He was made subject to
         requirements under the Sex Offences  Act  2003  (SOA  2003)  for  a
         period of five years.

         On 18 April 2014 he was convicted of being drunk and disorderly. He
         was on bail when this offence was  committed.   He  was  fined  and
         ordered to pay costs.

         On 29 May 2014 he was convicted of common assault.  He was remanded
         on conditional bail. He was sentenced to a supervision requirement,
         a twelve-month community order and an activity requirement.

         On 4 July 2014 he pleaded guilty to being drunk and disorderly.  He
         was remanded on conditional bail.  He was fined and ordered to  pay
         costs and victim surcharge.

         On 1 October 2014 he pleaded guilty to failing to comply  with  the
         sex offender's notification requirements.  He was  sentenced  to  a
         community  order  and  ordered  to  pay  costs  of  �85.  A  curfew
         requirement and victim surcharge were imposed.

         On 23 December 2014 he pleaded guilty to failing to comply with the
         requirements of a community order.  He was fined �50 and ordered to
         pay a victim surcharge and costs.

         On 29 October 2015 he pleaded guilty to theft  (shoplifting).   He
         was remanded on conditional bail.  He was sentenced to a  six-month
         community order and ordered to pay a victim surcharge. He was  made
         subject to an alcohol  abstinence  requirement  and  rehabilitation
         activity requirement.  He  was  ordered  to  pay  Criminal  Courts'
         charges.

         On 29 October 2015 he pleaded guilty to theft (shoplifting). He was
         sentenced to a six-month  community  order  and  given  an  alcohol
         abstinence requirement and a rehabilitation activity requirement.

         On 13 November 2015 he was convicted of being drunk and disorderly.
          He committed the offence whilst on bail.  He  did  not  receive  a
         separate penalty.

         On 12 January 2016 he pleaded guilty to failing to comply with  the
         requirement of a community  order.   The  court  ordered  that  the
         original conviction of 13 November 2015 continue.  He  was  ordered
         to continue the rehabilitation activity requirement and pay costs.

         On 1 April 2016 he was convicted of being drunk and disorderly.  He
         received a  fine  and  was  ordered  to  pay  costs  and  a  victim
         surcharge.

         On 2 June 2016 he pleaded guilty to theft  (shoplifting).   He  was
         remanded on conditional bail and received no separate penalty.

         On 9 June 2016 he was found guilty of having failed to comply  with
         the sex offender's notification requirements  and  sentenced  to  a
         twelve-month community order, alcohol treatment requirement for six
         months and a 25-day rehabilitation activity requirement.

         On 10 May 2017 he pleaded guilty to theft (shoplifting). He was  on
         bail.  He  was  remitted  for  sentence  (I  presume  that  he  was
         committed to the Crown Court for sentence. The outcome of  this  is
         not entirely clear to me).

         On 18 May 2017 he pleaded guilty to  being  drunk  and  disorderly.
         This was an offence committed whilst on bail.   He  was  fined  and
         ordered to pay costs and a victim surcharge.

         On 6 June 2017 he pleaded guilty to indecent assault (intentionally
         touching a  female  -  no  penetration),  theft  (shoplifting)  and
         racially/religiously aggravated intentional harassment, alarm,  and
         distress  -  words/writing.  He  was  sentenced   to   ten   weeks'
         imprisonment. This was suspended in whole for eighteen months.   He
         was made subject to the notification  requirements  under  the  SOA
         2003 for seven years.  He was ordered to pay compensation and given
         a 40-day maximum rehabilitation activity  requirement  with  unpaid
         work and alcohol treatment.


Directive 2004/38 ("the Directive")



 7.    Recitals 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Directive  2004/38  ("the  Directive")
    state:

         '(17)    Enjoyment of permanent residence  by  Union  citizens  who
             have chosen to settle long term in the host Member State would
             strengthen the feeling of  Union  citizenship  and  is  a  key
             element in promoting social cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the
             fundamental objectives of the  Union.  A  right  of  permanent
             residence should therefore be laid down for all Union citizens
             and their family members who have resided in the  host  Member
             State in compliance with the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
             Directive during a continuous period  of  five  years  without
             becoming subject to an expulsion measure.




         (18)     In order to be a genuine vehicle for integration into  the
             society of the host Member State in which  the  Union  citizen
             resides, the right  of  permanent  residence,  once  obtained,
             should not be subject to any conditions.

         ...

         (23)     Expulsion of Union citizens and their  family  members  on
             grounds of public policy or public security is a measure  that
             can seriously harm persons who, having availed  themselves  of
             the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the Treaty,  have
             become genuinely integrated into the host  Member  State.  The
             scope  for  such  measures  should  therefore  be  limited  in
             accordance with  the  principle  of  proportionality  to  take
             account of the degree of integration of the persons concerned,
             the length of their residence in the host Member State,  their
             age, state of health, family and economic  situation  and  the
             links with their country of origin.

         (24)     Accordingly, the greater  the  degree  of  integration  of
             Union citizens and their family members  in  the  host  Member
             State, the greater the degree of protection against  expulsion
             should be. Only in exceptional circumstances, where there  are
             imperative grounds of public  security,  should  an  expulsion
             measure be taken against Union citizens who have  resided  for
             many years in the territory  of  the  host  Member  State,  in
             particular  when  they  were  born  and  have  resided   there
             throughout  their  life.   In   addition,   such   exceptional
             circumstances should also apply to an expulsion measure  taken
             against minors, in order to protect  their  links  with  their
             family, in accordance with the United  Nations  Convention  on
             the Rights of the Child, of 20 November 1989.'

 8. In Chapter IV  of  the  Directive  ('Right  of  permanent  residence'),
    Article 16, which is entitled 'General  rule  for  Union  citizens  and
    their family members', provides:

         '1.  Union citizens who  have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in the host Member State shall  have  the
             right of permanent residence there. This right  shall  not  be
             subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.
         2.     Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members who are  not
             nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with  the
             Union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period
             of five years.
         3.     Continuity of residence shall not be affected by  temporary
             absences not exceeding a total of six months  a  year,  or  by
             absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service,
             or by one absence of a maximum of 12  consecutive  months  for
             important reasons such as pregnancy  and  childbirth,  serious
             illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in another
             Member State or a third country.
         4.     Once acquired, the right of permanent  residence  shall  be
             lost only through absence from the host  Member  State  for  a
             period exceeding two consecutive years.'
 9. In Chapter VI of the Directive ('Restrictions on the right of entry and
    the right of residence on grounds of public policy, public security  or
    public health'), Article 27, which is  entitled  'General  principles',
    provides:

         '1.  Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States  may
             restrict the  freedom  of  movement  and  residence  of  Union
             citizens   and   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
             nationality, on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health. These grounds shall not  be  invoked  to  serve
             economic ends.
         2.     Measures taken  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
             security shall comply with the  principle  of  proportionality
             and shall be based exclusively on the personal conduct of  the
             individual concerned. Previous criminal convictions shall  not
             in themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures.
             The  personal  conduct  of  the  individual   concerned   must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of   society.
             Justifications that are isolated from the particulars  of  the
             case or that rely  on  considerations  of  general  prevention
             shall not be accepted.
10. Article 28 of the Directive entitled  'Protection  against  expulsion',
    which also falls within Chapter VI, provides:
         '1.  Before taking an  expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health, family and economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the host  Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.
         2.     The host Member State may not take  an  expulsion  decision
             against Union citizens or their family  members,  irrespective
             of nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on
             its territory, except on serious grounds of public  policy  or
             public security.
         3.     An expulsion  decision  may  not  be  taken  against  Union
             citizens, except  if  the  decision  is  based  on  imperative
             grounds of public security, as defined by  Member  States,  if
             they:
             (a)  have resided in the host Member State for the previous 10
                  years; or
             (b)    are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary  for
                  the best interests of the child, as provided  for  in  the
                  United Nations Convention on the Rights of  the  Child  of
                  20 November 1989.'

The  Immigration  (Economic  European  Area)  Regulation  2016  ("the   2016
Regulations")
Continuity of residence
    "3.-(1)  This regulation applies for the purpose of calculating periods
             of continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom  under  these
             Regulations.
         ...
         (3)  Continuity of residence is broken when-
             (a)  a person serves a sentence of imprisonment;
             (b)  a deportation or exclusion order is made in relation to a
                  person; or
             (c)  a person is removed from the United Kingdom  under  these
                  Regulations.
         (4)  Paragraph (3)(a) applies, in principle, to an EEA national who
             has resided in the United Kingdom for at least ten years,  but
             it does not apply where the Secretary of State considers that-
             (a)  prior to serving a  sentence  of  imprisonment,  the  EEA
                  national had forged  integrating  links  with  the  United
                  Kingdom;
             (b)  the effect of the sentence of imprisonment was  not  such
                  as to break those integrating links; and
             (c)  taking into account an  overall  assessment  of  the  EEA
                  national's situation, it would not be appropriate to apply
                  paragraph (3)(a) to the assessment of that EEA  national's
                  continuity of residence".

Decisions taken on grounds of public  policy,  public  security  and  public
health

         "27. (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                  person  with  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  and public security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                  grounds of public security in respect of an  EEA  national
                  who -

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                      is in the best interests of the person concerned,  as
                      provided for in the Convention on the Rights  of  the
                      Child adopted by the General Assembly of  the  United
                      Nations on 20th November 1989.

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
                  United  Kingdom  include  restricting   rights   otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles -

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

             (7)  ....

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
                  of this regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)  have
                  regard to  the  considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1
                  (considerations of public policy, public security and  the
                  fundamental interests of society etc.)"[1].

The Appellant's Evidence

11. The Appellant has made a  undated  witness  statement.   He  gave  oral
    evidence through an interpreter. He  has  been  married  for  seventeen
    years and he has a daughter here who was born on 7 July 2020.  He is in
    daily contact with his wife and child. He sends them money. He lost his
    job in the UK  and  that  made  him  turn  to  drink.  He  now  attends
    Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings in  Lithuania  that  help  him  with
    addiction.  Alcohol abuse led to temporary separation  from  his  wife,
    but they now wish to reconcile.  The Appellant's sister  has  lived  in
    the UK since 2001.

12. When giving evidence the Appellant became upset. He  said  that  he  is
    remorseful. He realised that he had made a mistake which  he  wants  to
    correct.  His family is the most important thing  to  him.  He  is  now
    moving on from his criminality.  He was deported nearly three years ago
    and during this time he has lived on his own.  He has been  working  in
    Lithuania. He finds it very hard without his family and they have  been
    unable to visit him because of the pandemic. He wants to  start  a  new
    life with his family.

13. He spoke to his wife and daughter the day before the hearing.  She  was
    not able to attend the hearing because she had to go to  work.  She  is
    employed on a maternity ward.  Her  employment  is  not  flexible.  She
    cannot always ask for a day off.  He is willing to give the  court  his
    wife's telephone number.  The last time the Appellant saw his  daughter
    was in summer 2019 when she and her mother visited him in Lithuania.

14. The Appellant is now rehabilitated for alcohol dependency.  He  attends
    AA twice weekly.  He also  attends  Mass  and  spends  a  lot  of  time
    praying.

15. His wife lives in Croydon in a council flat.  He last  lived  with  her
    three years ago.  He always lived with his wife while  he  was  in  the
    United Kingdom.

16. I asked the Appellant  a  number  of  questions  in  order  to  clarify
    matters.  Because of mention of the Social Services in the OASys Report
    I asked him about this.  He began to explain about his wife  taking  an
    interest in another man and as a result he (the Appellant) resorted  to
    alcohol and said things he should not have said. The  police  would  be
    called. He then said that he does not want to remember these things.

17. He conceded that he moved out of the family home in 2016. He said  that
    this was for work purposes. In relation to his wife's evidence  at  the
    hearing before Judge Paul, namely that she and the Appellant had  lived
    together up until 2014, he said that they lived separately  because  of
    his employment, however they had lived together until his removal.

18. Th Appellant has not had any alcohol since the summer of 2019 when  his
    family visited Lithuania.  He has been working  as  an  electrician  in
    Lithuania.  He blames alcohol for his criminality. He told me  that  if
    he does not consume alcohol then there are no problems.

The Evidence of Grazina Gregory

19. Ms Gregory is the Appellant's sister. She gave evidence. She  explained
    that the Appellant has family here in the United Kingdom. Their  mother
    lives here.  She sees the Appellant's wife and daughter.

20. The Appellant's daughter speaks to him daily. The Appellant  recognises
    that he has made mistakes. He is now a different person.  He  lives  on
    his own in Lithuania. He is  depressed  and  misses  his  family.   His
    family here need him financially and his daughter needs a father.   She
    believes that his wife  would  not  phone  him  unless  she  was  still
    interested in him.

21. She misses her brother.  Alcohol has  affected  his  judgment.  He  has
    stopped drinking. He wants to get away from alcohol. He is supported by
    the group meetings. He is trying to get help. He is  trying  to  get  a
    job. It is difficult now that it is winter and there is a pandemic.  He
    does not presently have work.

22. Ms Gregory believes that the Appellant's wife wants to  reconcile  with
    him because she talks to her on the telephone and  she  wants  to  know
    what is happening with him.  She probably could not  get  the  day  off
    work and that is why she did not attend the hearing. Ms  Gregory  spoke
    to her last weekend.

Evidence of DC George Sinclair

23. There is a witness statement from DC George Sinclair of 24  July  2017.
    His evidence is that he is attached to the  Croydon  Jigsaw  team,  his
    role is to monitor and manage registered sex offenders in the community
    and that the Appellant is currently managed as being of  high  risk  of
    further sexual offending.  He committed an offence on 26 November  2012
    against a 15-year-old girl. He was lying in the street drunk. The  girl
    approached him and asked if he was alright. The Appellant put his  hand
    up the girl's skirt and touched her in a sexual manner.

24. On 6 July 2017 he was convicted of an incident on 24 March 2017 whereby
    he sexually touched a female police officer during  an  arrest.   There
    had been incidents of  sexualised  language  and  behaviour  whilst  in
    custody that have not led to charges.




25. The Appellant first came to police notice on 22  August  2011.  He  was
    seen to damage the window of a department store in central Croydon.  He
    was cautioned.  He has come to the notice of the police on a number  of
    occasions usually for drunkenness or shoplifting where no formal action
    was taken due to victims not wishing to prosecute.  Most, if  not  all,
    of his criminality is related to alcohol misuse.  His relationship with
    his wife has been turbulent. They separated for about  eighteen  months
    after he assaulted her in May 2014.  He has since moved  back  in  with
    his wife but due to his behaviour in recent months the relationship has
    deteriorated again.  His employment is described as sporadic and he  is
    currently unemployed due to alcoholism. He finds it difficult  to  hold
    down a job because of his drinking.

The OASys Assessment

26. The Respondent relies on the OASys assessment prepared by the Probation
    Service on 24 July 2017 after  the  Appellant  was  given  a  suspended
    sentence.

27. In respect of the offences, it is stated that the Appellant was causing
    a disturbance in a shop. He  had  been  detained  for  shoplifting  two
    bottles of wine.  Whilst he was  being  searched  by  a  female  police
    officer, he caressed her left hand with his index finger.   He tried to
    hold the police officer's hand in a way that she described as caressing
    and he then racially abused her.

28. The Appellant admitted that he has a problem  with  alcohol.  It  would
    seem he  has  a  serious  alcohol  problem  and  problems  with  coping
    strategies which are linked to his sexual offending.  When  he  is  not
    drinking, he works hard and spends time with his wife and daughter.  He
    had been alcohol free for a period of eight months before the offences.
    He was tempted by a peer.  There is a thinking  skills  deficit  and  a
    lack of perspective involved.  The Appellant had not yet addressed  his
    alcohol problem despite being subject to previous probation orders.

29. The Appellant pleaded guilty; however, he maintained that he could  not
    recall what had happened.  Whilst this may be true it may also be a way
    of distancing himself from reality and not wanting  to  come  to  terms
    with what he has done. He recognised that he is an alcoholic. He  takes
    a casual attitude towards the situation.   He also went on  a  drinking
    binge after he committed the offences in question.

30. Attendance at the office of  the  probation  officer  is  sporadic.  He
    attended with his wife. He is described as "economical with the  truth"
    and had not been making all the positive changes that he said he would.
     The Appellant  separated  from  his  wife  after  being  convicted  of
    assaulting her in 2014. He then  moved  back  in  with  her  and  their
    daughter.  However, he could not live with his  wife  because  she  was
    residing in a refuge hostel and she had then moved in with  her  sister
    on a temporary basis.  In 2016 he privately rented a room.   The report
    states in respect of the Appellant's attitude towards the 2014  assault
    that he "remained adamant that even if he had not been drinking at  the
    time, he would still hit his wife". At the time of the assault  on  his
    wife his daughter was present in the house.

31. His wife challenged his accounts that he gave to the probation  officer
    which have not always been fully accurate. She is described as "at  her
    wits end and is on the brink of ending the relationship  altogether  if
    her husband does not  address  the  issues  once  and  for  all".   The
    Appellant's daughter is being affected by his behaviour because he will
    get drunk and bring friends back who urinate  all  over  the  property,
    take money, make a mess and then pass  out.   Relationship  issues  are
    linked to the risk of serious harm.

32. Nearly all  his  offences  were  committed  whilst  he  was  under  the
    influence of alcohol.  The Appellant has had help for alcohol misuse by
    way of an Alcohol Treatment Requirement (ATR)  which  he  completed  in
    2016, however he went back to drinking.

33. During 2016 and 2017 the Appellant was rebuilding his relationship with
    his wife and according to him this was going well.   He began  drinking
    heavily and had been asked to leave by his landlord.  His  marriage  is
    not stable. It is stated in the report that his wife "may  ask  him  to
    leave if he does not change things around for good".

34. The Appellant was employed as a fireman in Lithuania prior to coming to
    the United Kingdom. He has also been in the army. He  had  mostly  been
    employed in construction whilst in the UK and more recently a  security
    guard.  He lost a job because of drinking.   He was working as  a  road
    sweeper and doing work at the weekend cash in  hand,  however  he  lost
    this job because of drinking.  The Appellant has  a  good  work  ethic.
    However, he  put  too  much  focus  on  work  and  not  enough  on  his
    criminogenic needs.

35. Lifestyle and associates are a major factor  contributing  towards  the
    Appellant's drinking.  This is  in  part  cultural.  The  Appellant  is
    described as not having any true friends, just people he goes  drinking
    alcohol with.  The report states "these peers are very present  in  his
    lifestyle which makes it harder, for  Mr  Statauskas  to  abstain  from
    drinking alcohol as he does not  have  the  necessary  support  network
    outside of probation to encourage this".  The following is stated:

         "Mr Statauskas has been motivated to address  his  alcohol  problem
         and declared his want for  a  better  future  and  need  to  attend
         Turning  Point  to  see  an  alcohol  worker.   Mr  Statauskas  had
         previously breached the AAMR element of a  previous  order  due  to
         failure to comply.  Despite his early motivation the  tag  did  not
         act as a deterrent to Mr Statauskas".

36. The Appellant managed to remain alcohol free  for  a  period  of  eight
    months before he went on a binge leading to the most  recent  offences.
    The Appellant has continued to offend and abuse alcohol which  displays
    a lack of consequential thinking and inability to  take  responsibility
    for  his  actions.   His  excessive  alcohol  consumption  acts  as   a
    disinhibitor to his thinking  skills.   He  has  previously  failed  to
    comply with orders imposed on him by the  court.   After  appearing  at
    court, he continued to carry on drinking.  The following is  stated  in
    relation to the Appellant's attitude.

         "Mr Statauskas has failed  to  comply  with  a  previously  imposed
         community order and notification arrangements.  Despite  displaying
         a previous clear motivation to target his alcohol issue and  attend
         additional support groups in the past Mr Statauskas has  failed  to
         act on these  and  has  since  been  in  denial  of  breaching  the
         requirement".

37. The Appellant is assessed at medium risk of reoffending and medium risk
    of harm to the public.  In relation to when the risk is  likely  to  be
    greatest the following is stated:

         "Mr Statauskas has offended over the past five years,  every  year,
         more so in 2015 and 2016.  His drinking  problem  continues  to  be
         evident - risk still great at this time until he proves that he can
         remain abstinent for a  period  of  time.   He  went  eight  months
         abstinent from alcohol and had protective factors in place and  yet
         chose to drink which was reckless - this behaviour is  part  of  an
         established pattern and  he  is  yet  to  demonstrate  real  change
         towards avoiding reoffending".

38. The following factors are said to increase risk of reoffending: alcohol
    consumption,   relationship   difficulties,   jealousy    within    the
    relationship, lack of support/structure, boredom, peer association when
    fearful that he has already lost his way.  The factors that are said to
    reduce risk are: alcohol treatment, keeping occupied with work, gaining
    some  stability  with  accommodation,  employment,  family  life,   and
    focusing on coping strategies.  He presents a medium risk  of  harm  to
    the public,  known  adults  and  staff.   He  was  described  as  quite
    motivated to change and quite capable of doing so.

The Respondent's Skeleton Argument

39. The  Court  of  Justice  law  and  legal  opinion  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant's behaviour/conduct is the starting point for the  assessment
    of integration and public policy justification.   As  Advocate  General
    Bot said in  Nnamdi  Onuekwere  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EUECJ C-378/12 O, it is the  behaviour/conduct  which
    strongly tells towards integration.

         "50. Periods of residence in prison of course make clear  that  the
             person concerned is integrated to only a limited extent.  That
             is  even  more  true  where,  as  in  the  case  in  the  main
             proceedings, that person is a multiple  recidivist.   Criminal
             conduct in my opinion clearly shows that the person  concerned
             has no desire to integrate in the society of the  host  Member
             State".

40. This is further confirmed  by  the  court  in  B  (Citizenship  of  the
    European Union - Right to move and reside freely - Enhanced  protection
    against expulsion - Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-316/16 ("B:-

         "73. Other relevant factors in that overall assessment may include,
             as observed by the Advocate General in points 123  to  125  of
             his opinion, first, the nature of the offence that resulted in
             the period of imprisonment in question and  the  circumstances
             in  which  that  offence  was  committed,  and,  secondly  all
             relevant factors  as  regards  the  behaviour  of  the  person
             concerned during the period of imprisonment".

41. The SSHD accepts that most authority in both the European and  domestic
    context deals with cases in which the EEA national  criminal  has  been
    the subject of a sentence  of  imprisonment.   That  of  course  simply
    reflects the high volume of cases  in  which  this  is  the  underlying
    factual, criminal matrix.  However, none of these  authorities  require
    that there  should  be  as  a  matter  of  fact  or  law  a  period  of
    imprisonment to establish conduct.

42. It is the Secretary of State's submission that if the drafters  of  the
    Directive  felt  that  imprisonment  was  a   pre-requisite   for   the
    instigation of removal action on the basis of public policy, then  that
    would clearly be reflected in the language of the legal scheme itself.

43. The Secretary of State also relies upon the decision of the court in  K
    (and allegations des crimes de guerre)  (Citizenship  of  the  European
    Union - Right to move and reside freely within  the  territory  of  the
    Member State - Restrictions - Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-331/16 ("K").

44. There is no requirement for the Appellant to have been  imprisoned  for
    the decision to be taken. The convictions accrued by the  Appellant  in
    this appeal are materially relevant to his conduct with  the  corollary
    assessment of  the  "public  disturbance"  caused  by  the  Appellant's
    actions.

45. The Upper Tribunal should make an assessment taking  into  account  the
    further policy guidance in Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations.

46. As part of the consideration of the Appellant's attitude to the general
    public and UK criminal law, as well as the public disturbance caused by
    his repeat criminality, the Upper Tribunal will bear in mind  that  the
    Appellant has, on two occasions been made subject to the sex  offenders
    notification requirements (for five years as a result of his 9  January
    2013 conviction and for a further seven years on  6  June  2017).   The
    very  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  been  made  subject   to   these
    requirements  on  two  occasions  is  particularly   telling   of   the
    Appellant's general disregard for the safety of women in the UK and the
    criminal justice  system.   There  is  no  doubt  such  assaults  cause
    significant public disturbance.

Submissions




47. Mr Tufan submitted that the Appellant cannot be  deemed  to  have  been
    integrated in the light of his appalling offending  over  the  previous
    seven- year period.  Conduct alone is sufficient to break continuity in
    residence and integrative links.  The Appellant is clearly a recidivist
    offender and the fundamental interest is maintaining public  order  and
    preventing social harm.  There is  no  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    wife. There is no evidence that the Appellant plays a critical role  in
    his daughter's life and development.




48. The Appellant in submissions said that the Tribunal  had  forgotten  to
    ask him why his family would not return to live with him in  Lithuania.
    His daughter was born in the United Kingdom. She is a British  citizen.
    She speaks Lithuanian. She cannot read or  write  in  Lithuanian.   His
    wife is disabled. She is not respected  in  Lithuania  because  of  her
    disability and she would be unable to work there.

Discussion

49. From the considerable body of law concerning the interpretation of  the
    Directive, the following can be extrapolated:-

          i. The Directive  establishes  a  system  of  protection  against
             expulsion measures which is  based  in  integration  of  those
             persons in the host member state. The greater  the  degree  of
             integration the greater the guarantees against expulsion.




         ii. Those who have a right of permanent residence  cannot  be  the
             subject of expulsion "except  on  serious  grounds  of  public
             policy of public security"




        iii. The acquisition of the right of permanent residence  is  based
             not only on territorial  and  temporal  factors  but  also  on
             qualitative elements relating to the level of integration




         iv. To  "have  resided  legally"  in  Article  16  (1)  should  be
             construed as meaning a period of residence which complies with
             Article 7(1).




          v.  A  period  of  imprisonment  cannot  be  regarded  as  "legal
             residence"  and  may  not  be  taken  into  account   in   the
             calculation  of  the  five-year  period   required   for   the
             acquisition of permanent residence.

         vi. In the case of union citizens  who  have  resided  in  a  host
             member state  for  the  previous  10  years,  Article  28  (3)
             considerably strengthens their protection against expulsion by
             providing that a measure may not be  taken  except  where  the
             decision is based on " imperative grounds of  public  security
             ."




        vii. A pre-requisite of eligibility for enhanced protection against
             expulsion is that a person must  have  a  right  of  permanent
             residence.




       viii. The 10 -  year  period  of  residence  must  in  principle  be
             continuous and must be calculated by counting  back  from  the
             date of the decision ordering  the  expulsion  of  the  person
             concerned.




         ix. The Directive is silent as  to  the  circumstances  which  can
             interrupt the period of 10 years residence.




          x. If an individual is  imprisoned  during  the  ten-year  period
             prior to  the  expulsion  decision,  this  will  in  principle
             interrupt  continuity  of  residence  because  in  general   a
             custodial sentence is indicative of a  rejection  of  societal
             values and thus severing integrative  links  with  the  member
             state.




         xi. In principle periods of  imprisonment  cannot  be  taken  into
             account for the purposes of granting enhanced  protection.  An
             overall assessment is required to establish the extent of  the
             severing of integrative links.




        xii. The fact that a person has resided in a member  state  for  10
             years prior to imprisonment may be taken into account as  part
             of the overall  assessment  in  deciding  whether  integrating
             links previously forged have been broken.

50. There is a large body of law concerning breaks in  residence  following
    sentences of imprisonment (or absences from the host country)  and  the
    level of protection available following the serving of  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment.   The  first  issue  in  this  appeal  is  the  level  of
    protection due to the Appellant in the light of his criminality and  in
    the absence of him having served  a  period  of  imprisonment.   It  is
    necessary to consider why imprisonment breaks continuity  of  residence
    to determine this.

51. In Onuekwere  Case  C-378/12  the  CJEU  considered  a  request  for  a
    preliminary ruling from the Upper Tribunal  on  the  interpretation  of
    Article  16  (2)  and  (3)  OF  THE  Directive   concerning   in   what
    circumstances, if any, will a period of imprisonment  constitute  legal
    residence for the purposes of the acquisition of a permanent  right  of
    residence under Article 16 of and whether Article 16(2) and (3) must be
    interpreted as meaning that continuity of residence is  interrupted  by
    periods of imprisonment in the host Member  State  of  a  third-country
    national who is a family member of a Union citizen who has acquired the
    right of permanent residence in that Member State during those periods.
    Before looking at the substantive decision of the CJEU, the opinion  of
    Advocate General Bot  offers  some  guidance  on  why  imprisonment  is
    capable of breaking integrative  links  in  the  context  of  permanent
    residence.
         "47.      The  system  set  up  by  Directive  2004/38   and   more
             specifically the creation of a right of permanent residence is
             therefore based on the idea that genuine integration must,  in
             a sense, be rewarded, or at least that it must have an  effect
             of strengthening the feeling of belonging to  the  society  of
             the host Member State.
         48.    Therefore, if such a system is based on genuine integration
             of the person  concerned,  how  can  a  person  who  has  been
             imprisoned on one or more occasions  possibly  be  allowed  to
             enjoy a right of permanent residence? Does integration  within
             the society of the host Member State  not  first  require  the
             person who seeks to profit from it to  respect  the  laws  and
             values of that society?
         49.    In my view, that must be the case. As the Court  stated  in
             its judgment in Case C-325/09 Dias, (18) and as  noted  in  my
             Opinion in Case C-348/09 I., (19) the integration  which  lies
             behind the acquisition of the  right  of  permanent  residence
             laid down in Article 16(1) of Directive 2004/38 is  based  not
             only on territorial and time factors but also  on  qualitative
             elements, relating to the level of  integration  in  the  host
             Member State. (20)
         50.    Periods of residence in prison of course make clear that the
             person concerned is integrated to only a limited extent.  That
             is  even  more  true  where,  as  in  the  case  in  the  main
             proceedings, that person is a  multiple  recidivist.  Criminal
             conduct in my opinion clearly shows that the person  concerned
             has no desire to integrate in the society of the  host  Member
             State. (my emphasis)
         ...
         56.  That is the reason for which, in addition, I am of the opinion
             that, even in the context of reduced sentencing which may find
             expression, for example, in house arrest or in a  part-release
             scheme obliging the  prisoner  to  return  to  prison  in  the
             evening, it is  not  possible  to  consider  that  the  person
             concerned is residing legally within the  meaning  of  Article
             16(2) of Directive 2004/38.
         57.  For all the above reasons, I take the view that that provision
             must be interpreted as meaning that a period  of  imprisonment
             cannot be qualified as 'legal residence' and may not therefore
             be taken into account in the calculation of the period of five
             years required for the purposes  of  the  acquisition  of  the
             right of permanent residence".

52. The CJEU decided in Onuekwere as follows: -
         "25.    Such  integration,  which  is  a  precondition   of   the
             acquisition of the right of permanent residence laid  down  in
             Article 16(1) of  Directive  2004/38  is  based  not  only  on
             territorial and  temporal  factors  but  also  on  qualitative
             elements, relating to the level of  integration  in  the  host
             Member State  (see  Case  C-325/09  Dias  [2011]  ECR  I-6387,
             paragraph 64), to such an extent that the undermining  of  the
             link of integration between the person concerned and the  host
             Member State justifies the loss  of  the  right  of  permanent
             residence even outside the circumstances mentioned in  Article
             16(4)  of  Directive  2004/38  (see,  to  that  effect,  Dias,
             paragraphs 59, 63 and 65).
         26.  The imposition of a prison sentence by the national  court  is
             such as to show the non-compliance  by  the  person  concerned
             with the values expressed by the society of  the  host  Member
             State in its criminal law, with the  result  that  the  taking
             into consideration of periods of imprisonment for the purposes
             of the acquisition by family members of a  Union  citizen  who
             are not nationals of a Member State of the right of  permanent
             residence for the  purposes  of  Article  16(2)  of  Directive
             2004/38 would clearly be contrary to the aim pursued  by  that
             directive in establishing that right of residence.
         .......
         30.    That condition of continuity of legal  residence  satisfies
             the integration requirement which is  a  precondition  of  the
             acquisition of the right  of  permanent  residence,  noted  in
             paragraphs 24 and 25 of the present judgment, and the  overall
             context of  Directive  2004/38,  which  introduced  a  gradual
             system as regards the right of residence in  the  host  Member
             State, which reproduces, in essence, the stages and conditions
             set out in the various instruments of European Union  law  and
             case-law preceding the directive and culminates in  the  right
             of permanent residence (see Joined Cases C-424/10 and C-425/10
             Ziolkowski and Szeja [2011] ECR  I-14051,  paragraph  38,  and
             Alarape and Tijani, paragraph 46).
         31.  As was noted in paragraph 26  of  the  present  judgment,  the
             imposition of a prison sentence by a national court is such as
             to show the non-compliance by the person  concerned  with  the
             values expressed by the society of the host  Member  State  in
             its criminal  law,  with  the  result  that  the  taking  into
             consideration of periods of imprisonment for the  purposes  of
             the acquisition by family members of a Union citizen  who  are
             not nationals of a Member State  of  the  right  of  permanent
             residence for the  purposes  of  Article  16(2)  of  Directive
             2004/38 would clearly be contrary to the aim pursued  by  that
             directive in establishing that right of residence".

53. From the decision  of  the  CJEU  and  the  opinion  of  Advocate  Bot,
    integration is key to the level of protection available and integration
    is undermined by criminal conduct. In the opinion of Advocate Bot, this
    is particularly so because he  considered  that  a  person  subject  to
    "reduced sentencing" could not be legally resident.

54. In SSHD v Viscu [2019] EWCA Civ 1052, the Court  of  Appeal  considered
    Regulation 3 of the 2016 Regulations which is intended to  give  effect
    to the Directive and the interpretation of "sentence of  imprisonment."
    It was argued by the Respondent in those proceedings that  a  detention
    and training order (DTO) was not a sentence  of  imprisonment  breaking
    continuity of residence.  The Court rejected  the  argument.  Flaux  LJ
    said as follows; -
         "44. The CJEU jurisprudence to which I  have  referred  establishes
             (i) that the degree of protection against expulsion to which a
             Union national resident in another member  state  is  entitled
             under  the  Directive  is  dependent  upon   the   degree   of
             integration of that individual in the member state; (ii) that,
             in general, a custodial sentence is indicative of a  rejection
             of societal values and thus of a severing of integrative links
             with the member state but (iii) that the extent to which there
             is such a severing of integrative links will  depend  upon  an
             overall assessment of the individual's situation at  the  time
             of the expulsion decision.
         45.   Although  the  jurisprudence  refers   most   frequently   to
             "imprisonment" rather than "custodial  sentence"  I  am  quite
             satisfied that  the  rationale  for  the  principle  that,  in
             general, a custodial sentence is indicative of a rejection  of
             societal values and a severing of integrative links so  as  to
             interrupt the required continuity  of  residence,  is  equally
             applicable to sentences of detention in a  YOI  as  it  is  to
             imprisonment. This is because, on a proper analysis, it is not
             the sentence which indicates rejection of societal values  but
             the offending which  is  sufficiently  serious  to  warrant  a
             custodial sentence whether of imprisonment or some other  form
             of detention.
         46.  This was the point made by Advocate-General Szpunar in [75] of
             his Opinion in Vomero: "...it is the offence itself  which  is
             directed against the values expressed by the criminal  law  of
             the host member state. The imposition  of  a  prison  sentence
             leads  only  to  the  assumption  that  the  convicted  person
             committed a serious offence". Similarly, Advocate-General  Bot
             focused on the gravity of the offence in the  passage  in  his
             Opinion in Onuekwere at [54] to [56]  which  I  quoted  above.
             That is why he considered that continuity of  residence  might
             be interrupted even by house arrest or partial deprivation  of
             liberty.
         47.  Given that, in regulation 3, Parliament was avowedly intending
             to give effect to the decisions of the CJEU in  Onuekwere  and
             MG, I agree with Mr Lask that "sentence  of  imprisonment"  in
             the regulation should be widely construed to include all forms
             of custodial sentence, including detention in a YOI, in  order
             to reflect the principle (whether one  categorises  it  as  an
             "interruption principle" or as an "integration principle") and
             its rationale to which I have just referred. There is  nothing
             in domestic law which precludes that construction of "sentence
             of imprisonment". As Mr Lask submitted, there is no reason why
             imprisonment may not include other forms of detention: it  all
             depends upon the context".

55. The reasoning of the court supports that it is criminal conduct  rather
    than imprisonment  that  breaks  continuity  of  residence  and  severs
    integrative links.  This is made plain at paragraph 46  with  reference
    to the opinion of Advocate General Szpunar in SSHD v  Vomero  EUECJ  C-
    316/16 (delivered on 24 October 2017).

56.  In Hafeez v SSHD [2020] EWCA 406, the Court of  Appeal  found  that  a
    period of imprisonment does not count towards  the  ten-  year  period.
    Bean LJ said as follows; -
         "43.     For these reasons, I consider that the FTT judge was wrong
             to give the Appellant the benefit of the legal doubt  on  this
             point. As I said in Hussein at paragraph [18] (in  a  judgment
             handed down after the FTT and  UT  decisions  in  the  present
             case), an individual relying on imperative grounds  protection
             who has served time in custody must prove both that he has ten
             years' continuous (or non-continuous)  residence  ending  with
             the date of the decision on a mathematical basis and  that  he
             was sufficiently integrated within the host State during  that
             ten year period. In the present case, if the  Appellant  could
             not count his three and a half years  in  prison  towards  the
             necessary ten years'  residence,  he  failed  to  qualify  for
             imperative  grounds  protection  under  Regulation  27(4)  for
             simple mathematical  reasons.  The  question  of  whether  his
             integrative links with the UK were broken by the three  and  a
             half years in custody (as to which see Viscu, another decision
             of this court given after the FTT  and  UT  judgments  in  the
             present case) therefore does not arise".

57. The decision emphasises the need for an Appellant to establish that  he
    was sufficiently integrated throughout the ten-year period. The test is
    more than just a mathematical  calculation.  There  is  a  need  for  a
    qualitative assessment.

58. The Secretary of State relies on B  in  which  the  CJEU  decided  that
    Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted  as  meaning
    that, in the case of  a  Union  citizen  who  is  serving  a  custodial
    sentence and  against  whom  an  expulsion  decision  is  adopted,  the
    condition of having 'resided in the host Member State for the  previous
    ten years' laid down in  that  provision  may  be  satisfied  where  an
    overall assessment of the person's situation, taking into  account  all
    the relevant aspects leads to the conclusion that, notwithstanding that
    detention, the integrative links between the person concerned  and  the
    host Member State have not been broken.  Those aspects  include,  inter
    alia, the strength of the integrative links forged with the host Member
    State before the detention of the person concerned, the nature  of  the
    offence  that  resulted  in  the  period  of  detention  imposed,   the
    circumstances in which that offence was committed and  the  conduct  of
    the person concerned throughout the period of detention.

59. The CJEU has repeatedly referred to a  person's  criminal  conduct  and
    behaviour which is  capable  of  breaking  continuity  and  integrative
    links.   I have no  hesitation  in  finding  that  criminality  without
    imprisonment  is  capable  of  breaking  continuity  of  residence  and
    reflects that a person committing offences is not genuinely integrated.
     It is an individual's criminal conduct which shows non-compliance with
    the values expressed by the society of the host  Member  State  in  its
    criminal law. This much is made clear throughout European and  domestic
    decisions. The imposition of a sentence of  imprisonment  reflects  the
    seriousness of the offence/s which explains  why  deportation  normally
    follow sentences of imprisonment.  However, what is key is  the  degree
    of integration at the date of the decision to exclude.

60. Regulation 3 of the 2016 Regulations was intended  to  give  effect  to
    Article 28 of the Directive as interpreted by the CJEU.   Reg 3 (3) (b)
    provides that a deportation order breaks continuity. The Appellant  has
    not served a sentence of imprisonment so the exceptions in Regulation 3
    (4) (a) cannot be applied to him.  This gives protection to  those  who
    have resided in the United Kingdom for 10 years before imprisonment  or
    where the effect of imprisonment  does  not  break  integrative  links,
    subject to an overall assessment.   However,  the  case  law  makes  it
    overwhelmingly clear that where a person, like the Appellant, has  been
    here for ten years while he may  meet  the  mathematical  requirements,
    there must still be an assessment  made  to  determine  whether  forged
    integrative links  have been broken by the Appellant's conduct.

61. A conviction for an offence which does not result  in  imprisonment  is
    unlikely to  break  continuity  of  residence  or  justify  deportation
    regardless of the level  of  protection  available  to  the  Appellant.
    Generally speaking, a more serious offence will receive a  sentence  of
    imprisonment and the  converse  is  true.    Whether  such  conduct  is
    capable of breaking continuity of residence, depends on the  following:
    the seriousness of the offences (considered cumulatively if  more  than
    one),  the frequency of  offending  and  whether  the  Appellant  is  a
    persistent offender, and the duration of the criminal conduct.  In  all
    cases there must be an overall assessment  of  a  person's  integrative
    links.


Findings and Reasons

The level of protection available to the Appellant

62. The Appellant has been here more than ten years, counting back from the
    deportation decision.  He has  permanent  residence.  At  the  time  of
    deportation, he had been here for fourteen years.

63. The Appellant is a persistent offender. There is no definition of  this
    under EU law. However, he would meet the definition  in  Chege  ("is  a
    persistent  offender")  [2016]  UKUT  00187.  His  criminal  record  is
    appalling. He is a recidivist.  He has committed offences including  an
    assault on his disabled wife, a  sexual  assault  on  a  child  and  an
    assault on a police officer. He has repeatedly  breached  court  orders
    and twice  failed  to  comply  with  the  sex  offender's  notification
    requirements.   His offending took place over a period of  five  years.
    The sentences imposed include fines, community  penalties  and  alcohol
    treatment  orders.   He  has  spent  significant  periods  subject   to
    conditional bail. Restrictions have been placed on his liberty  through
    a variety of sentences. The final sentence  was  a  suspended  sentence
    imposed in June 2017, shortly before  the  Appellant  was  deported.  A
    suspended sentence is a custodial sentence. (As an aside  I  note  that
    the definition of imprisonment does not include  a  suspended  sentence
    under UKBA 2007 justifying automatic deportation. However,  that  would
    not prevent the deportation  of  a  persistent  offender  on  conducive
    grounds).

64. The case of Binbuga (Turkey) SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  551  considered  how
    criminality can impact on social and cultural integration.  This  is  a
    case concerning deportation of a foreign criminal who was a member of a
    criminal gang. This Appellant is not a member of a gang. The protection
    offered to EU nationals  is  greater  for  those  who  are  integrated.
    However, the  judgement  is  useful  when  considering  the  impact  of
    criminality on integration. The Court of Appeal said that:-


         "58.      Social  and  cultural  integration  in  the  UK  connotes
             integration as a  law-abiding  citizen.  That  is  why  it  is
             recognised that breaking the law may involve discontinuity  in
             integration. As was found in the Bossade case at [55]:


                  '...his history of offending (repeated robbery) betokens a
                  serious  discontinuity  in  his  integration  in  the   UK
                  especially because it shows blatant disregard  for  fellow
                  citizens. ..... We also agree with  Mr  Jarvis  that  even
                  when not in  prison  the  claimant's  lifestyle  over  the
                  period when he was committing offences was manifestly anti-
                  social..... We have to decide whether he is  socially  and
                  culturally integrated in the UK in the present. He is  now
                  29. Whilst his  recent  acceptance  of  the  reprehensible
                  nature of his criminal conduct is an important factor,  we
                  consider the  negative  factors  we  have  just  mentioned
                  indicate that his history of criminal offending broke  the
                  continuity of his social and cultural integration  in  the
                  UK and he has not regained it. This means  that  currently
                  he  has  not  shown  he   is   socially   and   culturally
                  integrated.'"

65. This Appellant was a law-abiding citizen from 2003-2012. By any account
    he forged  significant  integrative  links  here,  culminating  in  his
    entitlement to permanent residence in 2008/9. He is a hard  worker  and
    when not drinking, he is able to hold down employment.  Before  he  had
    lived here for 10 years,  he  started  to  commit  offences  (  he  was
    cautioned in 2011).  By the time of the deportation order, he had  been
    a persistent offender for 5 years.  I have considered  that  there  are
    times during the period of criminality when  he  was  working.  He  has
    produced some evidence of  this.  This  would  accord  with  the  OASys
    report. This is evidence of some integrative links.  However,  he  lost
    employment as a result of drinking and spent  periods  unemployed.  His
    offending caused problems in his marriage, not  least  because  he  was
    violent to his wife. The Appellant's evidence about this, was  evasive.
    He said that he had always lived with  his  family.  This  was  clearly
    untrue and at odds with the OASys report and the evidence of  his  wife
    before the First-tier Tribunal.   He  attempted  in  oral  evidence  to
    justify domestic violence on the basis that his wife was interested  in
    another man.  In the light of his serious and persistent criminality he
    cannot be considered to have  been  genuinely  integrated  during  this
    period of his offending. Any integrative links were severed.

66. The Appellant is not entitled to enhanced protection.



Is the Appellant's  deportation  justified  on  serious  grounds  of  public
policy?

67. The Appellant has permanent residence under the EEA  Regulations,  with
    the result that the tests in Regulations 27 (3)  and  27  (5)  must  be
    satisfied in his case if the Secretary of State's deportation  decision
    is to be upheld. The burden of  proving  that  a  person  represents  a
    genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently  threat  affecting  one  of   the
    fundamental interests of society under Regulation 27(5)(c) of  the  EEA
    Regulations rests on the Secretary of State and the  standard of  proof
    is the balance of probabilities: Arranz (EEA Regulations -  deportation
    - test) [2017] UKUT 294.

68. The decision to remove the Appellant must be based exclusively  on  his
    personal conduct. Matters that do not directly relate to  the  case  or
    which relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  a
    decision to remove him.  Deterrence has no part to  play.  There  is  a
    need to look to the future. (It was not the Secretary of State's  case`
    that the "Bouchereau" exception applied  Case  30/77  [1977]  ECR  1999
    (Bouchereau)).

69. In Straszwewski v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1245, Moore - Blick LJ said  the
    following about the test:

         "25.     In the present case  the  Secretary  of  State  sought  to
             justify Mr. Straszewski's deportation on  serious  grounds  of
             public policy or public security. "Public  policy"  for  these
             purposes  includes  the  policy  which  is  reflected  in  the
             interest of the state in protecting its citizens from  violent
             crime and the theft of their property.  These are  fundamental
             interests of society and therefore, although regulation  21(3)
             does not speak in terms of the risk of causing harm by  future
             offending, in a case of this kind that is the risk  which  the
             Secretary of State is called upon to assess  when  considering
             deportation. That requires an evaluation to  be  made  of  the
             likelihood that the person concerned  will  offend  again  and
             what the  consequences  are  likely  to  be  if  he  does.  In
             addition, the need for the conduct of the person concerned  to
             represent a  "sufficiently  serious"  threat  to  one  of  the
             fundamental interests of society requires  the  decision-maker
             to balance the risk of future harm against the  need  to  give
             effect to the right of free movement.  In any  given  case  an
             evaluative exercise of that kind may admit of  more  than  one
             answer. If so, provided that all appropriate factors have been
             taken into account, the decision cannot be impugned unless  it
             is perverse or irrational, in the sense of falling outside the
             range of permissible decisions".

70. The Secretary of State relies on K where the CJEU said as follows:
         "57.     In this case, the referring  court  in  Case  C-331/16  is
             uncertain as to the effect of the considerable period of  time
             that has elapsed since the assumed commission of the acts that
             justified K.'s exclusion from refugee status under Article 1F
             of the Geneva Convention.
         58.  In that regard, the time that has elapsed  since  the  assumed
             commission of those acts is, indeed, a relevant factor for the
             purposes of assessing whether there exists a  threat  such  as
             that referred to in the second subparagraph of  Article 27(2)
             of Directive 2004/38 (see, to that effect, judgment of 11 June
             2015, Zh. and O., C-554/13, EU:C:2015:377,  paragraphs 60  to
             62). However, the possible exceptional gravity of the acts  in
             question may be such as to require, even  after  a  relatively
             long  period  of  time,  that   the   genuine,   present   and
             sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the  fundamental
             interests of society be classified as persistent.
         ......
         60.  In that regard, it must be observed that,  however  improbable
             it may appear that such crimes or acts may recur outside their
             specific  historical  and  social  context,  conduct  of   the
             individual concerned that shows the persistence in  him  of  a
             disposition hostile to the  fundamental  values  enshrined  in
             Articles 2 and 3 TEU, such as human dignity and human rights,
             as revealed by those crimes or those acts, is, for  its  part,
             capable of constituting a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
             serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
             society, within the meaning  of  the  first  sentence  of  the
             second subparagraph of Article 27(2) of Directive 2004/38".

71. The Appellant is a persistent offender. He has committed offences which
    are  capable  of  affecting  the  fundamental  interests   of   society
    (maintaining public order, removing social harm, protecting the  public
    from sexual assaults and violence). However, he has not  committed  any
    offences since the middle of 2017. He was  removed  shortly  after  the
    Crown Court imposed a suspended sentence. The Secretary  of  State  has
    not, as far as I am aware, asked the Lithuanian authorities to  confirm
    whether the Appellant  has  been  arrested  or  convicted  of  offences
    between 2017 and the date of the hearing. The Appellant's  evidence  is
    that he has not done so.  I accept this. The offences committed by  the
    Appellant cannot by any  account  be  considered  of  such  exceptional
    gravity that the threat can be classified as "persistent" (in the sense
    intended by the CJEU in K  at  [58]).   This  was  not  argued  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The Appellant was in immigration detention  before
    his removal. Therefore, it is not  of  significance  that  he  did  not
    commit offences before he was removed. However, in  the  light  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision to remove him pending his appeal and  the
    application of the burden of proof, it is reasonable to expect  her  to
    have liaised with the authorities  in  Lithuania  to  seek  information
    concerning the Appellant's conduct since his return.

72. I have considered the OASys assessment. Had I been deciding this appeal
    in 2017 or 2018, I may have reached a different conclusion  in  respect
    of risk of re-offending. The suspended sentence has now expired.  There
    is no evidence of further offending.  I accept that risk does not  need
    to be imminent; however, the Appellant  has  gone  from  committing  21
    offences in five years to not committing any in the last  three  years.
    It is the persistence of the Appellant's offending  which  presented  a
    risk.  While not wishing to trivialise the offences committed, it is  a
    significant factor that he  has  not  received  an  immediate  term  of
    imprisonment at any time. This must  reflect  the  seriousness  of  the
    offences as found by the sentencing judges  who  would  have  had  more
    information before  them  concerning  the  offences  and  any  relevant
    mitigation.

73. Notwithstanding  the  Appellant's  appalling  record  the  Crown  Court
    decided in  2017  to  suspend  a  custodial  sentence.  The  sentencing
    comments have not been disclosed, but it is difficult to reconcile  the
    sentence  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  the  Appellant
    represents  a  genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  and  that
    deportation is justified  of  grounds  of  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy. The Secretary  of  State  has  not  produced  evidence  of  the
    Appellant engaging in conduct which is at least  capable  of  breaching
    the suspended sentence.

74. While the Appellant's evidence about employment, alcohol abstinence and
    attending meetings was unsupported by direct corroborative evidence, it
    is supported by him having remained out of  trouble  for  three  years.
    Alcohol is the main cause of his offending behaviour.  During the  time
    of the OASys assessment the risk of offending was assessed  as  medium;
    however, I must consider the risk at the date of the hearing before me.
     The passage of time  and  the  lack  of  evidence  of  reoffending  or
    criminal behaviour during this time is material to the risk  now  posed
    by the Appellant.   The risk factors identified in the OASys report are
    present in Lithuania where he might arguably be under more stress,  but
    the Secretary of State has not produced evidence  of  criminal  conduct
    since his return.

75. I findthat the likelihood of re-offending is less now than  it  was  in
    2017.  When  assessing  risk,  I  have  taken  into  account  that  the
    Appellant was not a straight- forward witness.  He  was  evasive  about
    his offending. I do not accept that his wife intends for  the  marriage
    to continue.  I do not accept that interest in his appeal as  described
    by  the  Appellant's  sister,  indicates  that  she  wishes   for   the
    relationship to resume.  She did not give  evidence  and  nor  did  the
    Appellant's daughter.  I find that the  Appellant's  sister's  evidence
    was wishful thinking.   She  want  to  support  her  brother,  but  her
    evidence did not disclose any rational basis on which to  believe  that
    the Appellant's wife wants him to return to the  United  Kingdom  never
    mind the marriage to resume. The Appellant will have to cope with  this
    on return here.  However, he has coped with separation from his  family
    since deportation in so far as he has managed to stay out  of  trouble,
    stop drinking and for the most part find work.

76. The decision to deport the Appellant must be considered through EU law.
    However, should he return to the  United  Kingdom  and  re-offends  and
    should the Secretary of State wish to deport him,  he  will  no  longer
    have the protection of EU law.  If I were considering  the  Appellant's
    appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  I
    would have no hesitation in  dismissing  the  appeal  on  the  evidence
    before me.  It falls far short of establishing that the Appellant has a
    family life with his wife.  The evidence does not  establish  that  his
    wife is hoping for a reconciliation.  She did not attend.  The prospect
    of resuming family life with her was unlikely. He has family life  with
    his daughter here.  While it may be in her best interests  for  him  to
    return here, the evidence does not establish that separation is  unduly
    harsh. There are no properly identified very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above in the context of section 117C (6)  of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  However, for  now  none  of  this  is
    relevant as the Secretary of State cannot  under  EU  law  justify  the
    Appellant's deportation.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under EU law.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 16 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
-----------------------

[1] SCHEDULE  1 CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

Considerations of public policy and public security

1.  The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy or
public security values: member States enjoy considerable discretion, acting
within the parameters set by the EU Treaties, applied where relevant by the
EEA agreement, to define their own standards of public policy and public
security, for purposes tailored to their individual contexts, from time to
time.

Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom
2.  An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same nationality
or language does not amount to integration in the United Kingdom; a
significant degree of wider cultural and societal integration must be
present before a person may be regarded as integrated in the United
Kingdom.
3.  Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national has
received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the longer the
sentence, or the more numerous the convictions, the greater the likelihood
that the individual's continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting of the
fundamental interests of society.
4.  Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA national
or the family member of an EEA national within the United Kingdom if the
alleged integrating links were formed at or around the same time as-
(a)the commission of a criminal offence;
(b)an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of society;
(c)the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was in custody.
5.  The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the family
member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive evidence of
not demonstrating a threat (for example, through demonstrating that the EEA
national or the family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed
or rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.
6.  It is consistent with public policy and public security requirements in
the United Kingdom that EEA decisions may be taken in order to refuse,
terminate or withdraw any right otherwise conferred by these Regulations in
the case of abuse of rights or fraud, including-
(a)entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person to enter or to
attempt to enter, a marriage, civil partnership or durable partnership of
convenience; or
(b)fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, or assisting another to
obtain or to attempt to obtain, a right to reside under these Regulations.

The fundamental interests of society
7.  For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests of
society in the United Kingdom include-
(a)preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration laws, and
maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration control
system (including under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;
(b)maintaining public order;
(c)preventing social harm;
(d)preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;
(e)protecting public services;
(f)excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an EEA
national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that person is
likely to cause, or has in fact caused, public offence) and maintaining
public confidence in the ability of the relevant authorities to take such
action;
(g)tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an immediate or
direct victim may be difficult to identify but where there is wider
societal harm (such as offences related to the misuse of drugs or crime
with a cross-border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty
on the Functioning of the European Union);
(h)combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in relation
to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet
the requirements of regulation 27);
(i)protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly from
exploitation and trafficking;
(j)protecting the public;
(k)acting in the best interests of a child (including where doing so
entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or otherwise
taking an EEA decision against a child);
(l)countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared values.




