
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00847/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast-Laganside                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2013                                |On 10 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     ZM
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A. McGowan, Counsel instructed by McHugh Lynam
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A. Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant was born on 18 July 1971. He is a citizen of  Tunisia.
       He came to the UK in 1997  with  leave  to  enter  as  a  spouse.  A
       decision to make a deportation order against him was  taken  by  the
       Secretary of State on 5 October 2012. That decision was taken on the
       basis of the appellant's convictions on 18 April 2005  for  grievous
       bodily harm contrary to section  20  of  the  Offences  Against  the
       Person Act 1861 involving two separate victims, and possession of an
       offensive weapon, being a keyring  containing  a  blade.  For  those
       offences he received a total  sentence  of  three  years  and  three
       months' imprisonment. He has other convictions which are set out  in
       detail below.

    2. On 6 December 2012  his  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make  a
       deportation order came before a Panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       consisting of First-tier judge S. Gillespie and non-legal member  Mr
       B Yates whereby they dismissed  the  appeal.  Permission  to  appeal
       against that decision having been granted, the  appeal  came  before
       me.

Submissions

    3. Mr McGowan relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
       well as the skeleton argument.  He  indicated  that  there  were  no
       ongoing contact proceedings in respect of the appellant's  children,
       although it was  initially  suggested  that  there  was  documentary
       evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to the effect  that  contact
       proceedings were ongoing at that time. In fact, the relevant  letter
       is dated 24 January 2013 and relates to proceedings in February 2013
       which Mr McGowan accepted was correct and which could not  therefore
       have been evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  sat  in
       December 2012. I was informed that the family proceedings  had  been
       withdrawn on the advice of counsel. There was nevertheless  evidence
       in the form C1 before the First-tier Tribunal of an  application  to
       the family court but there was no return date.

    4. It was submitted that it was irrational of the Secretary of State to
       take into account the sentencing remarks given the delay between the
       offences  and  the  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.   The
       sentencing judge had stated that nothing would be served by  sending
       him back to prison. The decision  letter  did  not  refer  to  other
       aspects of the sentencing remarks.

    5. The Secretary of State had only considered the Immigration Rules not
       Article 8 proper. I was referred to an academic article from Westlaw
       UK entitled "Outcomes aren't all: defending process-based review  of
       public authority decisions under the Human Rights Act" by David Mead
       relating to the suggestion that there was a failure on the  part  of
       the Secretary of State in terms of process in relation to Article 8.



    6. The First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  did  not  deal  with  the
       question of whether the appellant's deportation was conducive to the
       public good and does not refer to case law on  the  public  interest
       issue, the issue of delay and whether there was sufficient  evidence
       for a decision to be taken under section 3(5) of the Immigration Act
       1971.

    7. Mr Mullen submitted that the decision to make  a  deportation  order
       followed the appellant's convictions in 2010. By  the  time  of  the
       deportation decision he had four convictions. The Secretary of State
       was entitled to have regard to  all  those  considerations  and  the
       delay did not render the decision unlawful, albeit  that  delay  may
       have an affect on the proportionality assessment. I was referred  to
       various  factual  matters  which  it  was  submitted  supported  the
       decision of the Secretary of State and the conclusion of the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    8. It was conceded that the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was
       not an 'automatic deportation'. However, that error  by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal did not require the decision to be set aside.

    9. Even if the 'new' Article 8 Rules did not apply, the  Tribunal  went
       on to consider Article 8 in any event. Through  whatever  prism  the
       First-tier Tribunal had looked at the decision they would have  come
       to the same conclusion.

   10. It was implicit that the family proceedings had only been  initiated
       for  the  purposes  of  the  deportation  proceedings.  He  had  not
       undertaken those proceedings until 2012. The First-tier Tribunal had
       considered the question of the family proceedings. In any event, now
       the family proceedings had ground to a halt.

My assessment

   11. In order to put my conclusions into context it is necessary  to  set
       out some further background to the appeal.  On  18  April  2005  the
       appellant was convicted, after pleas of guilty, of two  offences  of
       causing grievous bodily harm contrary to section 20 of the  Offences
       Against the Person Act 1861, against two individuals.  He  was  also
       convicted of having an offensive weapon, namely a keyring containing
       a blade. The offences took place  on  24  April  2003.  He  received
       sentences totalling three years and three months imprisonment.

   12. According to the Secretary of State's summary in her appeal  bundle,
       he was convicted in the Magistrates Court  on  3  November  2008  of
       breach of a non-molestation  order  and  sentenced  to  six  months'
       imprisonment suspended for  two  years.  On  2  March  2009  he  was
       convicted of disorderly behaviour and fined  �350.  On  22  February
       2010 he was convicted of two offences of breach of a non-molestation
       order, assault on police and "resisting police". For all offences he
       received a sentence of six months' imprisonment  suspended  for  two
       years, all to run concurrently. Seemingly also on 22  February  2010
       he was convicted of breach of a non-molestation order and  sentenced
       to three months imprisonment, although there may be  some  confusion
       in relation to the offences in  February  2010  since  the  outcomes
       referred to appear inconsistent. On 15 August 2011 he was  convicted
       in the Magistrates Court of disorderly behaviour, attempted criminal
       damage and resisting police. He  received  concurrent  sentences  of
       five months' imprisonment.

   13. He has two children, CM born on 12 May  2005  and  SJM  born  on  13
       November 1997. It is accepted that he has not had contact  with  SJM
       since 2003, although there had been  contact  proceedings  going  on
       until 2008 at which point there was a  court  order  preventing  him
       from bringing further contact proceedings without leave of the court
       and he had been denied legal aid to challenge that ruling.

   14. The decision to make a deportation order expressly states that it is
       made pursuant to section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  ("the
       171 Act"). It is not stated to be a  decision  under  the  automatic
       deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").

   15. The First-tier Tribunal at [18] purported  to  consider  the  appeal
       with reference to the 2007 Act, stating that "It is  in  the  public
       interest to  deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
       Deportation Order in accordance with Section 32 of the UK  Border[s]
       Act 2007". In the respondent's 'Rule 24' response to the grounds  of
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal it was  accepted  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal misdirected  itself  in  considering  the  decision  as  an
       automatic deportation, albeit contending that  this  error  was  not
       material to the outcome.

   16. It is clear that there is an error of law in  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal which erroneously considered the  appeal  as  an
       automatic deportation decision under section 32(5) of the 2007  Act.
       The question is, does this require the decision to be set aside.

   17. Related to this issue are other aspects of  the  grounds  of  appeal
       whereby at various points it is contended that the Tribunal erred in
       law by failing to require the Secretary of State to establish lawful
       grounds for deportation (C), failing to allow the  appeal  as  being
       not in accordance with the law, and failing to find that  no  lawful
       grounds for deportation had been established.

   18. It is not suggested that paragraphs 396 and 398 are inapplicable  by
       reason of the date of the immigration decision as against  the  date
       of  the  introduction  of  those  Rules.  Paragraph  398  refers  to
       deportations that are conducive to the public good. In the  case  of
       this appellant his convictions in 2005, resulting in a term of three
       years and three months' imprisonment are relied on.

   19. I do not accept that the Secretary of State has not established  any
       basis for the decision to make a  deportation  order,  or  no  valid
       ground under which the appellant is liable to deportation ([14c.] of
       the grounds of appeal). It is expressly stated  in  the  immigration
       decision itself that his deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public
       good.

   20. At [14d.] of the grounds it is said  that  the  Secretary  of  State
       erred in law by applying paragraph 398 because it was irrational and
       otherwise contrary to administrative law to take  into  account  the
       sentence of 39 months, given the delay of  five  and  a  half  years
       before   taking   the   immigration   decision.    However,    those
       administrative  law   principles   are   not   applicable   in   the
       circumstances of this appeal where there was an immigration decision
       which generated a right of appeal before the  Tribunal  whereby  the
       Tribunal would be required to consider proportionality  as  part  of
       its consideration of the Article 8 ground of appeal.

   21. Whilst the decision in MF (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
       UKUT 00393(IAC) is to the effect that the 'Article 8' rules were not
       a complete  analogue  of  Article  8  proper,  it  was  nevertheless
       concluded that the Secretary of State was  entitled  to  make  those
       rules  which  included  requirements  that  were,  within  UK   law,
       extraneous to Article 8. Thus, the  reference  in  the  reasons  for
       decision letter to a requirement of exceptional  circumstances  does
       not render the Secretary of State's decision not in accordance  with
       the law as the grounds appear to suggest. The Tribunal in MF did not
       itself conclude that the immigration decision in that case  was  not
       in accordance with the law.

   22. Similarly, whilst it is at least arguable that the  decision  letter
       did not deal with Article 8 in its 'pure'  form,  as  distinct  from
       under the Article 8 immigration  rules,  I  do  not  accept  that  a
       failure to deal with Article 8 renders the  decision  unlawful,  and
       that the First-tier Tribunal should have so  found.  This  issue  is
       referred to in the skeleton argument as a "procedural  failure"  and
       reliance is placed on the article by David  Mead  (see  paragraph  5
       above).  However, as was acknowledged on behalf  of  the  appellant,
       and is recognised in that article, the weight of  authority  in  the
       three House of Lords  decisions  identified  there  is  against  the
       proposition contended for on behalf of the appellant. The article by
       David Mead, however interesting and compelling it  may  be  from  an
       academic perspective, does not have any impact on the issues I  have
       to determine.

   23. There is no merit in the contention in the last sentence  of  [14e.]
       of the grounds to the effect that the Tribunal erred  by  conducting
       its own consideration of Article 8. It was bound to consider Article
       8, it having been raised as a ground of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (see section 86(2) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
       2002).

   24. The grounds contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  misstated  the
       burden of proof at [3] where it stated that the burden of  proof  is
       on the appellant whereas  in  a  deportation  case  it  is  for  the
       Secretary of State to establish the facts relied  on  in  favour  of
       deportation. This apparently standard paragraph used by the Panel is
       not apt in a deportation case such as this where  the  Secretary  of
       State does need to establish that the appellant  is  not  a  British
       citizen and that his deportation is conducive to  the  public  good.
       However, when the determination overall is considered it is apparent
       that the Panel did assess the  evidence  in  terms  of  whether  his
       deportation was conducive to the public good. I also  bear  in  mind
       the presumption in paragraph 396 that where a person  is  liable  to
       deportation the  presumption  shall  be  that  the  public  interest
       requires deportation.

   25. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in  the  suggestion  that
       the Secretary of State's decision was unlawful on  the  basis  of  a
       failure to take into account aspects of the  sentencing  remarks  in
       relation to the grievous bodily harm offences. The  passages  relied
       on in support of this argument relate to the sentencing judge having
       stated that there was no need for the  appellant  to  spend  further
       time in prison. However, the fact is that it was  decided  that  the
       offences merited a significant custodial term and the seriousness of
       the offences is reflected in that part  of  the  sentencing  remarks
       quoted in the decision letter. Naturally, there is bound to be  some
       subjectivity in  the  selection  of  passages  from  the  sentencing
       comments but that in no way makes the Secretary of State's  decision
       unlawful on the basis of irrationality as suggested on behalf of the
       appellant.

   26. It is said that the First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  mistake  of  fact
       leading to unfairness when it appeared to doubt the existence of the
       appellant's child CM. At [24] it was said that no birth  certificate
       had been provided. There was however, evidence in the form of  proof
       of an application for an Order (in family proceedings) on a form  C1
       in relation to CM. The Tribunal itself referred  to  that  document.
       Whilst therefore there was evidence of the existence of  that  child
       and the Tribunal was wrong to state otherwise at  [24],  it  did  in
       fact proceed on the assumption that there is such  a  child  because
       there was consideration of the contact proceedings.

   27. In relation to the contact proceedings, although  the  Tribunal  had
       before it the C1 application it observed that there was no  evidence
       that it had been filed with the court or that there was  any  return
       date. The Tribunal also noted  that  previous  proceedings  in  2011
       resulted in his application being dismissed. The Panel  referred  to
       the decision in RS (immigration and family court proceedings)  India
       [2012] UKUT 00218(IAC) and noted the  lack  of  evidence  of  actual
       input by the appellant into the lives of his children.

   28. The grounds criticise the Tribunal for the observation at [28]  that
       there is "a pattern to be discerned in the way in which both mothers
       have apparently responded to whatever contacts he has made", on  the
       basis of  irrelevance  and  lack  of  supporting  evidence  for  the
       observation. In fact, it does appear from [15]  that  the  appellant
       himself said that contact with CM was stopped by his mother. At [14]
       there is reference to his last contact with SJM having been in  2003
       and a court order  preventing  him  from  bringing  further  contact
       proceedings without leave of the court, and that he had been  denied
       legal aid to challenge that  decision.  It  seems  to  me  that  the
       Tribunal was justified in making the observation that it did. It  is
       not an  irrelevant  consideration  because  it  was  a  matter  that
       potentially affected the prospects of future contact.

   29. In any event, as indicated at  [3]  above,  I  was  informed  by  Mr
       McGowan that there were now no ongoing contact proceedings and  that
       the application that there was had been withdrawn. Those facts to  a
       great extent supersede some of the matters raised in the grounds  of
       appeal and in the skeleton argument.

   30. The grounds at [26] contend that the Panel irrationally concluded at
       [29] that irrespective of the outcome of any family  proceedings  or
       the best interests of the appellant's children his  deportation  was
       merited. However, this was a conclusion the Tribunal was entitled to
       come to on the evidence. It was in any event not a  conclusion  that
       affected the outcome of the appeal because there were, and  are,  no
       contact proceedings and it is evident  from  the  history  of  those
       proceedings that the best interests of the appellant's children  are
       not served by his having contact with them.

   31. There is however, merit in the further  criticism  of  [29]  of  the
       determination. There it is stated that the court that sentenced  the
       appellant to three months' imprisonment in 2010 for breach of a non-
       molestation order decided, having taken into account a  pre-sentence
       report ("PSR"), that the offence was  so  serious  that  the  public
       needed to be protected from harm. The Panel went on  to  state  that
       "Considerations leading to that outcome clearly went  beyond  issues
       affecting  Ms  Henderson  alone."  The  grounds  argue   that   that
       conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal has no  evidential  basis  and
       "the Tribunal erred in making an assumption."

   32. It seems to me that this is a valid criticism of that  part  of  the
       Tribunal's  determination.  Whilst  not  expressly  stated  in   the
       grounds, it does not appear that the Panel had before  it  the  pre-
       sentence report in respect of that conviction.  In  fact,  when  one
       looks at the summary of the appellant's offending contained  in  the
       decision letter, it records different sentencing  outcomes  for  the
       breach of non-molestation order dealt with on the 22 February  2010,
       albeit that what the Panel recorded as a sentence of  three  months'
       imprisonment has not been disputed on behalf of the appellant.

   33. So, not having before it the PSR it is impossible  to  see  how  the
       Panel concluded that the offence was so serious that the public then
       needed protection from harm. Indeed,  logically  a  breach  of  non-
       molestation order would probably not be a basis for concluding  that
       the public at large should be protected. Additionally, the reference
       to a Ms Henderson is puzzling. It may  well  be  that  this  passage
       relates to another case entirely.

   34. Those aspects of the determination at [29] do betray a want of  care
       on the part of the Panel in  drafting  the  determination.  However,
       when considered in the context of the determination as a  whole,  in
       so far as they reveal an error of law  for  apparently  taking  into
       account irrelevant matters,  that  is  not  an  error  of  law  that
       requires the determination to  be  set  aside.  Even  without  those
       errors, the outcome of the appeal would not have been any  different
       on the Panel's assessment of the evidence.

   35. So far as delay is concerned, at [32] the Panel  took  into  account
       that five years had elapsed between the convictions of 2005 for  the
       serious offences of  grievous  bodily  harm  and  possession  of  an
       offensive  weapon,  and  the  notification  of  his   liability   to
       deportation. There is reference in the determination to the decision
       in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 and [13]-[16] of the judgement. It  is
       evident that the  Panel  took  into  account  the  issue  of  delay,
       identifying it as a relevant factor but concluding that it  did  not
       render disproportionate the decision to remove the appellant for the
       reasons given.

   36. I return now to the question of whether the  error  of  law  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal in relation to  automatic  deportation  requires
       the decision to be set aside. In stating at [18] that it is  in  the
       public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must  make  a
       deportation under section 32 of the 2007 Act the First-tier Tribunal
       seems to have had in mind section  32(4)  which  provides  that  the
       deportation of a "foreign criminal" is conducive to the public good.
       Nevertheless, it went on to  make  its  own  assessment  of  whether
       deportation was conducive to the public good, albeit expressing  the
       matter in terms of the public interest, referring to his convictions
       not  only  for  the  most  serious  offences  but  those   committed
       subsequently.

   37.  The  appellant  plainly  is  and  was  someone  who  is  liable  to
       deportation under section 3(5) of the 1971 Act because he is  not  a
       British citizen and the Secretary of State deemed his deportation to
       be conducive to the public good. The First-tier  Tribunal  correctly
       stated, with reference to paragraph 396,  that  where  a  person  is
       liable to deportation the  presumption  shall  be  that  the  public
       interest requires deportation.

   38. In conclusion, although the First-tier Tribunal did err  in  law  in
       referring to the deportation decision under appeal as  an  automatic
       deportation, that is not an error of law which requires the decision
       to be set aside. None of the other grounds establish  any  error  of
       law or any that require the decision to be set aside.

Decision

   39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       however, is not set aside and the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
       stands.




Anonymity

Given that these proceedings involve children, I make an order (pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008).
Consequently, this determination identifies the  appellant's  children,  and
the appellant, by initials only in order to preserve the anonymity of  those
children.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 10/09/13
