
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00721/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons                 |
|On 6 November 2014 and 16 January    |Promulgated on 20 February 2015      |
|2015                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              THARGAM AL HAMADI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Halligan instructed by Malik & Malik


                            DECISION AND REASONS

ERROR OF LAW

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford and Mrs S A  Hussain  JP
    (the Tribunal) who for reasons given in  their  determination  dated  6
    June 2014 allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision to  make
    a deportation order dated  11  April  2014.   On  6  November  I  heard
    submissions and thereafter sent  out  my  decision  setting  aside  the
    Tribunal in the following terms.

 2. The Respondent (the claimant) is a national of Iraq where he  was  born
    15 January 1992.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  February  2008
    when he claimed asylum.  He  had  on  arrival  presented  a  Lithuanian
    identity card which was found to be false and he was refused  leave  to
    enter.

 3. Whilst his claim to asylum was pending, the claimant committed offences
    resulting in convictions in March and  April  2010  and  December  2011
    before  his  asylum  claim  was  refused  on  8  September  2011.   The
    convictions over this two year period were as follows:

          i) 16 March 2010; conviction of burglary  with  intent  to  steal
             resulting in a sentence of four months in a  young  offenders'
             institution on 19 May 2010.

         ii) 28 April 2010; conviction of sexual  assault  -  intentionally
             touch a female.  On 26 May  2010  sentenced  to  four  months'
             training and training order.

        iii)  1  December  2011;  convicted  of  failing  to  comply   with
             notification requirements.  A community order extended  to  23
             February 2012 with a curfew requirement for twelve  weeks  and
             electronic tagging.

 4. The claimant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim  was
    allowed on Article 8 human  rights  grounds.   On  this  basis  he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain on 26 June  2012  until  26  June
    2015.

 5.  On  23  January  2014  the  claimant  was  sentenced  to   65   weeks'
    imprisonment.  He had pleaded guilty to a count of conspiracy to supply
    cannabis and an offence of aggravated vehicle  taking.   The  sentences
    imposed were 31 weeks' imprisonment for aggravated vehicle  taking  and
    34 weeks' imprisonment for the drugs offence.  The  claimant  had  been
    driving a motor car which had been acquired by his co-defendants  which
    had resulted in a  police  chase  and  a  collision  with  three  other
    vehicles.  The drug offence  occurred  on  3  November  2012  when  the
    claimant was transporting eight bags of cannabis worth  between  �2,000
    to �4,000 in a taxi as the trust courier  of  his  co-defendants.   The
    sentencing judge observed that the drugs were  for  onward  supply  but
    not, in his judgment, street dealing quantities.

 6. The claimant married  Samantha  Connors  on  30  December  2011.   This
    relationship was the basis of the asylum appeal having been allowed  on
    article 8 grounds which had led to the grant of discretionary leave.

 7. The reasons for the proposed deportation order are set out in a  letter
    dated 11 April 2014 in which it is explained that paragraph  398(c)  of
    the Immigration Rules applied in the case.  The Secretary of State  did
    not accept that  the  claimant  could  benefit  from  paragraph  399(a)
    because there were no children nor in respect of 399(b) because it  was
    not accepted he had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    British citizen partner.  In any event he had not lived in  the  United
    Kingdom with valid leave for at least the fifteen years  preceding  the
    date of the decision.  In respect of paragraph 399A it was accepted the
    claimant may have developed a degree of private life he  did  not  meet
    the criteria of this rule. This was the basis that as a  22  year  old,
    even before any  periods  of  imprisonment  had  been  discounted,  the
    claimant had not spent at least half his life in  the  United  Kingdom.
    In his asylum claim he had advised that his family remained in Iraq and
    there was no evidence to suggest they would be unable to help him to re-
    establish himself on return.  It was  considered  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which would prevent deportation.

 8. The Tribunal took a different  view  on  these  matters  after  hearing
    evidence from the claimant and his wife.   Under  a  misconception,  it
    understood  the  Secretary  of  State  had  contended  the   claimant's
    deportation was conducive to  the  public  good  because  he  had  been
    sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  over  twelve  months  with
    reference to paragraph 398(b).  The Tribunal found  that  the  claimant
    had been accepted into Ms Connors' family.  He had learned English  and
    has used his time in custody constructively.  It was accepted that  the
    claimant's family had not approved of this marriage.   Ms  Connors  had
    always lived in the United Kingdom and did not speak Arabic.

 9. The exceptional circumstances the Tribunal found in this case  were  as
    follows:

         "(i) The Appellant's strong subsisting marriage to Ms Connors;

         (ii) His relationship with her family;

         (iii)    Her inability to leave her family and employment  to  live
             in a country considered dangerous for British citizens by  the
             Foreign office;

         (iv) The fact that if he were deported alone, it would  in  effect,
             break up the marriage with Miss Connors, who  is  an  innocent
             party and a hard-working respectable young woman;

         (v)  If the Appellant were deported, he could not re-enter  the  UK
             for a ten-year period, which we believe might well  extinguish
             his relationship with his wife."

10. The Tribunal thereafter turned its  attention  to  the  proportionality
    exercise with reference to Razgar and concluded at [28][iv] that:

         "...interference with the [claimant's] private and family  life  is
         not necessary in the interests of national security, public safety,
         the economic wellbeing  of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
         disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or  for
         the protection of rights and freedoms of others."

11. The Tribunal then proceeded in brief  terms  to  state  that  in  their
    judgment deportation of the claimant to  Iraq  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to a private and family life  and  thus  on
    this basis allowed the appeal under Article 8.

12. The Secretary of State's challenge argues that the Tribunal had  failed
    to give reasons or adequate reasons for its finding on material matters
    with reference to the decisions in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192,
    Gulshan v SSHD [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin).  In short it was  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    provide reasons why the claimant's circumstances were either compelling
    or exceptional.

13. In granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes noted
    that the grounds and the determination referred incorrectly to s.32  of
    the 2007 Act.  He considered that the grounds were arguable.

14. I am grateful to Ms Johnstone and Mr Halligan  for  their  submissions.
    Ms Johnstone sought leave to amend the grounds to include reference  to
    the wrong provision of the Rule to which Mr Halligan had no  objection.
    Ms Johnstone confirmed that the challenge in essence was  a  perversity
    challenge.  In his response Mr Halligan argued in  essence  that,  when
    read in its entirety, the determination showed the Tribunal had carried
    out the proportionality test correctly.

15. Having considered the submissions and the determination, I am satisfied
    that the Tribunal erred in its Article 8 consideration in the following
    respects.

16. Whilst it might not of itself be material, the  Tribunal  misunderstood
    the nature of the immigration decision under challenge referring in its
    opening paragraph to a  decision  to  deport  the  claimant  under  the
    automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.

17. The determination sets out accurately the claimant's offending  history
    and also the nature of the offending that had specifically led  to  the
    decision to make a deportation order.  However a further error  emerges
    in [22] which reveals the Tribunal understood that the deportation  was
    conducive to the public good because of the sentence  to  a  period  of
    over twelve months' imprisonment with reference to paragraph 398(b)  as
    I have observed above.

18. But for that reference, there is no explanation by the Tribunal how  it
    factored the criminal offending into the proportionality  exercise  nor
    is there an explanation of how the public interest had been  reconciled
    with the competing factors in favour of  the  claimant  and  his  wife.
    There is an absence of reasoning why the Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    interference with the claimant's protected Article  8  rights  was  not
    necessary having regard to the Secretary of State's aims other  than  a
    reference earlier in the determination as follows at [24]:

         "...The appellant and his wife say that the  appellant  has  learnt
         his lesson and wishes to be a constructive member of  society.   We
         accept that this is the appellant's intention and that he  has  the
         support of his wife and family.  We  note  that  the  appellant  is
         still only 22 years old and that his first  conviction  in  the  UK
         occurred when he was 18 years old.  He was given the chance to live
         a normal life in the UK, but re-offended.  On the  other  hand,  we
         accept that he has lived in the UK since he was 16  years  old  and
         has spent his adult life in the UK.  We accept that he  has  learnt
         English and used this time constructively."

19. There was no direction by the Tribunal as  to  the  principles  it  was
    required to apply pursuant to MF (Nigeria) and the Tribunal  failed  to
    appreciate that the scales in favour of deportation by  virtue  of  the
    claimant's offending were already heavily weighted  in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State.  Although a failure to refer to the  relevant  case
    law would not of itself result in error if, in substance,  the  correct
    test had been applied, this is  not  evident  from  a  reading  of  the
    determination. The Tribunal correctly explained in [26] that it  needed
    to consider whether there were exceptional circumstances but it is  not
    clear from the language of the determination that  it  understood  that
    "something very compelling (which will be "exceptional") is required to
    outweigh the public interest in removal" (as per the judgment in MF  at
    [42]).

20. Whilst it was open to the Tribunal to  identify  the  factors  that  it
    considered sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest  it  was  also
    necessary to explain why that was  so  in  the  context  of  the  heavy
    weighting in the scales in favour of removal.  As the rules contemplate
    the possibility of separation because of  criminal  offending,  it  was
    necessary to explain why, in the  absence  of  the  15  year  residence
    requirement being met, the article 8  claim  should  trump  the  public
    interest.  Perhaps if the Tribunal had understood that the decision  to
    make a deportation order was based on  persistent  offending  it  might
    have realised the importance of the criminal history.   In  any  event,
    the assurances given by the claimant and his partner as to a change  of
    behaviour lacks a critical analysis of why their word was enough in the
    face of a pattern of criminal behaviour.

21. A factor such as the possibly that a relationship would  be  unable  to
    continue can have considerable weight but only after proper regard  has
    been had to the force of the public interest and adequate reasons given
    for the resulting proportionality decision.

22. The decision cannot stand. I therefore set aside the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The only new evidence Mr  Halligan  indicated
    would be led related to medical  treatment  by  the  claimant  and  his
    partner connected with having a baby.  The relationship is not disputed
    and I do not consider such further fact-finding on this aspect requires
    the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

REMAKING THE DECISION

23. In compliance with directions  given,  the  claimant's  representatives
    have lodged with the Upper Tribunal further statements by the  claimant
    and his partner and supporting letters from the claimant's  cousin  and
    aunt.  Mr Harrison had no questions for the claimant  and  his  partner
    and  accordingly  neither  was  called.   After  submissions  from  the
    representatives I reserved my decision.

24. The statement by the claimant refers to the absence of  any  breach  of
    the licence on which he was released from prison which has now expired.
     He expresses regret at his offending and the impact  on  his  partner.
    He accompanies her when she attends hospital for infertility treatment.

25. In her statement Ms Connors refers to the  support  that  the  claimant
    provides her. She also  refers  to  her  employment  with  one  of  the
    clearing banks and the courses she follows to further her career. It is
    her contention that as a British citizen it would be  unreasonable  and
    unfair to expect her to go to Iraq to  live  with  the  claimant.   She
    confirms the strength of her relationship with the claimant.

26. Mr Halligan began his submissions with the argument that  the  decision
    by the Secretary of State showed that she had  misunderstood  the  task
    before her in the way that she had addressed Article 8 in her  decision
    letter. I find no merit in this particular argument.  The Secretary  of
    State asked herself  the  question  whether  there  were  circumstances
    present which were sufficiently  exceptional  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest.  It is not arguable that she was applying  an  exceptionality
    test in the context of a  decision  letter  that  involves  a  detailed
    consideration of the Immigration Rules.

27. Thereafter the representatives addressed me the approach they contended
    I should take under the Immigration Rules.  In  addition,  Mr  Halligan
    argued  that  the  circumstances  of  Ms  Connors   required   separate
    consideration under Article 8 outside the Rules.

28. In accordance with YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292  the  2014
    Rules apply in this case as do the amendments to the 2002 Act  bringing
    into force Part 5A. I began with the latter. Relevant to the issues  in
    this appeal the provisions are as follows:


         117A   Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
             life under Article 8, and

         (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2)   In considering the public interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

         (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
             and

         (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
             the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)   In subsection (2), "the public interest question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B      Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
    all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

         117C    Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

         117D     Interpretation of this Part


         (1)  In this Part-

           . "Article 8" means Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights;

           . "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or
             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
                  of seven years or more;
           . "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or
             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
                  of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A)  of  that
                  Act).



         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)  who is not a British citizen,

         (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an  offence,
             and

         (c)  who-

             (i)  has been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                  least 12 months,

             (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused  serious
                  harm, or

             (iii)    is a persistent offender.


29. The relevant Rules are in these terms:


         Deportation and Article 8


         A398. These rules apply where:


               a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
                  deportation would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;


               b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
                  against him to be revoked.


         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and


               a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;




               b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or


               c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law,


              The Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -


             (a)      the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and


                  (i)      the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case


                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and
                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or


             (b)     the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a
                      British citizen or settled in the UK, and


                   i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and


                  ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and


                 iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


         399A.   This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -


               a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
                  of his life; and


               b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


               c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.


         399B.    Where an Article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
             successful:


               a) in the case of a person who is in  the  UK  unlawfully  or
                  whose leave to enter or remain has  been  cancelled  by  a
                  deportation  order,  limited  leave  may  be  granted  for
                  periods not  exceeding  30  months  and  subject  to  such
                  conditions   as   the   Secretary   of   State   considers
                  appropriate;


               b) in the case of a person who has not  been  served  with  a
                  deportation order, any limited leave to  enter  or  remain
                  may be curtailed to a period not exceeding 30  months  and
                  conditions  may  be  varied  to  such  conditions  as  the
                  Secretary of State considers appropriate;


               c) indefinite leave to enter or remain may be  revoked  under
                  section 76 of the 2002 Act and limited leave to  enter  or
                  remain granted  for  a  period  not  exceeding  30  months
                  subject to such  conditions  as  the  Secretary  of  State
                  considers appropriate;


               d) revocation of a deportation order does  not  confer  entry
                  clearance or leave to enter or remain  or  re-instate  any
                  previous leave."

30. Section EX.2. of Appendix FM  is in these terms:

             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner.

DISCUSSION

31. Consideration of any article 8 claim must be through the  lens  of  the
    above rules and the consideration of the public interest  question  i.e
    the justification for interference  must  have  regard  Part  5A.  This
    approach is now well established by the authorities;  the  most  recent
    reminder being by the Court of Appeal in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA
    Civ 1636.  Sales LJ explained at [39] and [40] that:
         "39. The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
             comprehensive code is significant, because it  means  that  an
             official or a tribunal should seek  to  take  account  of  any
             Convention rights of an appellant through the lens of the  new
             rules themselves, rather  than  looking  to  apply  Convention
             rights for themselves in a free-standing way outside  the  new
             rules. This feature of the new rules makes the decision-making
             framework in relation to foreign criminals different from that
             in relation to other parts of the Immigration Rules, where the
             Secretary of State retains a general  discretion  outside  the
             Rules in exercise of which, in some  circumstances,  decisions
             may need to be made in order to accommodate certain claims for
             leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  Convention  rights,  as
             explained in Huang and R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department[2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).
         40.  The requirement that claims  by  appellants  who  are  foreign
             criminals for leave to remain, based on the Convention  rights
             of themselves or their partners, relations or children, should
             be assessed under the new rules  and  through  their  lens  is
             important,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  has
             emphasised. It seeks to ensure uniformity of approach  between
             different officials, tribunals and courts who have  to  assess
             such claims, in the interests of fair and equal  treatment  of
             different appellants with similar cases on the facts. In  this
             regard, the new rules also serve as a safeguard in relation to
             rights of appellants  under  Article  14  to  equal  treatment
             within the scope of Article 8. The requirement  of  assessment
             through the lens of the new rules also seeks  to  ensure  that
             decisions are made in a way that is properly informed  by  the
             considerable weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by Parliament in
             the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State (as  the
             relevant Minister with responsibility  for  operation  of  the
             immigration system), so as to  promote  public  confidence  in
             that system in this sensitive area."

32. Mr Halligan accepted that the claimant's case came within 398(c) on the
    basis of the second category, "... persistent offender ...".  Initially
    Mr Harrison argued that he was instead captured by 398(b).  I  reminded
    him that the claimant had been convicted of two offences leading  to  a
    consecutive sentence of more  than  twelve  months;  on  reflection  he
    acknowledged 398(b) was not in play.

33. Mr Halligan acknowledged that he was unable to make out  a  case  under
    399A. There are no children to the relationship and in consequence  the
    focus is on 399(b).

34. As to 399(b)(i), the relationship was formed when the claimant  was  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully in the sense that he did not  have  leave
    to enter or remain. Even if it could be said that  Temporary  Admission
    made his presence here lawful or  that  section  78  of  the  2002  Act
    lawfully entitled him to remain  pending  the  outcome  of  his  asylum
    appeal, I consider that his immigration  status  was  precarious.   His
    asylum claim had been  refused  and  the  outcome  of  his  appeal  was
    uncertain.  As matters turned out, his appeal was allowed on Article  8
    grounds based on the relationship with Ms Connors.  Mr Halligan  argued
    that the effect of that grant  of  leave  meant  that  the  immigration
    status had  ceased  to  be  precarious  and  accordingly  the  claimant
    satisfied the category in 399(b).

35. Two questions flow from this. The first is whether a  subsequent  grant
    of leave has a neutralising effect on the precariousness of a  previous
    immigration status.  The second is whether the grant  of  discretionary
    leave for 30 months is in itself "precarious" immigration status.

36. The wording of the rule must be given its ordinary meaning.   The  past
    tense is used.  If it was intended that a  subsequent  grant  of  leave
    would have the effect of rendering previous immigration status  as  not
    precarious, the rule would have said so.

37. I have no doubt that the claimant's immigration status  was  precarious
    when the relationship with Ms  Connors  was  formed.   According  to  a
    preliminary ruling of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  dated  30  March
    2012, the claimant's asylum claim was refused on 8 September 2011.  The
    First-tier Tribunal's decision of 6 June 2014 noted the  evidence  that
    the claimant had proposed to her on New Year's Eve on  2010  and  their
    marriage took place on 30 December 2011.  The "preliminary  ruling"  of
    Judge Lever addressed the issue whether  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    required to consider paragraph 395C.  He concluded there  was  no  such
    requirement and the matter should  proceed  to  a  substantive  hearing
    which took place four weeks later.

38. I have not been provided with a copy of the decision.   However  it  is
    not disputed that the appeal was allowed on human rights  grounds  only
    under Article 8, resulting in the grant of discretionary  leave  on  16
    July 2012.  That grant includes the following observation:

         "Applying for an extension.

         Before the period of leave that you have been granted expires,  you
         should either leave the United Kingdom or apply for an extension of
         stay, explaining the reasons on  which  you  were  seeking  further
         leave.  Any application will be considered  in  the  light  of  the
         circumstances prevailing at  that  time.   If  you  application  to
         extend your stay is refused, you will be advised as to the  reasons
         for  this  and  any  right  of  appeal   against   that   decision.
         Applications to extend your stay must be made on the  correct  form
         which is rivalled from this office or by calling 0870 2410645.

         Caution

         The leave you have been granted may be subject to review before  it
         expires if the circumstances which  led  to  your  grant  of  leave
         change. You should understand that you may not be allowed to remain
         in the United Kingdom if, during your stay, you take  part  in  any
         criminal  activities  or  activities  such  as   support   for   or
         encouragement of terrorist organisations, or you otherwise endanger
         national security or public order.  Furthermore,  you  may  not  be
         allowed to remain in the United Kingdom if it is decided  for  some
         other reason that your presence here is not conducive to the public
         good."

39. It seems to me that "precarious"  is  used  in  the  rule  to  describe
    something that is uncertain or unstable.  The above notes  accompanying
    the grant of leave indicate continuing uncertainty and instability  and
    thus, a precarious immigration status.  The offending by  the  claimant
    after the grant of leave leading to the sentencing on 23  January  2014
    undoubtedly contributed to the precariousness of  the  leave  that  had
    been granted.

40. Accordingly I am satisfied in this particular case that the  claimant's
    immigration status was precarious at  the  time  the  relationship  was
    formed and that it remained so by virtue of the claimant's own  actions
    as it developed.  He does not meet the first requirement of 399(b)(i).

41. Each of the requirements of 399(b) must be met if the  claimant  wishes
    to come within the category. His failure to cross the first  hurdle  is
    therefore  fatal.   The  fact  that  Mr  Harrison  conceded  that   the
    requirements of 399(b)(ii) are met does  not  help  the  claimant.   In
    passing I consider that Mr Harrison was correct to make that concession
    in the light of the nature of the situation Ms Connors would face  were
    she to accompany the claimant to Iraq.

42. Any consideration of the third requirement at  399(b)(iii)  has  to  be
    therefore hypothetical.  I am not persuaded that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for Ms Connors to remain  without  the  claimant  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The test has subjective and objective components. I  have  no
    doubt about the affection she feels towards him but she will have  been
    aware when they met of the uncertainty of his  immigration  status  and
    she has allowed the relationship to develop and strengthen despite  the
    claimant undertaking criminal activity.  She  has  invested  a  lot  in
    somebody who has let her down.    Whilst  I  have  no  doubt  that  the
    claimant's absence will cause heartache, I do not consider in  all  the
    circumstances that it would be unduly harsh for her to  remain  without
    the claimant even though it would be unlikely she will see him  in  the
    near future again unless the parties meet in a third country.

43. As the claimant cannot come within the 399(b) category the  next  stage
    in the journey through the Rules is the concluding clause in  398.  The
    enquiry is whether there are "very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those in paragraphs 399 and  399A".   It  is  also  necessary  to
    consider the provisions in Part 5A.  I note that little  weight  should
    be given to a relationship that is "formed with  a  qualifying  partner
    that is established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
    status is precarious"(section 117B(4)(b)).  Both the  section  and  the
    rule  contemplate  a  past  state  of  affairs.  Whereas  there  is  no
    flexibility in the rule, section 117 leaves room for some weight to  be
    given however I do not consider it can avail the claimant in the  light
    of undermining effect of his continued criminal behaviour.

44. Section 117(C) provides exceptions to the public  interest  requirement
    for deportation of  foreign  criminals.  The  claimant  is  in  such  a
    category as he has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at
    least 12 months (section 117D (2)). This is not restricted to a  single
    offence. Exception 2 in section 117B (4) requires consideration of  the
    effect on Ms Connors. I see no difference between the test  of  "unduly
    harsh" in the Act and that used in 399(c)(iii).   Although  my  finding
    under the rule was on a hypothetical basis, it can be  applied  without
    qualification to this provision in primary legislation. Ms Connors  has
    permitted the relationship to be established whilst fully aware of  its
    precariousness and to develop whilst the claimant was offending.  I  do
    not consider Exception 2 is made out.

45. Mr Halligan argued  that  the  circumstances  of  Ms  Connors  required
    consideration outside the  Rules.  As  I  have  already  observed,  any
    Article 8 assessment is required to be made through the lens of the new
    Rules.

46. The removal of the claimant will effectively end further development of
    Ms Connors relationship with him unless they decide to live in a  third
    country.  Despite the real disappointment this will  bring  and  giving
    consideration to the claimant's avowed intention not to offend again, I
    am  not  persuaded  that  these  factors  constitute  very   compelling
    circumstances  that  render  the  interference  with  the  family  life
    disproportionate.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  I  have  also  taken
    account of the period of time that the claimant has spent in the UK and
    the private life that he will have developed although it has to be said
    that the focus of the submissions was on the relationship. I have  also
    taken account of the difficulties that he will face in  readjusting  to
    life in Iraq where he claims to have no ties. He  states  that  he  has
    little recollection of his life there.  That may well be the case and I
    take account of the absence of any challenge to this evidence. But even
    when all these factors are weighed  against  the  strong  pull  of  the
    competing public interest, I find based on the approach  I  must  take,
    that deportation is proportionate and justified.

47. By way of conclusion, therefore, the decision of the  Tribunal  is  set
    aside for error of law.  I remake the decision and dismiss  the  appeal
    by the claimant against the decision dated 11  April  2014  to  make  a
    deportation order.




Signed        Date 19 February 2015

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

