
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00486/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|16 November 2018                              |12 December 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                         BARTOSZ BARTOSZ KMIECIEWSKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Poland,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision to remove him on the grounds
    of public policy, public security or public health following  a  number
    of criminal convictions.  The appellant was  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom on 29 November 2016.

 2. There was no appearance by him or on his behalf at the  hearing  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff on 25 January 2018.  There had  been
    a late request for an adjournment, which had been  refused  in  writing
    for good reason.  In response the appellant's  solicitors,  South  West
    Law, wrote to  the  Tribunal,  wholly  inappropriately  asserting  that
    unless the Tribunal accepted that it did  not  need  a  report  from  a
    social worker in order for the appellant to succeed in his appeal their
    adjournment request should be granted.   That  second  application  was
    rejected in writing.  A third request for an adjournment  was  made  by
    the solicitors by fax  on  23  January  saying  that  they  had  "heard
    yesterday" that the appellant was unable to afford a flight to  the  UK
    for the hearing.

 3. At the hearing itself, that fax was  before  the  judge.   Although  in
    dealing with it the judge said that it did not make  reference  to  the
    firm being unable to provide representation for the hearing  (which  is
    correct), it did in fact say that  the  firm  would  not  be  providing
    representation for the hearing - or at any rate a hearing on  the  date
    fixed - because the appellant would not be paying them.  It is  because
    the judge made no reference to that feature of this  third  adjournment
    request that permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted.

 4. To complete the  story  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Seelhoff,  the
    appellant's partner (who had not been nominated as his  representative)
    attended the hearing.  She said she was surprised that there was nobody
    from the solicitors.  The solicitors remained on the record.  The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer asked the judge to refuse the adjournment and
    proceed, which is what happened.  The judge issued a full determination
    dismissing the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by this Tribunal for the reasons  we  have  set  out.   Permission  was
    specifically refused on other grounds  relating  to  the  substance  of
    Judge Seelhoff's decision.

 6. On 24 October 2018, South West Law informed the Tribunal that they were
    without instructions and would not be providing any further  assistance
    to the appellant.  They also said that  they  did  not  have  a  postal
    address for the appellant, but did have an email address.

 7. The appellant had been notified of the hearing  by  letter  sent  on  8
    October 2018 to him in the Netherlands at the address he gave  for  the
    purposes of his appeal; no doubt South West Law,  who  represented  him
    then and for some time thereafter, will have carried out  their  duties
    by informing him of the hearing  using  the  email  address  they  had.
    There has been no response from the appellant or anybody acting on  his
    behalf, and there was no attendance at the hearing  by  the  appellant,
    any representative, or anybody claiming to be a member of  his  family.
    We decided to proceed in his absence.

 8. The only ground of appeal is the procedural ground.   It  appears  that
    South West law  while  remaining  on  the  record  as  the  appellant's
    solicitors decided that they would not attend a hearing which they knew
    was going to take place.  Although the judge did not refer to  that  we
    regard it as inconceivable that it would have made  any  difference  to
    the decision to refuse this third adjournment request.  In  any  event,
    the grounds were in the circumstances not the subject of any  argument,
    expansion or explanation before us.  It appears that the  appellant  is
    not concerned to pursue them.  The substantive determination is clearly
    sound.

 9. We dismiss the appellant's appeal.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 26 November 2018.

