
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00307/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     | Date promulgated:                   |
|On 12 August 2016                    |On 2 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               REDHA HAMIDECHE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr CH Ndubuisi of Drummond Miller Solicitors


                                  DECISION

 1. In this regrettably delayed appeal, a brief recitation of  the  history
    will  suffice.   I  shall  employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"   and
    "Respondent" as they applied at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is aged 45 years  and  of  Algerian  nationality.  Having
    entered the United Kingdom in 1995, he pursued  an  unsuccessful  claim
    for asylum. On 10 May 1999 he married a lady of dual British and  Irish
    nationality, as a result of which on 28 September 2000 he  was  granted
    six months leave to enter as the spouse of  an  EEA  national  who  was
    exercising Treaty rights.  I shall describe this lady as "Mrs H".   The
    marriage was of extremely short duration, less than two years.

 3. The Appellant  became  a  prolific  offender,  generating  16  separate
    convictions in respect of 36 offences spanning the period 1998 to 2012.
     His most recent offending consisted of attempted robbery and  assault,
    attracting a sentence of 31 months' imprisonment  on  15  August  2012.
    This was the impetus for the Secretary of State's  decision,  dated  08
    February 2013, to make a deportation order against  him  under  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Thereafter, in brief compass:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") allowed the Appellant's  appeal
         under Article 8 ECHR, in a decision dated 27 September 2013.

     ii) By decision dated 28 November 2013, a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
         allowed the Secretary of State's appeal.

    iii) By the interlocutor of the Court of Session, dated  18  June  2015,
         the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
         was allowed and remittal was ordered.

 4. The contours of this remitted hearing are shaped by what the  Court  of
    Session ordered:

         "... The Upper Tribunal erred in law in not resolving the challenge
         to  the  Appellant's  deportation  predicated  on  a  reliance   on
         purported EEA rights; [the Court] for that  reason  set  aside  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal dated 28 November 2013 only  insofar
         as it dismissed the Appellant's appeal ....  [and] remits the  case
         back to the Upper Tribunal with a direction  to  determine  whether
         the decision of the Respondent was unlawful (i)  having  regard  to
         the possible application  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006; and (ii) having regard to Article 8  [ECHR]
         in the light of the factual position pertaining at the date of  the
         consideration to follow."

    The die is cast accordingly.

 5. All of the evidence in this appeal is documentary.  Some aspects of the
    virtual matrix are uncontroversial, others not. Having  considered  the
    evidence and  the  parties'  respective  arguments,  I  find  that  the
    following material facts are either admitted or proven to the requisite
    standard:

      a) The Appellant's son was  born  on  18  August  1998  in  Edinburgh,
         Scotland.

      b) The Appellant and  Mrs  H  were  married  on  10  May  1999.   They
         separated in 2001 and remain separated.

      c) On 28 September 2000 the Appellant was granted six months leave  to
         enter the United Kingdom for the express purpose of  affording  him
         an opportunity to provide evidence that he was the spouse of a  EEA
         national exercising Treaty rights.  This grant seems to  have  been
         made outwith the Immigration Rules.

      d) On 07 February 2001 Mrs H acquired the status  of  citizen  of  the
         Republic of Ireland.

      e) During an unspecified period between 2001 and 2003 Mrs H  completed
         an Access to University course.

      f)  Between  September/October  2003  and  June  2009  Mrs  H  studied
         nutrition at Queen  Margaret  University,  Edinburgh,  obtaining  a
         Bachelor of Science with Honours.

      g) On 29 March 2010 Mrs H's application for Jobseeker's Allowance  was
         granted, backdated to 16 March 2010.

      h) Mrs H began working for NHS Lothian on 31 October 2011.  There  are
         no further particulars of this, or any other, employment.



THE EEA REGULATIONS

 6. This issue is susceptible to formulation in very compact terms  indeed.
    The Appellant's case is that he acquired a permanent right of residence
    in the United Kingdom qua family member of a  qualified  person  for  a
    minimum period of five years.  The legal effect  of  this  is  that  he
    became  entitled  to  the  enhanced  protections  against   deportation
    enshrined in the Regulations  and,  further,  that  deportation  action
    against him could only be taken under this regime.  Neither the FtT nor
    the Upper Tribunal, in its decision of  28  November  2013,  determined
    this issue.  This is what lies at the heart of the Court  of  Session's
    interlocutor.

 7. By regulation 6(1) of the EEA Regulations a "qualified person" means  a
    person who is an EEA national and is  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    capacity of, inter  alia,  student.  Regulation  4(1)(d)  contains  the
    following definition of "student":

         "(d) "student" means a person who-

             (i)   is enrolled, for the principal purpose  of  following  a
                  course of study  (including  vocational  training),  at  a
                  public or private establishment which is-

                  (aa) financed from public funds; or

                  (bb) otherwise recognised by the Secretary of State as  an
                      establishment  which  has  been  accredited  for  the
                      purpose of providing such courses or training  within
                      the law or administrative practice of the part of the
                      United Kingdom in which the establishment is located;

             (ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
                  Kingdom; and

             (iii)    assures  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  means  of  a
                  declaration, or by such equivalent means as the person may
                  choose, that he has sufficient resources not to  become  a
                  burden on the  social  assistance  system  of  the  United
                  Kingdom during his period of residence."

 8. There were corresponding provisions  under  the  previous  regime,  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2000.   Regulation
    3(1)(g) contained the following definition of "student":

         "(g) "student" means a person who-

             (i)   is enrolled at a recognised educational establishment in
                  the United Kingdom for the principal purpose of  following
                  a vocational training course;

             (ii)   assures  the  Secretary  of  State  by   means   of   a
                  declaration, or by such alternative means as he may choose
                  that are at  least  equivalent,  that  he  has  sufficient
                  resources to avoid him becoming a  burden  on  the  social
                  assistance system of the United Kingdom; and

             (iii)     is covered by sickness insurance in respect  of  all
                  risks in the United Kingdom."

    By regulation 5 a student who satisfied the requirements of  regulation
    3(1)(g) was encompassed within the definition of "qualified person".

   9. By regulation 4(1)(d) of the 2006 Regulations:

         "(d) "student" means a person who-

             (i)   is enrolled, for the principal purpose  of  following  a
                  course of study  (including  vocational  training),  at  a
                  public or private establishment which is-

                  (aa)  financed from public funds; or

                  (bb)  otherwise recognised by the Secretary of State as an
                      establishment  which  has  been  accredited  for  the
                      purpose of providing such courses or training  within
                      the law or administrative practice of the part of the
                      United Kingdom in which the establishment is located;

             (ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
                  Kingdom; and

             (iii)     assures the  Secretary  of  State,  by  means  of  a
                  declaration, or by such equivalent means as the person may
                  choose, that he has sufficient resources not to  become  a
                  burden on the  social  assistance  system  of  the  United
                  Kingdom during his period of residence."

10. Next, it is necessary to consider the definition  of  "family  member".
    First, by regulation 6 of the 2000 Regulations:

         "(1) In these Regulations, paragraphs (2) to (4) apply in order to
             determine the persons who are family members of another
             person.

         (2)  If the other person is a student, the persons are-

             (a)   his spouse; and

             (b)   his dependent children.

         (3)  If he is a self-sufficient or retired person, the persons are-



             (a)   his spouse;

             (b)   descendants of his or of his spouse who are under 21  or
                  are their dependants; and

             (c)   dependent relatives in his ascending line or that of his
                  spouse.

         (4)  In any other case, the persons are-

             (a)  his spouse;

             (b)  descendants of his or of his spouse who are under  21  or
                  are their dependants;

             (c)  dependent relatives in his ascending line or that of  his
                  spouse."

    With effect from 30 April 2006,  the  commencement  date  of  the  2006
    Regulations, the new definition of "family member" is to  be  found  in
    regulation 7.  For the purposes  of  this  appeal,  the  definition  of
    "family member" encompasses a person  who  is  the  spouse  of  another
    person. The consequence of having the status  of  family  member  of  a
    qualified person is spelled out in regulation 15:

         "(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
             United Kingdom   permanently-

             (a)   an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;

             (b)   a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an
                  EEA national but who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  with the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations
                  for a continuous period of five years;..."

    The cross heading of regulation 15 is "permanent right of residence".

11. Changes to the 2006 Regulations  were  introduced  by  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2012.   These  contain
    certain transitional provisions, the most  importance  whereof  in  the
    present context are paragraph 2(2) and (3) of Schedule 3:

         "(2) The criterion in this subparagraph is met where F was on  16th
             July 2012 a person with a permanent right  to  reside  in  the
             United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations.

         (3)  The criteria in this subparagraph are met where F-

             (a)   was on the 16th July 2012  a  person  with  a  right  to
                  reside in the United Kingdom under the  2006  Regulations;
                  and

             (b)  on the 16th October 2012-

                  (i)  held a valid registration  certificate  or  residence
                      card issued under the 2006 Regulations;

                  (ii) had made an application under  the  2006  Regulations
                      for a  registration  certificate  or  residence  card
                      which had not been determined; or

                  (iii)     had  made  an   application   under   the   2006
                      Regulations  for  a   registration   certificate   or
                      residence card which had been refused and in  respect
                      of which an  appeal  under  regulation  26  could  be
                      brought while the appellant is in the United  Kingdom
                      (excluding the possibility of an appeal out  of  time
                      with permission) or was pending (within  the  meaning
                      of section 104 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
                      Asylum Act 2002)."

    The Appellant contends that he is the beneficiary of these provisions.




    THE APPELLANT'S CASE

12. The lawfulness of the impugned decision of the Secretary of State falls
    to be assessed by reference to the date upon  which  it  was  made,  11
    February 2013.  The essential question  which  arises  is  whether,  by
    reference to events preceding this date, the Appellant can  demonstrate
    that he acquired the status of family  member  of  a  qualified  person
    within the compass of the 2006 Regulations, thereby acquiring  a  right
    of permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

13. The Appellant, in advancing this case, is driven to rely heavily on the
    contention that Mrs H was a "student" within the meaning and satisfying
    the requirements of the 2006 Regulations and their predecessor during a
    lengthy period, namely 2003 - 2009.  In adjudicating on the Appellant's
    case, the central issues to be  determined  are  of  a  purely  factual
    nature, namely whether Mrs H satisfied,  at  the  material  times,  the
    requirements of regulation 3(1)(g) of the 2000  Regulations  and,  when
    this regime was superseded, regulation 4(1)(d) of the 2006 Regulations.
     These two statutory provisions are reproduced in [8] and [9] above.

14. It is common case that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  08
    February 2013 to deport the Appellant was made under section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.  By the terms of this decision, the  Secretary
    of  State  expressly  disavowed  the  Appellant  having  any  right  of
    residence under the EEA Regulations.  It follows that if the  Appellant
    is able to demonstrate that he is a family member of  a  EEA  national,
    the impugned decision would not have been in accordance  with  the  law
    and a new decision under regulation 19(3)(b)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    would be required.

15. At the conclusion of the hearing on 12 August 2016, it became necessary
    to defer the Tribunal's decision and to make  a  formal  direction  for
    further submissions in  writing.  Subsequent  administrative  oversight
    has, regrettably,  delayed  finalisation  of  this  judgment:  see  the
    Addendum below.



DECISION AND DISPOSAL

16. The period under particular scrutiny is that during which Mrs H  was  a
    student, namely 2001 to 2009.  During the  first  five  years  of  this
    period, the statutory provision of relevance for present  purposes  was
    regulation 3(1)(g)  of  the  2000  Regulations:  see  [8]  above.   The
    definition of "student" in regulation 3(1)(g)  had  three  elements.  I
    find that the first of these  was  satisfied.   However,  there  is  no
    evidence whatsoever which would enable the Tribunal to find that either
    the second (a declaration or other proof of self-sufficient  resources)
    or the third (proof of comprehensive sickness insurance) was satisfied.
     As regards the last three years of the relevant period,  the  relevant
    statutory provision was regulation 6(1) of the  2006  Regulations:  see
    [7]  above.   This  definition  is   substantially   similar   to   its
    predecessor.  Once again, I find that the first of the  three  elements
    compromising the definition of "student" was satisfied. However,  there
    is no evidence whatsoever  permitting  a  finding  of  compliance  with
    either the second or the third of these elements.

17. It follows that Mrs H was not a "qualified person" within  the  meaning
    of either the 2000 Regulations or the 2006 Regulations at any  material
    time.  The Appellant, in consequence, was not the family  member  of  a
    qualified  person  at  any  material  time.  Having   regard   to   the
    presentation of the Appellant's case, this emerged as the main issue to
    be decided by the Tribunal.

18. A further issue emerged at  the  hearing.   The  2006  Regulations,  in
    particular the definition of  "EEA  national"  in  regulation  2,  were
    amended with effect from 16  October  2012  by  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2012, stimulated by the decision in McCarthy  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2001]  Imm  Ar  586.   The
    transitional arrangements are contained  in  Schedule  3,  paragraph  2
    whereof provides in material terms:

         "(1) Where the right of a family member ("F") to be admitted to, or
             reside in, the United Kingdom pursuant to the 2006 Regulations
             depends on the fact that a person ("P") is an EEA national,  P
             will, notwithstanding the effect of paragraph 1(d) of Schedule
             1 to these Regulations, continue to  be  regarded  as  an  EEA
             national for the purpose of the  2006  Regulations  where  the
             criteria in subparagraphs (2), (3) or (4) are met and  for  as
             long as they remain satisfied in accordance with  subparagraph
             (5).

         (2)  The criterion in this subparagraph is met where F was on  16th
             July 2012 a person with a permanent right  to  reside  in  the
             United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations."

19. Paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 3 places the spotlight  on  Mrs  H.   It  is
    clear that on the operative date, 16 July 2012, Mrs H, being  a  person
    of dual British and Irish nationality, did not have the  status  of  "a
    person with a permanent right to reside in the United Kingdom under the
    2006 Regulations [my emphasis.]  this does not appear to  be  contested
    by the Appellant.  However, the Appellant raises an issue based on  one
    of the Secretary of State's  policies,  namely  a  transitional  policy
    annexed to the European Case Work Instructions and taking effect on  20
    June 2011.  This policy contains the following statement:

         "These arrangements  apply  only  to  EEA  nationals  applying  for
         permission residence documentation on the basis of being a  student
         where they have been issued with a registration certificate in that
         capacity before 20 June 2011."

    It is at once apparent that this policy at no time  applied  to  Mrs  H
    since there is  no  evidence  that  she  had  either  (a)  applied  for
    permanent residence documentation qua student or otherwise or (b)  been
    issued with a registration certificate in her capacity of student prior
    to 20 June 2011.  Furthermore,  I  agree  with  the  submission  of  Mr
    Matthews that this policy was designed to protect a specific  class  of
    students, namely those who before 20 June 2011 had been issued  with  a
    student's registration certificate  without  having  been  required  to
    demonstrate proof of comprehensive sickness insurance.  That this proof
    was not, in practice, required by the Secretary of State  prior  to  16
    July 2012 is not in dispute and was, presumably, the product of  either
    a deliberate policy decision or laxity on the part of case workers  or,
    perhaps, a combination of both.

20. The submissions of Mr Ndbuisi on behalf of the Appellant also contained
    a passing reference to  paragraph  2(3)  of  Schedule  3  to  the  2012
    Regulations.  It is clear that the Appellant, being the person to  whom
    this provision is directed (qua  asserted  family  member  of  Mrs  H),
    cannot satisfy these criteria as there  is  no  evidence  that  on  the
    operative  date,  16  October  2012,  he  held  a  valid   registration
    certificate or registration card issued under the 2006  Regulations  or
    had  an  outstanding  undetermined  application  for  same  or  had  an
    outstanding undetermined appeal against a refusal of such application.

21. In summary, on the grounds and for the reasons  elaborated  above,  the
    Appellant's reliance on the EEA Regulations avails him nothing.   There
    is no provision, or combination of  provisions,  within  this  discrete
    legislative code calling into question the legality of the Secretary of
    State's deportation decision. I am satisfied that section 32(5) of  the
    2007 Act was correctly invoked.  The Appellant's quest for  status  and
    protection under the EEA Regulations fails.

22. Having regard to the terms of the Court of Session's interlocutor,  the
    final issue to be considered is Article 8 ECHR. Taking into account the
    intense statutory intervention in this field during recent  years,  the
    reality is  that  many  of  the  litigants  who  invoke  Article  8  in
    challenging the legality of a deportation decision do so more  in  hope
    than expectation. Notwithstanding, the fact remains that a  deportation
    order which breaches the Article 8 rights  of  a  foreign  criminal  or
    other affected family member  is  unlawful,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal
    emphasised recently in VM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  [2015  EWCA  Civ  1288  at  [20].   Citation  of  authority
    underlining the potency of  the  public  interest  in  play  is  almost
    unnecessary. This has  been  repeatedly  emphasised  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal, most recently in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488.

23. The Appellant's case, having regard to his sentencing, belongs  to  the
    framework of  paragraph  398(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   As  the
    Appellant's son is aged 17 and has resided in the United Kingdom  since
    birth, the two questions which arise are whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the son to live in  Algeria  and  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the Appellant: see paragraph 399(a).   The  appeal  was
    heard one week before the son's 18th birthday. I shall assume,  without
    deciding, that he is to be treated as  a  child.   It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that it would be unduly harsh for  the
    Appellant's son to move  to  and  live  in  Algeria.   However,  it  is
    contended that it would not be unduly harsh for the son  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom without the Appellant. In considering this  issue  I
    shall accept the Appellant's case at its zenith, as set out in the most
    recent witness statements provided.

24. The Court of  Appeal  has  provided  recent  guidance  on  the  correct
    approach to the "unduly harsh" concept, in MM (Uganda) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  450,  at  [22]  -  [24],
    which I have considered.

25. In determining the Article  8  ground  of  appeal,  I  have  taken  the
    Appellant's case at  its  reasonable  zenith.  This  has  included,  in
    particular, consideration of the most recent evidence adduced on behalf
    of the Appellant.  This evidence describes circumstances  of  undoubted
    stress and hardship for all three members of the family concerned - the
    Appellant, Mrs H and their son, whose 18th birthday has just  occurred.
    I take all of the difficulties into account.  I accept that there is  a
    significant, enduring father/son relationship.  However, as Mr Matthews
    has submitted, this relationship must be considered in the  context  of
    the Appellant's lifestyle which has been characterised by (inter  alia)
    repeated drug consumption, prolific offending,  frequent  incarceration
    and adverse mental health. I further accept  the  submission  that  the
    main adult figure in the son's life is his  mother.   Furthermore,  the
    Appellant's last offending is of comparatively recent vintage and there
    is  no  convincing  evidence  that  his  future  is  likely  to  differ
    significantly from his past.  On the contrary: the  evidence  indicates
    that he has no real insight  into  the  impact  of  his  offending  and
    continually  fails  to  take  opportunities  to  terminate   his   drug
    consumption. I consider it more likely than not that were the Appellant
    to avoid deportation reoffending would occur and he will continue to be
    an inadequate, under achieving father.

26. My  overall  evaluative  judgement  is  that  on  the  assumption  that
    paragraph 399(a) of the Rules applies, the Appellant fails  to  satisfy
    the "unduly harsh" standard enshrined in subparagraph (ii)(b)  by  some
    distance.  His proven past and predictable future combine to impel  the
    conclusion that while the impact of  his  deportation  on  his  son  is
    likely to be adverse, negative and uncomfortable, particularly  in  the
    initial stages, it falls well short of scaling the standard  prescribed
    in the Rules.

27. Finally, insofar as the  Appellant  seeks  to  bring  his  case  within
    paragraph 399A of the Rules, I consider that he fails to satisfy all of
    the criteria enshrined therein.  First, he has not  adduced  sufficient
    evidence to justify a finding that he has  been  (a)  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for most of his life and (b) lawfully so.  Based on  the
    evidence, he has been in the United Kingdom since 1994  and,  with  the
    exception of a period of six months in 2000/2001, his presence has been
    consistently unlawful. Second, having regard to all the evidence  about
    the Appellant's history and criminality in the United Kingdom,  I  find
    without hesitation that he is not socially and culturally integrated in
    this society. Third, there is no evidence to  justify  a  finding  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into  the
    country of his birth and upbringing.  Such evidence as  bears  on  this
    discrete issue swings in the  opposite  direction:  the  Appellant  has
    obtained some qualifications in the United Kingdom, he  has  family  in
    Algeria, he has been able to undertake some employment in the past  and
    he speaks both Arabic and English.

28. Given my findings and conclusions above, the final question is  whether
    the Appellant has demonstrated very compelling circumstances  over  and
    above those specified in paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the  Rules.    In
    determining this issue I have considered  in  particular  the  guidance
    provided by the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of  State
    for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662,  at  [28]  -   [33]
    particularly. I can identify no feature of the Appellant's case falling
    within the "over and above" category. I consider the  limited  evidence
    of his adverse mental health insufficient in this respect,  bearing  in
    mind the approach in cases such as Razgar v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, at [59] especially  and  GS  (India)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40, at  [86]
    - [87]. The factors of previous medical treatment and medication in the
    United Kingdom and the concern expressed about the adequacy of the care
    available  to  the  Appellant  in  Algeria   are,   in   my   judgment,
    insufficient.  The medical opinion that the Appellant would be at  risk
    of serious deterioration in his mental health with  possible  self-harm
    in the event of returning to Algeria is counterbalanced by the evidence
    that relevant drugs and treatment are available  there,  together  with
    related social services.  The very high threshold  established  by  the
    line of authority exemplified in the decision of GS (India) is  plainly
    not overcome.

29. My omnibus conclusion is that the pressing  public  interest  favouring
    the Appellant's deportation from the United Kingdom is  not  displaced.
    The Secretary of State's decision  is  in  harmony  with  the  relevant
    provisions of primary legislation and the Rules.



DISPOSAL

30. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.

[SEE ADDENDUM BELOW]


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                    Date:  21 September 2016



                                  ADDENDUM

31. I refer to [15] above.  This judgment was scheduled to  be  promulgated
    in  September  2016.   No  further  submissions  from  the  Appellant's
    representatives were brought to my attention.  Next, the  Secretary  of
    State's representative wrote to the Upper Tribunal indicating  that  no
    further submissions had been  received  and  filing  the  Secretary  of
    State's supplementary submissions.  Having then delayed for a period of
    several weeks, to cater for the possibility that there  had  been  some
    administrative oversight, I proceeded to have the judgment promulgated,
    on 09 November 2016.

32. This gave rise to a letter dated 15 November 2016 from the  Appellant's
    representatives  suggesting  that  they  had  indeed  compiled  further
    written submissions duly transmitted to the Upper Tribunal by  fax  and
    by special post on 26 August 2016.  I accept this as a  fact.   I  note
    the absence of any suggestion that these materials were served  on  the
    Secretary of State's representative.

33. Given these developments I considered that the decision promulgated  on
    09 November 2016 should  be  set  aside  under  Rule  43(2)(d)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the ground of  "other
    procedural irregularity in the proceedings". Both parties were  invited
    to treat the judgment promulgated as a mere draft and to  make  further
    submissions if desired. Neither did so.

34. The decision is hereby promulgated afresh, the difference between  this
    decision  and  its  predecessor  being  that  I  have   given   careful
    consideration  to  the   written   submissions   of   the   Appellant's
    representatives previously overlooked.  As emphasised above, the period
    under scrutiny in this appeal is 2001 to  2009.   The  three  statutory
    requirements in play are rehearsed in [8] and [9]  above.   In  [16]  I
    have stated that there is no evidence whatsoever which would enable the
    Tribunal to find that either the second requirement (a  declaration  or
    other proof of  self-sufficient  resources)  or  the  third  (proof  of
    comprehensive sickness  insurance)  was  satisfied,  impelling  to  the
    conclusion that Mrs H was not a "qualified person" and,  "ipso  facto",
    the Appellant in consequence was not the family member of  a  qualified
    person at any material time: see [17] above.

35. The further written  submissions  of  Mr  Ndubuisi  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant contain  nothing  to  warrant  a  different  assessment.  The
    evidential lacunae noted above remain unfilled. Thus my decision is  as
    set forth in [30] above.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date:  31 January 2017
