
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00385/2013
     DA/00387/2013
     DA/00388/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  11 April 2014                             |On  20 May 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LS
                                     KS
                                     QS
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Ms M. Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors

                                  DECISION
Introduction

    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the first appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on  15  July
       1984. She is the mother of the other appellants who were born in the
       UK on 23 September 2004 and 19 October 2006, respectively. The first
       appellant came to the UK on 21 February 2000 as a visitor,  arriving
       with her mother. The first appellant was therefore 15 years  of  age
       when she arrived. The further history can, for present purposes,  be
       taken quite shortly.

    3. On 7 January 2011 the first appellant was convicted of an offence of
       possession with intent to supply a Class A drug, namely  27.3  grams
       of cocaine. The offence was committed on  9  September  2010.  On  3
       February 2011 in  the  Crown  Court  at  Cambridge  she  received  a
       sentence of 18 months' imprisonment.

    4. On 13 February 2013,  a  decision  was  made  to  deport  the  first
       appellant under the  automatic  deportation  provisions  of  section
       32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007,  with  corresponding  deportation
       decisions in respect of the minor appellants.

    5. The appeals came before a Panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
       allowed the appeals of each  appellant,  the  appeal  of  the  first
       appellant being allowed under the Immigration Rules and that of  the
       minor appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR. The Secretary of State
       applied for permission to appeal against that decision.

    6. The application for permission to appeal was considered by  a  judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal whose decision stated that permission  to
       appeal was refused. The application for permission  to  appeal  that
       was made to the First-tier Tribunal was out of time and  the  First-
       tier judge dealing with the application did not consider  the  issue
       of timeliness. A renewed application for permission  to  appeal  was
       made to the Upper Tribunal whereby permission was granted.

    7. In  a  'Rule  24'  response,  it  is  contended  on  behalf  of  the
       appellants,  in  summary,  that  the  appropriate  response  to  the
       application for permission to appeal made to the First-tier Tribunal
       was that the application be 'not admitted' because the Secretary  of
       State failed to draw the attention of the First-tier Tribunal to the
       fact that the application  was  out  of  time,  and  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did not extend time. The refusal of permission by the First-
       tier Tribunal was therefore conditional; the  decision  should  have
       been not to admit it and in consequence, the renewed application  to
       the Upper Tribunal should  have  provided  an  explanation  for  the
       lateness of the application to the First-tier Tribunal.

    8. I heard brief submissions from the parties  which  I  refer  to,  as
       necessary, in the course of my assessment of the issue.

   My assessment

    9. I start by setting out the relevant procedure rules in relation both
       to the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

   10. In relation to the First-tier Tribunal the procedure rules  are  the
       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  ("the  2005
       Rules"). In so far as relevant they provide as follows:




                           "Appeals to the Upper Tribunal


                  Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal



           24.-(1) A party  seeking  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal must make a written application to  the  Tribunal  for
             permission to appeal.

           (2) Subject to paragraph (3), an application under paragraph (1)
             must be sent or  delivered  to  the  Tribunal  so  that  it  is
             received no later than 5 days after the date on which the party
             making the application is  deemed  to  have  been  served  with
             written reasons for the decision.

           (3) Where an appellant is outside the UK,  the  time  limit  for
             that  person  sending  or  delivering  an   application   under
             paragraph (1) is 28 days.

           (4) If a person makes an application under paragraph  (1)  later
             than the time required by paragraph (2)-

           (a) the Tribunal may extend the time for appealing if  satisfied
             that by reason of special circumstances it would be unjust  not
             to do so; and

           (b) unless the Tribunal extends time  under  sub-paragraph  (a),
             the Tribunal must not admit the application.

           ...

           Filing and service of documents

           (1) Any document which is required or permitted by  these  Rules
           or by a direction of the Tribunal to be filed with the Tribunal,
           or served on any person may be-

           (a) delivered, or sent by post, to an address;

           (b) sent via a document exchange to a document  exchange  number
           or address;

           (c) sent by fax to a fax number;

           (d) sent by e-mail to an e-mail address;

           (e) sent or delivered by any other method;

           specified for that purpose by the Tribunal or person to whom the
           document is directed.

           (2) A document to be served  on  an  individual  may  be  served
           personally by leaving it with that individual.

           (3) Where a person has notified the Tribunal that he  is  acting
           as the representative of an appellant and has given  an  address
           for service, if a document is served on the  appellant,  a  copy
           must  also  at  the  same  time  be  sent  to  the   appellant's
           representative.

           (4) If any document is served on a person who has  notified  the
           Tribunal that he is acting as the representative of a party,  it
           shall be deemed to have been served on that party.

           (5) Subject to paragraph (6), any document that is served  on  a
           person in accordance with this rule shall, unless  the  contrary
           is proved, be deemed to be served-

           (a) where the document is sent by post or document exchange from
           and to a place within the United  Kingdom,  on  the  second  day
           after it was sent;

           (b) where the document is sent by post or document exchange from
           or to a place outside the United Kingdom, on  the  twenty-eighth
           day after it was sent; and

           (c) in any other case, on the day on which the document was sent
           or delivered to, or left with, that person.

           ...

           Calculation of time

            57.-(1) Where a period of time for doing any act  is  specified
           by these Rules or by a direction of the Tribunal, that period is
           to be calculated-

           (a) excluding the day on which the period begins; and

           (b) where the period is 10 days or less, excluding any day which
           is not a business day (unless  the  period  is  expressed  as  a
           period of calendar days).

           (2) Where the time specified by these Rules or by a direction of
           the Tribunal for doing any act ends on a  day  which  is  not  a
           business day, that act is done in time if it is done on the next
           business day."

   11. Under Rule 2 of the 2005 Rules, a "business day" means any day other
       than a Saturday or Sunday, a bank holiday, 25th to 31st December  or
       Good Friday.

   12. Rule 21(6) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       ("the Procedure Rules") provides as follows:

           "(6)     If the appellant provides the application to the  Upper
           Tribunal later than the time required by paragraph (3) or by  an
           extension of time allowed under rule 5(3)(a)  (power  to  extend
           time)--

           (a)     the application must include a request for an  extension
           of time and the reason why the application was not  provided  in
           time; and

           (b)      unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  extends  time   for   the
           application under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend time) the  Upper
           Tribunal must not admit the application."

       Rule 2 states that:



             "2.-(1) The overriding objective of these Rules  is  to  enable
             the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


             (2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
             (a) dealing with the case in ways which  are  proportionate  to
             the importance of the case, the complexity of the  issues,  the
             anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;
             (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking  flexibility  in
             the proceedings;
              (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able
             to participate fully in the proceedings;
             (d)  using  any  special  expertise  of  the   Upper   Tribunal
             effectively; and
             (e)  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as   compatible   with   proper
             consideration of the issues.


             (3) The  Upper  Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the
             overriding objective when it-
             (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or
             (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.


             (4) Parties must-
             (a)  help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further   the   overriding
             objective; and
             (b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."

   13. The First-tier Tribunal's determination of  the  substantive  appeal
       was delivered by hand to the (Home Office) Presenting Officers' Unit
       at Angel Square on 20 December 2013. It was sent by first class post
       to  the  appellants  and  their  solicitors.   The  application  for
       permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       received by the First-tier Tribunal on 9 January 2013.

   14. The application to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to  appeal
       should have been received no later than  5  days  from  20  December
       2013. The effect of the 2005 Rules in terms of  the  calculation  of
       days and what is meant by a business day, is that the 5  day  period
       expired on 6 January 2014. The application made  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was not received by the First-tier Tribunal until 9 January
       2014. Mr Avery accepted that chronology.

   15. The application to the First-tier Tribunal was out  of  time.  There
       was no  indication  on  the  application  form  that  it  was  being
       submitted late, and in consequence there was no application  for  an
       extension of time. It is to be noted in passing that the 2005  Rules
       do not in fact require the party making the application to  ask  for
       an extension of time or require an explanation for its being out  of
       time, although in the absence of an explanation it is  difficult  to
       see how in most cases a First-tier judge could find that under  rule
       24(4)(a) that there were special circumstances making it unjust  not
       to extend time.

   16. Although the fact that the application was out of time was indicated
       on the Tribunal file by means of a sticker (except that the due date
       was given as 7 January 2014), the First-tier judge did not deal with
       the issue of  timeliness.  Indeed,  her  decision  stated  that  the
       Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  in  time,  and  then
       went on to state that  the  application  was  refused.  The  renewed
       application to the Upper Tribunal was in time.

   17. In the 'rule 24' response reference  is  made  to  The  Presidential
       Guidance Note of 2011 (amended in  September  2013)  which  at  [24]
       states the following:


             "It can happen that an application to the FtT is made late  and
             the question of an extension of time has not been dealt with at
             the time of granting permission. In  these  circumstances,  the
             grant of permission  to  appeal  is  to  be  treated  as  being
             'conditional' (see  Boktor  and  Wanis  (late  application  for
             permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT  00442  (IAC),  as  explained  in
             Samir (FtT  Permission  to  appeal:  time)  [2013]  UKUT  00003
             (IAC)). In considering the matter the UT Judge will be  sitting
             as a First-tier Tribunal Judge. It is suggested that by  parity
             of reasoning with Boktor and Wanis where an UT  Judge  has  not
             dealt with the issue of lateness, the grant of  permission  can
             be considered  as  being  conditional  with  the  issue  of  an
             extension of time to be considered by the UT  Judge  seized  of
             the appeal."

   18. In Boktor and Wanis (late application for permission)  Egypt  [2011]
       UKUT 00442 (IAC) the application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal was out of time but  there  was  an  explanation
       which was not considered by the judge dealing  with  the  permission
       application. The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  ensuing  grant  of
       permission to appeal was 'conditional', with  the  timeliness  issue
       having yet to be resolved. In Samir (FtT Permission to appeal: time)
       [2013] UKUT 00003(IAC), again  a  case  where  the  application  for
       permission made to the First-tier Tribunal  was  out  of  time,  the
       Upper Tribunal concluded that where an Upper  Tribunal  judge  deals
       with a 'conditional' grant of permission, the Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       is in fact  considering  the  matter  as  a  First-tier  judge.  The
       Tribunal in that case endorsed the  approach  taken  in  Boktor  and
       Wanis.

   19. Although I was not referred to  it,  I  have  considered  a  further
       reported decision of the Upper Tribunal on this issue, Wang and Chin
       (extension of time for appealing) [2013] UKUT 00343 (IAC),  although
       that decision gives wider guidance in relation to the approach to be
       taken when  faced  with  an  application  to  extend  time  when  an
       application for permission  to  appeal  is  out  of  time.   Another
       decision of a similar kind is  Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)
       Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC),  although  it  is  not  directly
       relevant to the issue before me.

   20.  I  have  also  considered  Mohammed  (late   application-First-tier
       Tribunal)  [2013]  UKUT  00467  (IAC)  which  again   concerned   an
       application made to the First-tier Tribunal that was out of time. In
       that  case  however,  the  First-tier  judge  recognised  that   the
       application was out of time but instead of dealing with the  out  of
       time issue the judge purported to  make  a  'conditional'  grant  of
       permission   pending   further   enquiry   into   whether    special
       circumstances for extending time could  be  established.  The  Upper
       Tribunal decided that that  'conditional'  decision  was  defective,
       there being no power to make a conditional grant.

   21. In that case after setting out the provisions of rule 24(4)  of  the
       2005 Rules the Upper Tribunal said this at [6]:
             "Because the two parts of rule 24(4) are  conjunctive,  if  the
             First-tier Tribunal does not make a decision  to  extend  time,
             then the application cannot be admitted.  This means that until
             a decision on whether to extend time has been made by  a  judge
             of the First-tier Tribunal, the application for  permission  to
             appeal cannot proceed to the Upper Tribunal.   The  implication
             is that a judge seized of such an application  is  required  to
             reach a decision on the timeliness if raised in the application
             or identified from the papers."

   22. The appeal before me is different from those in the  reported  cases
       to which I have referred. In those cases, the issue as to timeliness
       related to purported grants of permission  to  appeal,  and  in  all
       cases by the First-tier Tribunal. This appeal concerns  a  purported
       refusal of permission by the First-tier Tribunal  and  a  subsequent
       decision to grant permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal.

   23. The passage which  I  have  quoted  at  [21]  above  refers  to  the
       application being unable to proceed to the Upper  Tribunal  until  a
       decision on timeliness has been made. Of course in  the  case  of  a
       refusal of permission  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  is  no
       question of the decision proceeding to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
       basis of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

   24. It is also to be  noted  that  what  is  said  in  the  Presidential
       Guidance Note in relation to 'conditional' grants does only refer to
       grants of permission where timeliness has not been dealt  with,  not
       refusals.

   25.  Ms  Knorr's  contention  is  that  although  the  First-tier  judge
       purported to refuse the application, what she should have  done  was
       to decide the timeliness issue and decide not to admit it because it
       was out of time and there was no explanation for its lateness.  This
       in turn would have required the application to the Upper Tribunal to
       provide an explanation as to why the application for the  First-tier
       Tribunal was not made in time, pursuant to rule 21(7)  of  the  2008
       Rules.

   26. On one view of the 2008 Rules the appellants' argument should  fail.
       Rule 21(7)(a) of the 2008 Rules only requires a reason for the  late
       application to the First-tier Tribunal if  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       refused to admit the application. On its face, the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal in this case was plainly  and  unambiguously  to
       refuse the application and thus, the permission application  to  the
       Upper Tribunal did not need to provide a  reason  for  lateness.  On
       that  analysis  the   Upper   Tribunal   dealt   with   the   matter
       appropriately.

   27. Ms Knorr referred me to rule 2 of the 2008 Rules which amongst other
       things provides that the Upper Tribunal must seek to give effect  to
       the overriding objective when it exercises any power under the  2008
       Rules or interprets any rule or practice direction. In that context,
       as I understood her submission, it was that rule 21(7) of  the  2008
       Rules should be interpreted as meaning  that  where  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  ought  to  have  refused  to  admit  an  application,  the
       ostensible grant or refusal should be interpreted as  a  refusal  to
       admit the application.

   28. I do not consider that there is any merit in  that  submission.  The
       issue before me is not one of interpretation of a rule. The rule  in
       question is clear. The issue is one  of  jurisdiction  which  arises
       independently of any issue of interpretation.

   29. In Boktor and Wanis  the  Tribunal  decided  that  the  'grant'  was
       conditional. In Samir at [17] the  Tribunal  described  the  matters
       dealt with in Boktor and Wanis  as  concerning  "issues  as  to  the
       effectiveness of the grant of permission." At [21] it said that what
       had been done by the Upper Tribunal Judge in Boktor  and  Wanis  was
       the completion of the task begun by the First-tier judge. In Mohamed
       at [6] the Tribunal concluded that until a decision  on  whether  to
       extend time has been made by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the
       application cannot  proceed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  At  [9]  the
       Tribunal in Mohamed stated that the  issue  of  timeliness  remained
       outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal, and at [11] referred  to
       the First-tier Tribunal as having failed to complete its task.

   30. Again however, I do regard it as significant that those  expressions
       all relate to purported grants of permission. An effective grant  of
       permission by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  what  gives  the  Upper
       Tribunal its jurisdiction. A refusal of permission,  even  one  that
       wrongly fails to  consider  the  issue  of  timeliness,  confers  no
       jurisdiction on the Upper Tribunal.

   31. In one sense it could be suggested  that  the  other  party  to  the
       application for permission to  appeal  is  not  disadvantaged  where
       permission to  appeal  is  refused  in  a  case  where  there  is  a
       timeliness issue that was not dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal.
       Whether the application for permission is refused  or  not  admitted
       has the same effect, it could be said. The effect is that the matter
       cannot, without further application, proceed to the Upper  Tribunal.
       The question of  disadvantage  or  fairness  could  arise,  say,  if
       consideration is given to rule 59 of the 2005 Rules. That rule is as
       follows:

             "Errors of procedure

             59.-(1) Where, before the Tribunal has determined an appeal  or
             application, there has been an error of  procedure  such  as  a
             failure to comply with a rule-

             (a) subject to these Rules, the error does not  invalidate  any
             step taken in the proceedings, unless the Tribunal  so  orders;
             and

             (b) the Tribunal may make any order, or take  any  other  step,
             that it considers appropriate to remedy the error.

             (2) In particular, any  determination  made  in  an  appeal  or
             application under these Rules shall  be  valid  notwithstanding
             that-

             (a) a hearing did not take place; or

             (b) the determination was not made or served,

             within a time period specified in these Rules.

   32. Plainly there is a  discretionary  element  in  rule  59  which,  in
       conjunction  with  rule  4  of  the  2005  Rules   (the   overriding
       objective), could arguably be invoked in a case where the timeliness
       issue was not dealt with by the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  could  be
       said for example, that the question of timeliness ought to have been
       raised  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  to  the   application   for
       permission, before the matter  reached  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a
       renewed application.

   33. However, for this rule to be considered,  an  Upper  Tribunal  judge
       would have to sit as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  which  the
       Upper Tribunal judge would in any event be  doing  when  considering
       timeliness under rule 24 of the 2005 Rules. In  any  event,  as  was
       pointed out by Ms Knorr, where  an  application  for  permission  to
       appeal is refused by the First-tier Tribunal, the  parties  are  not
       made aware of the  chronology  of  events  such  as  would  indicate
       whether or not the application was submitted in  time.  It  is  only
       where permission is granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  or  by  the
       Upper Tribunal that the timeliness of the  application  is  evident.
       Otherwise  therefore,  the  respondent  to   the   application   for
       permission is not in a  position  to  make  any  submissions  as  to
       timeliness. Those submissions have been made in  this  case  because
       the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal resulted  in
       the application, with its grounds, being sent  to  the  parties  and
       from which it was evident from the chronology that  the  application
       to the First-tier Tribunal was made late.

   34. However, I do not consider that this takes the appellants' arguments
       much further when one considers that the effect of  the  refusal  of
       permission, as in a case where the application is not  admitted,  is
       that recourse to the Upper Tribunal on the strength  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal's decision is barred.

   35. It is as well at this point to mention Rule 7  of  the  2008  Rules,
       which, so far as relevant provides as follows:

             "Failure to comply with rules etc.



             7.-(1) An irregularity resulting from a failure to comply  with
             any requirement in these  Rules,  a  practice  direction  or  a
             direction, does not of itself render void  the  proceedings  or
             any step taken in the proceedings.


             (2) If a party has failed to comply with a requirement in these
             Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Upper  Tribunal
             may take such action as it considers just, which may include-


             (a) waiving the requirement;
             (b) requiring the failure to be remedied;
             (c) exercising its power under rule 8 (striking out  a  party's
             case); or
             (d) except in [a mental health  case,  an  asylum  case  or  an
             immigration case], restricting a party's participation  in  the
             proceedings.

   36. Thus, the Upper Tribunal has the  power  to  waive  an  irregularity
       resulting from a failure to comply with any requirement in the  2008
       Rules, for example rule 21(7)(a) (no  explanation  for  lateness  of
       application to First-tier Tribunal).

   37. I also note what was said in Samir at [23], as follows:


             "The application made by  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not,
             however, comply with the rules: rule 21(7)(a) requires material
             to be included in it, which was not included.  Although in  the
             present case, it is no doubt possible for the Upper Tribunal to
             discover what had been said previously, the  intention  of  the
             rule is clearly that the reasons  originally  given  should  be
             repeated (or even amplified) so that the application before the
             Upper Tribunal can be dealt with properly, on the basis of  all
             that the applicant wishes to say.  We doubt (without wanting to
             decide the issue) whether  non-compliance  with  rule  21(7)(a)
             would be sufficient to invalidate an application: nevertheless,
             the failure to comply with it is a matter to take into  account
             in the circumstances of the present case." (my emphasis)

   38. Drawing the threads of my assessment together, I conclude  that  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal to  grant  permission  to  appeal  is
       valid and confers jurisdiction on the Upper Tribunal to consider the
       appeal. It is  not  therefore  necessary  to  consider  further  the
       question of the timeliness of the application made to the First-tier
       Tribunal. The refusal of permission by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
       not to be characterised as a 'conditional' refusal of permission.

   39. In these circumstances, the Upper Tribunal having granted permission
       to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal is  to
       proceed to a hearing to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal erred
       in law and if so, what is the consequence of any error of  law.  The
       existing  directions  sent  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's  grant   of
       permission continue to apply.



Anonymity

Given that these proceedings involve children, I make an order (pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008).
Consequently, this decision identifies the appellants by  initials  only  in
order to preserve the anonymity of the minor appellants.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 15/05/14
