

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00082/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 7 October 2014                             |On 8 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                CLETUS OKPALA
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1.  The  parties  are  as  described  above,  but  the  rest  of   this
       determination  refers  to  them  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


    2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by a panel comprising Judge
       Morrison and Dr Winstanley, allowing the appellant's appeal  against
       deportation under Regulation 19(3)(b) of the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

    3. These are the grounds:

           ... the panel ... failed to provide  adequate  reasons  why  the
           appellant does not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
           serious threat to the public  to  justify  his  deportation  ...
           while the SSHD did not provide  a  copy  of  the  prison  social
           worker's formal risk assessment which assessed him as  a  medium
           risk of re-offending a copy  of  the  parole  board  review  was
           provided which ... took [this assessment] into account  ...  the
           panel failed to provide adequate reasons why they cannot rely on
           the ... review which took account of  all  assessments  ...  and
           found that [the appellant] should not be recommended for  parole
           because of the  continuing  risk  he  poses  ...  the  appellant
           continues to deny full responsibility for his actions and  there
           is limited evidence  that  his  circumstances  have  changed  to
           reduce the risk ... the appellant remains a medium risk  of  re-
           offending and does represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
           serious threat to the  public  as  demonstrated  by  the  parole
           board's recent decision to refuse him parole ...


           ... had the panel taken those  issues  into  consideration  they
           would have found that his deportation is proportionate.

    4. On 24 April 2014 a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  extended  time
       for the SSHD to seek permission to appeal  and  granted  permission,
       describing the grounds as a submission:

           ... that the panel erred in law  by  failing  to  give  adequate
           reasons for finding that the SSHD had not established  that  the
           appellant's personal conduct did not  represent  a  sufficiently
           serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society.

    5.  Mrs O'Brien submitted that although from paragraph 27  onwards  the
       panel referred to the evidence taken  into  account,  including  the
       parole board review, and although the panel  said  at  paragraph  36
       that the review would be given "lesser weight", it could not be seen
       that the panel had given the review any weight at all, which  was  a
       material error of law.  The substantive analysis at paragraphs 38  -
       41 did not mention the review.  She did not support the  proposition
       in  the  grounds  that  deportation  must  have  been  found  to  be
       proportionate, but she did say that the panel had  to  explain  just
       what weight the review carried, and why.  The  determination  should
       be set aside and the UT should substitute a fresh decision.   Taking
       all the evidence including the review properly  into  account,  that
       decision should be to dismiss the appeal, as originally  brought  to
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    6. At this stage I tried to ascertain precisely what is  said  to  have
       been missing from the parole board review  document,  and  what  the
       panel made of that omission.  The  documents  which  were  variously
       provided by both sides  are  not  in  the  best  of  order  and  the
       referencing is not easy to follow.  The  parole  board  review  took
       place on 29 October 2013.  The respondent's reasons for  deportation
       letter of 10 January 2014 based itself at  page  5  on  "the  prison
       social  worker's  formal  risk  assessment"  of  a  medium  risk  of
       offending.  That assessment was one  of  several  mentioned  in  the
       review,  and  it  was  not  itself  produced.   Some  of  the  other
       assessments are in the SSHD's bundle, having been  firstly  produced
       by the appellant when making representations through his solicitors.
        The outcome of the review was intimated to the appellant by  letter
       dated 12 November 2013, which has attached  a  copy  minute  of  the
       Board's decision, which includes reference  to  "the  prison  social
       worker's formal risk assessment".  The determination at paragraph 36
       says that "the absence of  Ms  McCheyne's  report  ...  lessens  the
       weight we can place on the parole board review ... in particular her
       suggestion  that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
       account, but of course  the  appellant  does  not  know  what  these
       claimed inconsistencies were and had had no  opportunity  to  answer
       these concerns."    The  panel  had  identified  the  prison  social
       worker's formal risk assessment  as  Ms  McCheyne's  report  from  a
       report by Mr Carmichael, criminal justice social  worker,  dated  20
       September 2013, which was before the panel and  which  discusses  Ms
       McCheyne's report before coming to its own conclusions.


    7. It is plain from this that the panel engaged in a thorough  scrutiny
       of the evidence before it, and made sense of  the  cross-references.
       Having made the comment at paragraph 36 recorded above, the panel at
       paragraph 38 (ii) found that it could  not  take  into  account  the
       alleged inconsistencies in absence of  Ms  McCheyne's  report.   The
       panel did not say it could not rely on the parole board  review,  as
       suggested in the grounds.   The  panel  did  take  the  review  into
       consideration, but held that it could not take into account  alleged
       inconsistencies, not knowing what they were, and that this  lessened
       the weight to be given to the review.  I cannot detect  legal  error
       in that approach.

    8. Having arrived at that view at the hearing, I did not hear  from  Mr
       Bryce on the other points in his note of argument  dated  6  October
       2014.    I record briefly as  follows.  I  doubt  if  the  grant  of
       permission is on a point not to be found in the  grounds.   I  think
       that the question before the parole board  while  not  identical  to
       that before the First-tier Tribunal was not "completely distinct  in
       character".  I agree that refusal of  parole  does  not  necessarily
       mean that deportation is justified.

    9. I mentioned at the hearing that it might have  been  said  that  the
       panel should not have given  the  appellant  any  benefit  from  the
       respondent's non-production of the  prison  social  worker's  formal
       risk assessment, because he must have had a  copy  in  the  ordinary
       course of events, and so could not claim to be prejudiced.  However,
       conclusions of this nature should not be minutely picked apart.  The
       degree of weight to be given to any item is a matter for the  panel,
       and I have found their approach to be properly reasoned.

   10. The relative weightings to be given to items of evidence  are  never
       capable of being stated with mathematical precision.  One assessment
       of medium risk, to be taken along  with  other  assessments  of  low
       risk, would not demand the conclusion that the  test  in  Regulation
       21(5) was met.

   11. The SSHD's grounds are in essence disagreement with the panel's fact-
       sensitive overall assessment.


   12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                7 October 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


