
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 19 October 2015                            | On 2 November 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Francesco Perticarari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms V Mascord, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 24 November 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  allowed  the
    appeal of the claimant, a citizen of Italy, against a decision  by  the
    Secretary of State dated 22 April 2014 to remove him  under  Regulation
    19 of the 2006 Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.

2.   The claimant was born in March 1992.   He  entered  the  UK  in  August
    2011.  He commenced a two year course in music computing.  He worked on
    a fruit stall while he was studying and in September 2012  set  up  his
    own fruit supply business.  He also bought  a  flat  in  Brighton  with
    financial assistance from  his  family.   Having  completed  his  music
    course, he began a relationship with his current partner, Mr Quinn.  On
    22 October 2013 he was convicted  on  two  counts  of  possession  with
    intent to supply a class A drug (MDMA) and a class C  drug  (Ketamine).
    He was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.  His  conditional  release
    date was February 2015.

3.   In making her decision the Secretary of State noticed  that  there  was
    no evidence from the claimant to show he had undertaken  rehabilitative
    work in custody.  In the absence of an improvement  in  the  claimant's
    personal  and  financial  circumstances  since  his   conviction,   the
    Secretary of State considered it was likely that he would reoffend.

4.   After hearing from the claimant, his partner and his  partner's  mother
    and after receiving further documentary evidence, the judge allowed the
    appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  essentially  raise  the
    following points.

5.   First of all it is submitted that the judge failed to note that it  was
    the claimant's choice to offend for his own  financial  benefit,  which
    was far worse than offending to fund a drug  habit.   Secondly  it  was
    submitted that the judge erred in finding that the claimant was  a  low
    risk of  reoffending  because  his  circumstances  had  not  materially
    altered.  He wished to return to his study and  would  therefore  incur
    debt to pay his fees.  Thirdly it was alleged that the judge  erred  in
    that having found the claimant had not  integrated  into  the  UK  (his
    residence having been extremely short) she should have found  he  could
    not be said to have rehabilitated here, whereas in Italy he would  have
    family support as he had in the past.  Fourth the  judge  was  said  to
    have erred in treating as a significant factor  the  claimant's  (same-
    sex)  relationship  which  was  of  short  duration,  did  not  involve
    cohabitation and in relation to which it had not been shown that  there
    were any reasons why the couple could not live in Italy.

My Assessment

6.   It is convenient to take these grounds out  of  turn.  As  regards  the
    third  ground,  which  concerned  integration  and  rehabilitation,   I
    consider that it is made out insofar as it was a given fact  that  this
    claimant had not acquired permanent residence.  Applying the  Court  of
    Appeal guidance in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v
    Dumliauskas & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145 and  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal
    decision on MC(Essa principles recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC it was  not
    open to the judge to attach any significant weight to  the  factors  of
    rehabilitation or integration.  It is true that before the judge  there
    was now evidence that the claimant  had  done  rehabilitative  work  in
    prison, but that did not merit any significant weight  being  given  to
    such activity.

7.   However, the judge's decision can only be said to be  materially  wrong
    if she was incorrect to conclude under Regulation 21 that there was  no
    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to   fundamental
    interests of society.

8.   The same  point  goes  for  the  Secretary  of  State's  fourth  ground
    regarding the weight attached by the judge to the claimant's (same-sex)
    relationship.  In any event the judge's decision at paragraph  20  made
    clear that this was not a  central  factor  and  was  only  taken  into
    account in relation to overall proportionality.

9.   As regards the first ground, I consider it rests  on  a  misreading  of
    the judge's findings.  The judge did not find  that  the  claimant  had
    offended for his own financial benefit outside the context of his  drug
    use.  It is clear that the thrust of the judge's analysis in paragraphs
    16 and 17 is that 1) the claimant  did  not  commit  his  offences  for
    financial motivation except in relation to his drug use.  At  paragraph
    16 the judge noted that he brought larger quantities of drugs to  cover
    his own drug use and he only sold  excess  drugs  to  his  friends  and
    associates.  That was the only financial motivation.  At  paragraph  16
    the judge made a clear finding  that  the  claimant  had  no  financial
    incentive in that he had always been able to support  himself  and  was
    capable  of  earning  money  through  employment  and   entrepreneurial
    enterprises and had financial support from his  family  in  Italy.   As
    regards the second ground, which challenges the judge's assessment that
    the claimant was a low risk of reoffending,  this  does  no  more  than
    express disagreement with such  findings.   There  was  ample  evidence
    before  the  judge  to  establish  1)  that  he  was  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending; 2) that he was motivated and  capable  of  addressing  his
    offending behaviour; 3) that he had kept clean of drugs in prison;  and
    4) that he was genuinely remorseful.

10.  The respondent's grounds come down therefore to this.   Was  the  judge
    entitled to find that there  was  no  propensity  to  reoffend  and  no
    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to   fundamental
    interests of society?

11.  In my judgment the clear answer to this question can only be  that  the
    judge was so entitled.  The judge had correctly  identified  the  legal
    test she had to apply at paragraph 14.  She had then applied this  test
    to the evidence before her.  She had carefully  weighed  this  evidence
    and reached entirely sustainable conclusions.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the Secretary of State's  grounds
    must fail.  Accordingly the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 29 October 2015


Dr H H  Storey, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


