
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00124/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 September 2013                          |On 4 October 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mustafa Abdullai
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel, instructed by Wilson and Co
Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal, hereinafter "the claimant," is a  citizen
    of Somalia.  He was born on 3 March 1984 and so is now 29 years old.  He
    appealed successfully to the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Finch and Mrs C St Claire (non-legal member)) a  decision  of  the
    appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") to deport him from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The Secretary of State was refused permission to appeal that decision by
    the First-tier Tribunal but permission was given by the  Upper  Tribunal
    and so I must decide  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that
    decision.

 3. Mr Hodgetts, for the claimant, had prepared a very full written response
    under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. It was his first contention that I had power to set aside  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal to give permission to the Secretary  of  State  to
    appeal and that I should use the power in this case because the decision
    to give permission to appeal did not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Procedure Rules.

 5. As far as I am aware there is no authoritative decision to guide  me  on
    whether or not I have power.  The Tribunal touched  upon  the  point  in
    Wang and Chin (extension of time for appealing) [2013] UKUT 00343  (IAC)
    but it did not have to decide the point to  determine  that  appeal  and
    declined to decide whether or not it had jurisdiction  to  set  aside  a
    decision to give permission to appeal, in that case made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, when an application was made late.

 6. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060  (IAC)  an
    Upper Tribunal judge had given permission to appeal where an application
    was known to have been made very late. The Upper Tribunal recorded  that
    it was "common ground between the parties" that there  is  no  power  to
    revoke a grant of permission to appeal if the judge had power  to  grant
    it.  The decision in that case  was  written  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor who sat with the President,  Blake  J.   Although  it  did  not
    decide if there is power to revoke  a  grant  of  permission,  it  seems
    somewhat unlikely that the Tribunal would have gone along with  the  law
    as agreed by the parties unless it agreed with the premise on which  the
    argument was conducted.  Nevertheless, the case does not  determine  the
    point authoritatively because it was not argued before the Tribunal.

 7. The papers show that the First-tier Tribunal heard the  case  on  7  May
    2013 and  the  determination  was  promulgated  on  31  May  2013.   The
    application for permission to appeal made to the First-tier Tribunal was
    known to be late.  According to part B  of  the  application  form,  the
    First-tier Tribunal determination was received on 4 June 2013.  The form
    is a standard text and indicates when an application must  be  received.
    In this case, according to the form, it should have been received within
    "5 working days after the date on which you were  deemed  to  have  been
    served with the First-tier Tribunal's decision".

 8. The form then explains that if the application was likely to be late the
    proposed appellant "must ask the Tribunal to extend the time  limit  for
    making the application, giving full reasons why it is late".

 9. Reasons were given.  The Secretary of State said:

         "It is respectfully asked that the Tribunal extends the time  limit
         for making this application.  The main reason for delay was because
         the Specialist Appeals Team on behalf of the Secretary of State did
         not receive the Tribunal's determination within two  working  days.
         It is respectfully submitted that the delay  has  been  through  no
         fault of the Secretary of State and  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team
         have endeavoured to deal with this case as soon  as  possible.   An
         extension of time is respectfully requested."

10. According to the Form IA60 the determination was served on the  claimant
    and his solicitors by posting the determination on 31 May  2013  and  on
    the Secretary of State "by hand" on the same  day.   I  understand  that
    this is less than a strictly accurate  description  of  service  on  the
    Secretary of State but would be understood by all those involved to mean
    that delivery was by internal government mail.  According to Rule  55(5)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005:

         "Any document that is served on the person in accordance with  this
         Rule shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be served -
         (a) where the document is sent by post or  document  exchange  from
         and to a place within the United Kingdom, on the second  day  after
         it was sent".

11. I take note that there is no delivery on Sundays and so the  second  day
    for these purposes  means  Monday  3  June  2013.   Mr  Walker  for  the
    Secretary of State showed me that the Secretary of State's copy  of  the
    letter was endorsed "SAT admin received 4 June 2013" ("SAT admin"  means
    the administrative department of the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  and  is
    nothing to do with Saturday).

12. If it was served on Tuesday 4 June then any application  for  permission
    to appeal should have been received no later than 11 June 2013.

13. The claimant contends that the determination was  deemed  to  have  been
    served on Monday 3 June and therefore any application should  have  been
    received  no  later  than  Monday  10  June  2013.   In  any  event  the
    application is out of time.

14. The First-tier Tribunal did not admit the application.   It  made  plain
    that it  had  considered  the  merits  and  would  not  have  given  the
    permission if the application  had  been  made  in  time,  but  said  at
    paragraph 2:
         "The application is out of time.  The [Secretary of  State]  states
         that  the  determination  was  received  on  4  June   2013.    The
         application should therefore have been received by  11  June  2013.
         It was not received until 12 June 2013.  There  is  no  explanation
         for this delay or application to extend time.   Accordingly,  I  am
         given no reason to extend time and I do not do so."

15. When deciding  whether  to  admit  a  late  application  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has to consider paragraph 24  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  Rule 24(4)(a) provides that where  the
    Tribunal  is  considering  an  application  made  later  than  the  time
    required, the Tribunal "may extend the time for appealing  if  satisfied
    that by reason of special circumstances it would be  unjust  not  to  do
    so".

16. The application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  made  to
    the Upper  Tribunal  records  correctly  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refused to admit the application because it was late, and then  says  as
    follows:

         "It is respectfully asked that the Tribunal extends the time  limit
         for making this application.  The main  reason  for  delay  in  our
         application to the First-tier Tribunal was because  the  Specialist
         Appeals Team on behalf of the Secretary of State  did  not  receive
         the Tribunal's  determination  within  two  working  days.   It  is
         respectfully submitted that the delay has been through no fault  of
         the Secretary  of  State  and  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  have
         endeavoured  to  deal  with  this  case  as   soon   as   possible.
         Furthermore, the Secretary  of  State  did  notify  the  First-tier
         Tribunal of these reasons in our application (a copy  of  which  is
         enclosed) and these reasons were not taken into consideration.   An
         extension of time is respectfully requested."

17. For the avoidance of doubt, the application to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    not made late.  The reference to "an extension of time"  was  a  request
    for the delay in serving the First-tier Tribunal to  be  excused.   When
    faced with an application  that  was  not  admitted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have  regard  to  Rule  21(7)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  This provides:

         "21(7) If the appellant makes an application to the Upper  Tribunal
         for permission to appeal against the decision of another  Tribunal,
         and  that  other  Tribunal  refused  to   admit   the   appellant's
         application for permission to appeal because  the  application  for
         permission or for a written statement of reasons was  not  made  in
         time -

              (a) the application to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission  to
             appeal must include the reason  why  the  application  to  the
             other Tribunal for permission  to  appeal  or  for  a  written
             statement of reasons, as the case may  be,  was  not  made  in
             time; and

              (b) the Upper Tribunal must only admit the application if  the
             Upper Tribunal considers  that  it  is  in  the  interests  of
             justice for it to do so."

18. In dealing with  this  point  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  when  it  gave
    permission to appeal:

         "The explanation given by the respondent for the delay of  one  day
         is in my view a valid one  and  I  consider  it  just  in  all  the
         circumstances to extend time."

19. Mr Hodgetts argued firstly that there was no basis for finding that  the
    application was only one day late.  We were shown at the hearing a paper
    date-stamped appropriately, but this had not been produced on an earlier
    occasion and there was nothing to go behind the deemed date  of  service
    which would have made the application two days late.  Secondly, he  said
    that the purported "explanation" was nothing of the kind.  The fact that
    the determination arrived one or two days later than  expected  is  not,
    without more, any kind of explanation at all  for  the  application  for
    permission to appeal being served late.

20. Nevertheless I remind myself that the Upper Tribunal judge,  faced  with
    an application for permission  to  appeal  where  another  Tribunal  had
    refused to admit the application, had to have regard to  Rule  21(7)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   An  appellant  in
    these  circumstances  was  obliged  to  include  the  reasons  for   the
    application to the other Tribunal being made late and the Upper Tribunal
    was restrained from admitting  an  application  unless  "it  is  in  the
    interests of justice for it to do so".

21. I do not agree with Mr Hodgetts's submission that the explanation  given
    to the Upper Tribunal could not be described properly as an  explanation
    at all.  Those of us that are  familiar  with  the  ways  of  government
    departments understand without being told that tasks  that  have  to  be
    started late are rarely given priority lest other tasks  are  made  late
    too. In organisations that are strained to their limits there is  always
    a concern that taking special steps to deal with one piece of work  that
    is late can cause other pieces of work to be late, and is not done.

22. Further, it is quite plain that the Upper Tribunal  judge  had  in  mind
    the  correct  test  when  he  found  that  it  was  "just  in  all   the
    circumstances to extend  time".   I  cannot  look  at  the  reasons  for
    extending time and say with confidence that the Rules have been ignored,
    or that the decision is incapable  of  being  right.   I  consider  this
    important in the context of an invitation to set aside a decision.

23. Clearly the decision complained of cannot be appealed to  the  Court  of
    Appeal (see Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, Section 13(8)(c)
    and I should be very slow to construe the Procedure Rules in a way  that
    gives the appellant what would really be a right of appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal against a decision that could not be appealed to the  Court  of
    Appeal.  Of course Mr Hodgetts was very careful to ask me to  set  aside
    the decision, but in reality he was seeking to appeal.  It was his  case
    that the decision should be looked at again because the judge that  made
    it made it badly.

24. The Procedure Rules give express powers to set aside "a  decision  which
    disposes of proceedings" (Rule 43).  This is of  little  relevance  here
    because the decision complained of most certainly  did  not  dispose  of
    proceedings but. At least in the Upper Tribunal, it  created  them.   In
    any event,  the  rest  of  the  Rule  makes  it  plain  that  there  are
    conditions, and the conditions show that  the  Rule  is  concerned  with
    procedural irregularities rather than alleged bad decisions.

25. Mr Hodgetts properly reminded me that the Upper Tribunal  has  the  same
    power as the High Court in relation to the attendance and examination of
    witnesses, the production and inspection of  documents  and  "all  other
    matters incidental  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  functions"  (Section  25
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007).   I  do  not  agree  that
    setting aside a decision that brings an appeal before the Upper Tribunal
    is properly described as a matter "incidental to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    functions".  Certainly I accept the Rules are illustrative  rather  than
    restrictive (see Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, Schedule 5,
    paragraph 15(3) and Jacobs (Tribunal Practice and Procedure) 15.34).  It
    may be, for example, that the Upper Tribunal could set aside a  decision
    to give permission to appeal that was shown to be based  on  fraud,  or,
    improbably, such a complete misreading of the facts that  there  was  no
    decision at all on  the  points  raised.   In  those  circumstances  the
    Tribunal would not be acting as an appellate court examining the reasons
    for the lower court's decision, but deciding  that  there  had  been  no
    decision at all on the points that mattered.  I regard these as examples
    of  different  kinds  of  procedural  irregularities.  It  is  extremely
    unlikely that such a situation would actually occur, but  a  very  large
    number of decisions are made every year and a small number  of  them  do
    take a peculiar course.

26. In short, I am satisfied that I do not  have  power  to  set  aside  the
    decision to give permission to appeal in this case and I decline to  set
    it aside.

27. I must now go on to look at the merits of  the  decision  and  begin  by
    looking at the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

28. This shows that the claimant was born in  1982  and  is  a  national  of
    Somalia.  He was given leave to enter the United Kingdom in 1993 when he
    was nearly 11 years old and his leave was extended in  stages  until  he
    was given indefinite leave to remain in 2000.

29. In 2007, when he was nearly 25 years old, he was convicted  following  a
    trial of one act of rape and one act of attempted rape and was sentenced
    to prison for ten years.  In 2008 he was warned that he was  liable  for
    deportation and he indicated that he would resist deportation  on  human
    rights grounds.  In July 2011 he applied for asylum.

30. The Tribunal rejected his  contention  that  he  risked  persecution  or
    other serious ill-treatment in  the  event  of  his  being  deported  to
    Somaliland.

31. The Tribunal further accepted that although the appellant had  lived  in
    the United Kingdom since February 1993 he left Somalia some  four  years
    before that, and lived in a refugee  camp  in  Ethiopia.   The  Tribunal
    accepted that the appellant has no close or extended family  members  or
    friends in Somalia or Somaliland, and that his  lack  of  experience  of
    life in  Somalia  or  Somaliland,  his  tattoo,  his  ignorance  of  the
    language, and general ignorance of  cultural  mores  would  make  him  a
    figure  of  attention  in  Somaliland.   Paragraphs  25   and   26   are
    particularly important.  It was noted that the claimant had been in  the
    United Kingdom for  more  than  20  years  but  there  was  a  statutory
    presumption in favour of his deportation because of his having convicted
    a serious crime.  The Tribunal  expressly  recognised  that  the  United
    Kingdom is entitled to impose strict immigration controls to protect the
    public interest  in  the  prevention  of  disorder  and  crime  and  the
    protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

32. At paragraph 26 the Tribunal reminded itself  just  how  nasty  was  the
    extent of the appellant's offending.  It said:

         "Nevertheless, the [Secretary of State] has to establish  that  the
         [claimant's]  deportation  would  be  proportionate  in   all   the
         circumstances of this case.  We have  begun  our  consideration  of
         this aspect of this appeal by considering the [claimant's] criminal
         record.  The [claimant] was sentenced to  ten  years'  imprisonment
         for one count of rape and one count of  attempted  rape.   We  also
         note that when he sentenced the [claimant], His Honour Judge Marron
         noted that the [claimant] had attacked an  innocent  woman  in  her
         early 20s in her own home when she was asleep in her  own  bed  and
         had held a knife to her throat while he raped her in two  different
         ways.  He also noted that she was pregnant at the time and that the
         [claimant] had threatened to kill her.  We do not seek to  minimise
         the seriousness of this offence."

33. The Tribunal recognised that fear of his own  family's  disapproval  and
    the condemnation of his own community made it harder for him  to  accept
    his guilt.  The Tribunal also noted that the  appellant's  sentence  was
    his first experience of custody and would be "likely to have  heightened
    his experience of detention".

34.  The appellant did  disclose  his  guilt  when  he  was  in  immigration
    detention and had been working on "The Victim  Empathy"  work  with  his
    probation officer.

35. The probation officer opined that the appellant posed a medium  risk  of
    harm with a low to medium risk of reoffending, but  the  assessment  was
    made before he had completed his Community Sex Offender Group Program or
    his work on victim empathy.  He had attended the Community Sex  Offender
    Group Program regularly for over a year  when  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    heard the appeal.

36. The Tribunal was also impressed with the  report  of  Dr  Harriet  Hunt-
    Grubbe who noted the claimant had expressed regret and remorse and  that
    in her opinion there was now  a  low  risk  of  him  committing  serious
    offences.  This was supported by his having behaved in  accordance  with
    his terms of bail whilst wearing an electronic tag and complying with  a
    curfew.

37. It was noted that he had changed  his  friendship  groups  and  was  now
    living with his uncle and family and that he spent much of time  he  was
    allowed to spend away from his  uncle's  home  in  accordance  with  his
    curfew taking care of his mother's aunt.

38. The Tribunal noted that to the appellant's discredit he had been  caught
    in possession of a small amount of cannabis while  on  licence  and  had
    been fined rather than being returned to prison.  He had  taken  a  drug
    awareness course and tested negative of any further use.   This  element
    of his life was being monitored by the probation officer.

39. The determination refers to the claimant having  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom since he was aged 8 years.  I cannot  see  the  basis  for  that
    finding.  He says he was born in 1982 and entered the United Kingdom  in
    1993.

40. The Tribunal made it plain that it was following the guidance  given  in
    Masih (deportation - public interest basic principles)  Pakistan  [2012]
    UKUT 00046 and also Uner v the Netherlands application  number  46410/99
    and Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47 ECHR.

41. The  key  points  were  that  he  had  no  relatives  in  Somaliland  or
    experience of living there  since  he  was  a  boy.   He  would  attract
    condemnation because he was tattooed contrary to the teaching  of  Islam
    but more significantly he had established a  considerable  private  life
    during his long stay in the United Kingdom.

42. In considering the evidence  of  Dr  Harriet  Hunt-Grubbe  the  Tribunal
    expressly reminded itself that she had only seen the claimant for a  two
    hour consultation but noted she was very experienced.  It was Dr Harriet
    Hunt-Grubbe who had drawn attention  to  the  disabling  effect  on  the
    claimant of finding the body of his dead brother which resulted  in  his
    almost immediate admission to Charing Cross Hospital Mental Health  Unit
    for a short period and deporting him would deprive him of the  emotional
    support provided by his mother and immediate family and would  serve  to
    increase his risk of suicide.

43. The appeal was allowed with reference to Article 8.

44. The grounds make two substantial challenges.  The  first  was  described
    by the Upper Tribunal judge as "devoid of merit".  It is  based  on  the
    contention that the amendment to the Immigration Rules discharge fully a
    consideration as required by the  "Maslov/Boultif"  principles  and  the
    Tribunal is wrong not to follow the Rules and to see it  as  a  complete
    encapsulation of the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  This is a well-trodden path.  It is  wholly
    contrary to the decision of the Tribunal in  MF  (Nigeria)  [2012]  UKUT
    00393 (IAC) and unless and until that decision is authoritatively  shown
    to be wrong, I will not take time answering the point said to be  raised
    in ground 1.   Mr  Walker  raised  them  formally  and  I  dismiss  them
    formally.

45. Ground 2 is, with respect, well summarised in the  grant  of  permission
    to appeal and I set out below  the  terms  of  the  ground.   The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge said:

         "I consider that ground 2 identifies an arguable error of law.   In
         particular, it is not apparent that the panel gave any reasons  why
         it was prepared to accept the opinion of Markus Hoehne as an expert
         opinion and why it was prepared to ascribe very significant  weight
         to the report of Dr Harriet Hunt-Grubbe, albeit acknowledging  that
         she had only seen the appellant for a two hour consultation.

         It is also not clear why the panel considered that  the  particular
         context which hampered the appellant's ability to confess his guilt
         externally  or  his  eventual  disclosure  of  his  guilt   somehow
         cancelled out the public interest in the deportation  of  a  person
         guilty of attacking an innocent pregnant woman in her early 20s  in
         her own home when she was asleep in her own bed and held a knife to
         her throat and threatened to kill her.  The panel  says  they  take
         this factor into account in paragraph 27, but they appear to  treat
         it as negated by their findings in paras 28/29."

46.  Dr  Harriet  Hunt-Grubbe  is  a  member  of  the   Royal   College   of
    Psychiatrists.  She was awarded that  degree  in  2006.   She  describes
    herself as a locum consultant in forensic psychiatry and at the time  of
    writing her report was working as an honorary  specialist  registrar  at
    Broadmoor Hospital.  Dr Hunt-Grubbe in her report noted factors that had
    caused people to be cautious about the claimant's propensity to reoffend
    before deciding that in her opinion the risk of further serious  violent
    or sexual offending was low.  She attributed this to the  fact  that  he
    had expressed deep remorse for his actions and was undertaking  work  to
    understand his offending behaviour  and  the  impact  it  had  on  other
    people.  Really she is saying that the appellant had made progress since
    the probation officer's opinion was expressed.

47. Dr Harriet Hunt-Grubbe is clearly qualified to give  the  opinions  that
    she does and is perhaps in a better position than anyone else to know if
    she could express that opinion competently after only a short  interview
    with  the  claimant.   There  is  no  contrary  evidence  from   anybody
    instructed by the Secretary of State and I fail to see any proper reason
    for challenging the use the Tribunal made of her evidence.

48. I do not find the evidence of Markus Hoehne of particular  significance.
     Indeed, Mr Hoehne's opinions by and large  seem  unremarkable.   It  is
    frequently said before the Tribunal that being tattooed is  contrary  to
    Islamic teaching and a person who is tattooed will therefore attract the
    disapproval of those who believe Muslims should not allow  their  bodies
    to be adorned in such a way.  Given the enormous role of the clan system
    and clan traditions in shaping Somali society, a person  who  is  Somali
    but not imbued in those traditions can be expected to find it  difficult
    to acclimatise.  It was not suggested by Mr  Hoehne  that  the  claimant
    could not conceivably establish himself  in  Somaliland.   Rather,  very
    understandable and real risks were  identified  and  were  part  of  the
    Tribunal's reasoning.  However, as I read the determination the critical
    points were not the fact  that  the  claimant  would  find  it  hard  to
    establish himself in Somaliland but rather the fact that he had been  in
    the United Kingdom for such a very long time.  I do not find it a proper
    reading of the determination to say that the public interest in removing
    the claimant, who the Tribunal  recognise  has  committed  very  serious
    offences indeed, was "negated" by paragraphs 28 and 29 that  reflect  on
    his belated recognition of his guilty.  Rather, the point there is  that
    although the claimant has committed serious  offences  he  has  at  last
    faced up to what he has done and has  taken  significant  steps  to  put
    behind him that kind of criminal behaviour.   That  finding  was  wholly
    open to the Tribunal.

49. The rest is a matter  of  balance.   The  Tribunal  identified  the  two
    competing compelling points.  On the one hand is the seriousness of  his
    offence bringing with it  a  statutory  presumption  in  favour  of  his
    deportation and on the other hand the amount of time he has spent in the
    United Kingdom.  That, taken  with  the  rational  finding  that  he  is
    unlikely to be in this kind of trouble again, enabled  the  Tribunal  to
    reach the decision that it did.

50.  This may well be the kind of case where the  balancing  exercise  could
    have  been  determined  differently  and  lawfully  by   a   differently
    constituted Tribunal.  However, although I have reflected  carefully  on
    the grounds and Mr Walker's submissions, I am quite unpersuaded that the
    Tribunal misdirected itself in any material way or  reached  a  decision
    that was not open to it for the reasons that it has given.

51. It follows therefore that I find no material error in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal and I dismiss the  Secretary
    of State's appeal against that decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 October 2013                 |








