
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00613/2013
                                                               DA/00697/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2017                   |On 27 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ERIC WINSTON MASANJA
                           ODILIA WINIFRED MASANLA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, counsel instructed by Darlingtons,
solicitors.


                                  DECISION

   1. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  September  2000
      and was admitted as a student.  He  was  subsequently  joined  by  the
      second appellant, who is  his  wife,  and  who  was  admitted  as  his
      dependent. Both are citizens of Tanzania.  In June 2003 he applied for
      leave to remain on grounds of ancestry, producing documentary evidence
      said to establish that his grandfather had been  born  in  the  United
      Kingdom. This was granted and was followed by two  similar  subsequent
      applications, leading to the grant to him and his wife  of  indefinite
      leave to remain.


   2. Their son was born in the United Kingdom in September 2008 and, as  he
      was born to parents with indefinite leave to remain, he was, at birth,
      a British citizen:  section  1(1)(b)  British  Nationality  Act  1981.
      However, the appellant's parents were not  in  fact  entitled  to  the
      grant of such leave and  on  10  May  2012  the  first  appellant  was
      convicted before the Isleworth Crown Court of 3  counts  of  obtaining
      leave  to  remain  by  deception  and  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of
      imprisonment. For the first of those offences he was sentenced  to  10
      months' imprisonment and for  the  other  two  subsequent  offences  4
      months' imprisonment, each to run  consecutively  so  that  the  first
      appellant was sentenced to a total of  18  months'  imprisonment.  The
      second appellant was not prosecuted and there is no suggestion she was
      complicit in these offences.


   3. On 15 March 2013 the first and second appellants were notified of  the
      decision of the respondent to make a deportation order  against  them.
      In respect of the first appellant that was because he  was  liable  to
      deportation as a consequence of his conviction and  imprisonment,  his
      deportation being deemed to be conducive to the public  good  (section
      3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971) and in respect of the  second  appellant
      because she was a family member of a person  being  deported  (section
      3(5)(b)).


   4. Their appeal came before a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      Kelsey sitting with a non-legal member of the First-tier Tribunal)  on
      13 March 2014 and the respondent  was  granted  permission  to  appeal
      against their decision to allow both of the appeals on the basis  that
      deportation would bring about an impermissible infringement of  rights
      protected by Article 8 of the ECHR. Following  a  hearing  before  the
      Upper Tribunal on 15 July 2015  (Lewis  J  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Southern) the respondent's appeal succeeded to  the  extent  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal was found to have made a  material  error  of  law
      such as to require that the decision be set aside and made afresh. The
      nature of that error was  that  the  Tribunal,  not  having  expressly
      referred to the applicable Immigration Rules, had  failed  to  reflect
      the general rule that in respect of a foreign criminal to  whom  paras
      399 and 399A do not apply (which are discussed in detail below),  very
      compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public interest in
      deportation. As can be  seen  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, there is a detailed discussion of  all  that  spoke  in  the
      appellants' favour but it is impossible to see that any  real  attempt
      was  made  to  balance  that  against  the  public  interest  in   the
      deportation of those subject to immigration control who commit serious
      criminal offences.


   5. At this point it is necessary to deal with three issues. First, it  is
      unfortunate that both  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  at  the
      initial error of law hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  first
      appellant was mistakenly treated as a person who had been sentenced to
      a single sentence of 18 months' imprisonment and there is some comment
      of him being a person who had been sentenced to more than  12  months'
      imprisonment. But this is not, and never has been, a  case  concerning
      so-called "automatic deportation", although there is mention  also  in
      the error of law decision of the Upper Tribunal of s32 UK Borders  Act
      2007. The basis of the decision that the  first  appellant  should  be
      deported is made unambiguously clear in the decision notice itself, in
      which the respondent said:


           "In view of this conviction the Secretary of State deems  it  to
           be conducive to the public good  to  make  a  deportation  order
           against you. The Secretary of State  has  therefore  decided  to
           make an order by virtue of section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration
           Act 1971."


      That inappropriate reference to s32 of the 2007 Act does  not  detract
      from the finding of an error of law made by the First-tier Tribunal in
      failing to give  proper  regard  to  the  public  interest  arguments,
      however, and the first matter in issue between the parties  identified
      by Ms Daykin in her submissions on behalf of the appellant is  whether
      the offences committed by the appellant are such  as  to  fall  within
      para 398(b) of the Immigration Rules which concerns those  in  respect
      of whom:


           "the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
           public good because, in the view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
           their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
           offender who shows a particular disregard for the law."


      Ms Daykin submits that the Tribunal must reach its own view about that
      matter. She is plainly right to say so: see LT (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1246 per Laws LJI.


   6. I  should  add  that  at  an  earlier  hearing,  for  the  purpose  of
      eliminating any possible doubt, the respondent was directed to provide
      written confirmation of the basis upon which the  deportation  of  the
      appellants was sought, so that the appellant and  his  representatives
      are in no doubt at all as to the matters in  issue  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal. The view of the respondent is  that  the  first  appellant's
      offending has caused serious harm.


   7. Second, the respondent was directed also to make clear her position in
      respect of the status of the appellant's son. He was considered to  be
      a British citizen because, at the time of his birth, his parents  held
      indefinite leave to remain and so were "settled" for the  purposes  of
      the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.  However,  the  effect  of   the
      deportation order is to "invalidate any leave to enter  or  remain  in
      the United Kingdom given to him before the order is made...". That has
      a retrospective effect which would  be  capable  of  invalidating  the
      indefinite leave held by the appellants at the  date  of  their  son's
      birth. However, the respondent has confirmed  that,  as  a  matter  of
      policy, no steps will be taken  to  invalidate,  revoke  or  otherwise
      disturb the child's British nationality, even if both of  his  parents
      remain subject to deportation.


   8. Third, an earlier hearing of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  was
      adjourned to await the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
      European Union in SSHD v CS (case  C-304/14).  Having  now  heard  the
      appellants  both  give  oral  evidence,  Mr  Wilding  accepts   as   a
      consequence that there is no one else who could care for their son  in
      the United Kingdom. Mr Wilding therefore now accepts and concedes that
      the proposed deportation of the second appellant, the  child's  mother
      who has committed no criminal offence and faces deportation only as  a
      family member of her husband, cannot now be justified. This is because
      she is now entitled to apply for a derivative right  of  residence  on
      the basis that expulsion of both parents would require  their  son  to
      return with them to Tanzania and therefore deprive him of the  genuine
      enjoyment of the substance of his rights as a Union citizen. For those
      reasons Mr Wilding no longer opposes the second appellant's appeal. He
      is plainly correct in that regard and so I need say no more about  Mrs
      Masanja's appeal which now falls to be allowed.


   9. Therefore, I am now  concerned  with  the  first  appellant's  appeal,
      although, of course, his wife and child, in respect of whom  no  steps
      will be taken to remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom,  remain  of
      central relevance to the case he advances  in  support  of  his  claim
      under Article 8 of the ECHR. However,  for  convenience,  I  will  now
      refer to Mr Masanja as "the appellant".


The legal framework.


  10. The decision of the respondent under challenge  in  these  proceedings
      and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  has  now  been  set
      aside were made before the provisions of the Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 were amended  to  introduce  section  117,  headed
      "Article  8  of  the  ECHR:  Public  Interest   Considerations"   with
      corresponding changes to the applicable immigration rules  which  came
      into force in July  2014.  Although  these  new  provisions  have  not
      informed the assessment of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      which of course was judged on the basis  of  the  provisions  then  in
      force, it is the new provisions that are in play for  the  purpose  of
      remaking the decision.

  11. The relevant rules provide as follows:
           396.  Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.
           397.    A deportation order will not be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed.
           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and
           (a) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law,
           the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,  the
           public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
           factors where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
           above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 (ii) the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                 immigration decision; and in either case
           (b) it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to  live  in  the
           country to which the person is to be deported; and
           (c) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the  UK
           without the person who is to be deported; or
           (d) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled  in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the relationship was formed at a time when  the  person
                 (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
                 status was not precarious; and
                 (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in
                 the country to which the person is to be deported,  because
                 of compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                 in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
                 (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                 in the UK without the person who is to be deported.
           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of
           his life; and
           (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
           into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.
           And section 117 of the 2002 Act provides:
           117A Application of this Part

           .                       (1)  This Part applies where a court or
                 tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
                 under the Immigration Acts-

           .                                               (a)  breaches a
                       person's right to respect for private and family life
                       under Article 8, and

           .                                               (b)  as a result
                       would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
                       Act 1998.

           .                       (2)  In considering the public interest
                 question, the court or tribunal must (in particular) have
                 regard-

           .                                               (a)  in all
                       cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
                       and

           .                                               (b)  in cases
                       concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
                       the considerations listed in section 117C.

           .                       (3)  In subsection (2), "the public
                 interest question" means the question of whether an
                 interference with a person's right to respect for private
                 and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases

           .                       (1)  The maintenance of effective
                 immigration controls is in the public interest.

           .                       (2)  It is in the public interest, and
                 in particular in the interests of the economic well-being
                 of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or
                 remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
                 because persons who can speak English-

           .                       (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers,
                 and

           .                       (b)  are better able to integrate into
                 society.

           .                       (3)  It is in the public interest, and
                 in particular in the interests of the economic well-being
                 of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or
                 remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
                 because such persons- ? (a) are not a burden on taxpayers,
                 and ? (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           .                       (4)  Little weight should be given to-
                 (a) a private life, or ? (b) a relationship formed with a
                 qualifying partner, ? that is established by a person at a
                 time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           .                       (5)  Little weight should be given to a
                 private life established by a person at a time when the
                 person's immigration status is precarious.

           .                       (6)  In the case of a person who is not
                 liable to deportation, the public interest does not require
                 the person's removal where-

           .                                               (a)  the person
                       has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
                       with a qualifying child, and

           .                                               (b)  it would
                       not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
                       United Kingdom.

           117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
           foreign criminals

           .                       (1)  The deportation of foreign
                 criminals is in the public interest.

           .                       (2)  The more serious the offence
                 committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the public
                 interest in deportation of the criminal.

           .                       (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal
                 ("C") who has not been sentenced to a period of
                 imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
                 requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
                 applies.

           .                       (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

           .                                               (a)  C has been
                       lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of ?
                       C's life,

           .                                               (b)  C is
                       socially and culturally integrated in the United
                       Kingdom, and

           .                                               (c)  there would
                       be very significant obstacles to C's integration into
                       the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

           .                    (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a
                 genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying
                 partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
                 with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation
                 on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

           .                   (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who
                 has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
                 four years, the public interest requires deportation unless
                 there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
                 those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                 (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                 taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                 a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent
                 that the reason for the decision was the offence or
                 offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

Has the appellant committed offences such as have caused "serious harm"?

  12. In reaching the conclusion that the appellant should be  made  subject
      to deportation, the respondent relied  upon,  and  reproduced  in  her
      decision, extracts from the sentencing remarks of the judge who passed
      upon the appellant an overall sentence  of  18  months'  imprisonment,
      made up of consecutive sentences of 10, 4 and 4 months. These  remarks
      included:


           "The deception deployed here  undermines  the  ancestral  claims
           system specifically and the border controls in place  generally.
           That ultimately impacts directly upon the security of the United
           Kingdom."


      Ms Deakin suggested that there was nothing to show consequences of the
      offences committed by the appellant such as to cause serious  harm  to
      any individual.  With respect, I cannot accept that submission. It  is
      not apparent why there should  be  any  requirement  for  a  specified
      individual to suffer serious harm as a result of the offending. On any
      legitimate view, these offences have caused serious harm,  both  on  a
      subjective and objective basis. The appellant and his  wife  have  had
      full access to public services to which they  were  not  entitled  and
      have remained in the United Kingdom after leave  to  remain  to  which
      they were entitled had expired. But for  the  appellant's  dishonesty,
      his son would not have been recognised as a British  citizen  and  all
      three would have had no lawful basis  upon  which  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom. The child is, of course, wholly  blameless,  which  is
      why the respondent will take no action to deprive him of  the  British
      nationality that he was granted  because  of  his  father's  dishonest
      application. As we have seen, his mother,  who  otherwise  would  have
      faced deportation as the family member of her  husband,  must  now  be
      allowed to remain to facilitate the rights of their son that  must  be
      respected.  On  a  wider  basis,  offences  such  as  these  seriously
      undermine the integrity of immigration control.


  13. For the purpose of the immigration rules  (even  though  not  for  the
      purpose of s.32 UKBA 2007) the appellant is a foreign  criminal  whose
      deportation is in the public interest. The next step  is  to  consider
      whether, in  the  appellant's  case,  paragraphs  399  or  399A  apply
      because, if they do not, the public interest in deportation will  only
      be outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
      circumstances over and above those described in 399 and 399A.  As  the
      child is a British citizen, the question arising to be addressed under
      399, in this case is whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to
      remain in the United Kingdom, cared for by  his  mother,  without  his
      father.


  14.  Realistically, Ms Daykin does  not  suggest  that  the  appeal  might
      succeed  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  private  life  or   his
      relationship with his wife, although that remains part of the  overall
      background, given that he has now lived in the United Kingdom  for  16
      years.


  15. The position is similar when viewed through the prism of s117C of  the
      2002 Act. Section 117A(2) provides  that  in  considering  the  public
      interest question in respect of a foreign criminal, the Tribunal must,
      in particular, have regard to the considerations listed in s117C.  The
      appellant is a foreign criminal for the purposes of  s117  because  he
      has been  convicted  of  an  offence  that  has  caused  serious  harm
      (s117D(2)(ii). S117C(1)  provides  that  the  deportation  of  foreign
      criminals is in the public interest. S,117C(3), which applies  because
      the  appellant  has  not  been  sentenced  to  more   than   4   years
      imprisonment,  provides that the public interest requires  deportation
      unless Exceptions 1 or 2 apply. As discussed above, on  the  facts  of
      this case only Exception 2, realistically, is in  play,  the  question
      being whether the effect upon the appellant's son of  his  deportation
      would be unduly harsh.


The evidence


  16. Oral evidence was provided by both the appellant and Mrs  Masanja.  It
      is surprising that they both adopted and relied  upon  their  original
      witness statements, made as long ago as 18 August 2013,  so  now  3  �
      years old, and added very little in giving  oral  evidence.  The  only
      more recent documentary evidence  was  a  letter  handwritten  by  the
      appellants' son dated 23 February 2016 but even that is now  nearly  a
      year old. In this letter he says, unsurprisingly, that he would be sad
      to leave the United Kingdom and would miss his friends if he  did  and
      would be sad if his father left the United Kingdom while  he  remained
      in the United Kingdom and would miss his father "a lot".


  17. The appellant opened his witness statement by saying that  he  "really
      did not know" that the documents he had submitted in  support  of  his
      application for leave to remain were  false  but  that  is  simply  an
      attempt to go behind the verdict of the jury that rejected his defence
      and found him to be guilty after a trial. There is no  room  here  for
      doubt or ambiguity. The appellant was convicted and sentenced  on  the
      basis of deliberate dishonesty used  in  making  the  application  for
      leave to remain.


  18. The appellant confirmed that  both  of  his  own  parents,  previously
      living in Tanzania, are now deceased. He is an only child of  his  own
      parents but has 8 half siblings, 4 maternal  and  4  paternal.  Having
      completed his secondary education at boarding school  in  Tanzania  he
      decided to move to the  United  Kingdom  to  complete  his  education.
      Having completed the studies facilitated by the student leave granted,
      he wished to settle here with his wife and then made  the  application
      for leave on the basis of ancestry. Having secured that leave he found
      work and in 2009 enrolled at university, subsequently graduating  with
      an honours degree. As soon as he was eligible,  he  applied  with  his
      wife for settlement, again on  the  basis  of  the  documents  proving
      ancestral links that were not genuine.


  19. The appellant says he has relatives in Tanzania but they are all half-
      siblings and "they have their own lives with  their  own  family".  He
      says that his wife still has family  in  Tanzania  but  "it  would  be
      terribly hard to start again there". At para 40 of that statement  the
      appellant said this:


           "I have had sight of the reasons for deportation and  whilst  in
           most  instances  this  is  a  conviction  which   under   normal
           circumstances would be pointless to challenge as I know it is an
           offence against the country and the system you have specifically
           put in place to permit those with genuine ancestral ties to work
           and settle in the UK. I know that this is an offence against the
           very structure of border controls. However, I honestly  did  not
           know."


      Thus, once again, the appellant advances his case on the basis that he
      was wrongly convicted of an offence that he did not  in  fact  commit.
      But, as I have explained, it is simply not open to  the  appellant  to
      sweep away so easily the fact of his conviction and  imprisonment  and
      that argument leads him nowhere at all.


  20. The appellant added nothing more in his oral evidence save to say that
      his son was now in year 3 at school.


  21.  In her witness statement, also dated 16 August 2013, Mrs Masanja says
      she has been "totally innocent of this whole situation" and so  should
      not be deported. She explained that  her  mother  remains  in  Dar  es
      Salaam where she runs a small corner shop. She also suggests that  her
      husband could not have been involved in obtaining leave by  deception.
      She provides details of her history of work in the United Kingdom  and
      association with a local church. The family is, she says, well settled
      in the United Kingdom and her son is doing well at school.


  22. In her very brief oral evidence she said simply that she has no  other
      relatives in the United Kingdom and was not herself  in  contact  with
      the one half-sibling of her husband's who lived here.


  23. No other documentary evidence was relied upon or drawn  attention  to.
      There are, though, a number of letters of support  for  the  appellant
      and his wife contained in the bundle of  documents  prepared  for  the
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have  read  all  of  those
      documents, although, of course, they are all now more than three years
      old.








   Submissions


  24. As discussed above, Mr Wilding does not oppose  Mrs  Masanja's  appeal
      and so his submissions were focused upon the case advanced  on  behalf
      of the appellant. The key question  was  whether  the  effect  of  the
      appellant's deportation upon his son would be unduly harsh. It was not
      being argued that the appellant could resist deportation on the  basis
      that family life with his wife would be disrupted. In carrying out  an
      assessment of whether the effect of deportation on the child would  be
      unduly  harsh  it  was  necessary  to  have  regard  to  all  of   the
      circumstances, including the nature of the parent's offending: see  MM
      (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617 at para 24:


           "... Accordingly the more pressing the public  interest  in  his
           removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect  on  his
           child or partner will be unduly harsh. Any other approach in  my
           judgment dislocates the "unduly  harsh"  provisions  from  their
           context. It would mean that the question of undue hardship would
           be decided wholly without regard to  the  force  of  the  public
           interest in deportation in the particular case. But in that case
           the term "unduly" is mistaken for "excessive"  which  imports  a
           different idea.  What  is  due  or  undue  depends  on  all  the
           circumstances, not merely the impact on the child or partner  in
           the given case. In the present  context  relevant  circumstances
           certainly  include  the  criminal's  immigration  and   criminal
           history."


  25. Mr Wilding submits that in this case the public interest in  deporting
      is strong and there is no impediment to return so far as the appellant
      is concerned. Nothing, he submits, in the evidence indicates that  the
      impact upon the child of his father's removal would be  unduly  harsh.
      Unlike his wife, who has committed no criminal offence, the  appellant
      cannot look to European law or regulations to resist deportation since
      as the child's mother  no  longer  faces  any  risk  of  removal,  the
      appellant's deportation will not require the child to leave the United
      Kingdom and so undermine his right to enjoy the benefits of  being  an
      EEA national.  Importantly, the appellant does  not  face  a  European
      expulsion decision but deportation under domestic  law  as  a  foreign
      criminal for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.


  26. Ms Daykin opened her submissions with an observation that Mrs  Masanja
      found herself subject to a deportation decision under domestic law  as
      a spouse who herself had committed no offence but finds  herself  free
      of it because of European law. The inference, if I have understood  it
      correctly, is that if she can  benefit  from  European  law  then  the
      appellant should be able to as well. However, the two are in  entirely
      different situations and different considerations apply. The appellant
      simply does not qualify for the same relief from deportation  as  does
      his wife for the reasons that I have already explained.


  27. Next, Ms  Daykin  drew  upon  Article  24(3)  of  the  EU  Charter  of
      Fundamental Rights, providing:


           "Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular basis
           a personal relationship and direct contact with both his or  her
           parents, unless this is contrary to his or her interests."


      In Abdul (section 55-Article 24(3) Charter) [2016]  UKUT  00106  (IAT)
      the President of the UT (IAC) offered guidance to the effect that:


           "Article 24(3) of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights creates a
           free standing right (although not absolute)"


      Plainly, Article 24(3) does not, and  is  not  intended,  to  displace
      arrangements for deportation of foreign criminals wherever there is  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship, as was recognised in  CS
      at para 40. Ms Daykin quite properly emphasises  the  absence  of  any
      suggestion that the appellant represents any risk of re-offending but,
      in the context of this case, that may be to miss the point being  made
      by the respondent about why this was a serious offence that has caused
      serious harm and why the public interest in deportation remains cogent
      and compelling.


      Conclusions


  28. The best interests of the child in this, as in any  other  deportation
      case, are a primary consideration and  must  be  accorded  significant
      weight but are not determinative. Although, as I have explained, there
      is very little in the way  of  recent  evidence  concerning  the  best
      interest of the child, having accepted the existence of a genuine  and
      subsisting  parental  relationship,  the  child's  best  interests,  I
      readily accept, are served by him remaining in the United Kingdom with
      both parents. I recognise also,  this  is  not  a  case  of  automatic
      deportation where, because of the length of the sentence imposed,  the
      respondent must make a deportation order in the  public  interest.  On
      the other hand, this appellant is liable to  deportation  because  the
      respondent, to whose views due regard must be  given,  has  considered
      his to be offences that have caused serious harm, an  assessment  with
      which I agree.


  29. The central issue in this appeal is whether the effect upon  the  son,
      who would remain in the United Kingdom  with  his  mother  should  the
      appellant be deported, would be unduly harsh. It is not hard to accept
      that the effect upon him would be harsh, given that there is no reason
      at all to doubt that there is here a genuine and  subsisting  parental
      relationship, even if evidence of the family  arrangements  is  scant.
      But whether it is unduly harsh requires something demonstrating rather
      more than that and here, in terms of evidence, it is simply absent.


  30. Guidance as to what is meant by "unduly harsh" in the context  of  the
      rule with which I am concerned is provided by the Court of  Appeal  in
      MM (Uganda) v SSHD per Laws LJ at para 22 et seq:


           "I turn to the interpretation  of  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh".
           Plainly it means the same in section 117C(5)  as  in  Rule  399.
           "Unduly harsh" is an ordinary English expression. As  so  often,
           its meaning is coloured by  its  context.  Authority  is  hardly
           needed for such  a  proposition  but  is  anyway  provided,  for
           example  by  VIA  Rail  Canada  [2000]  193  DLR  (4th)  357  at
           paragraphs 35 to 37.
           The context in these cases invites emphasis on two factors,  (1)
           the public interest in the removal of foreign criminals and  (2)
           the need for a proportionate assessment of any interference with
           Article 8 rights. In my judgment, with respect, the approach  of
           the Upper Tribunal in MAB ignores this combination  of  factors.
           The first of them, the public interest in the removal of foreign
           criminals,  is  expressly  vouched  by  Parliament  in   section
           117C(1). Section 117C(2) then provides (I repeat  the  provision
           for convenience):


           "The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
           the greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
           criminal."


           This steers the tribunals and the court towards a  proportionate
           assessment of the criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
           Accordingly  the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  his
           removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect  on  his
           child or partner will be unduly harsh. Any other approach in  my
           judgment dislocates the "unduly  harsh"  provisions  from  their
           context. It would mean that the question of undue hardship would
           be decided wholly without regard to  the  force  of  the  public
           interest in deportation in the particular case. But in that case
           the term "unduly" is mistaken for "excessive"  which  imports  a
           different idea.  What  is  due  or  undue  depends  on  all  the
           circumstances, not merely the impact on the child or partner  in
           the given case. In the present  context  relevant  circumstances
           certainly  include  the  criminal's  immigration  and   criminal
           history.


  31. Thus, while all of the circumstances fall to be  taken  into  account,
      the two central issues are first the impact upon the child and  second
      the nature of the offending and the public interest in the appellant's
      deportation. Balancing one against the other delivers  the  answer  to
      the question of whether the effect upon the child of  the  appellant's
      deportation will be unduly harsh.


  32. On the evidence before me it is simply  impossible  to  say  that  the
      effect upon the child will be unduly harsh. As I  have  said,  by  any
      legitimate view the respondent was plainly correct to say  that  these
      were offences giving rise to serious harm and so the  public  interest
      in deportation is strong and compelling. Very little indeed is offered
      on behalf of the appellant to indicate or even suggest that the impact
      of his deportation would be any more deeply felt by his child than  it
      would by the child of any other foreign criminal facing deportation or
      that it would be, given the circumstances, unduly harsh.


  33. For that reason, so far as the immigration rules  are  concerned,  the
      appellant is not a person in respect of whom either 399 or 399A  apply
      and  nothing  even  approaching  what  can  sensibly  be  regarded  as
      compelling circumstances over and  above  that  has  been  identified.
      Similarly, in terms of s117C, the evidence does not establish for  the
      purposes of  Exception  2  that  the  effect  of  deportation  on  the
      appellant's child (or upon his partner)  would  be  unduly  harsh  and
      there is nothing  in  the  evidence  to  establish,  and  nor  was  it
      submitted on the appellant's behalf, that he can fall within Exception
      1.  Therefore,  the   public   interest   requires   the   appellant's
      deportation.


Summary of decision:

  34. For the reasons previously  given,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
      material error of law and their decision has been set aside.

  35. I substitute a fresh decision to allow the appeal of  Odilia  Winifred
      Masanja (DA/00697/2013)


  36. I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal  of  Eric  Winston
      Masanja (DA/00613/2013)


                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 25 January 2017

