
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: DA/00199/2018         |
|the immigration Acts                                                       |
|Heard at: |Field House               | |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  |21st August 2018                 |  On 1st October 2018          |   |
|                                                                           |
|                                                                           |
|                                                                           |
|Before                                                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                  |
|Between                                                                    |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |            |
|           |                                                  |Appellant   |
|                                                                           |
|and                                                                        |
|                                                                           |
|Dawid Grebowiec                                                            |
|(Anonymity Order Not Made]                                                 |
|Respondent                                                                 |
|           |                                                  |            |


                                  Anonymity

The anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  rescinded  or
revoked.

Representation:

For the appellant:         Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    No representation.


                           Decision and Directions



 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  S  Lal  (hereafter  the
    "judge") who, in a decision promulgated on  5  June  2018  following  a
    hearing on 30 May 2018,  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Dawid  Grebowiec
    (hereafter the "claimant"), a national of Poland born on 29 June  1997,
    against a deportation order made on 25 September 2017. The Secretary of
    State's reasons for making the deportation  order  are  set  out  in  a
    letter dated 22 September 2017 (hereafter the "decision letter"). There
    is also a supplementary letter dated 14  October  2017  (hereafter  the
    "supplementary decision letter") which considered representations  that
    the Secretary of State received  from  the  claimant  late,  after  the
    expiry of the time limit of 10 days that he was given when served  with
    a notice dated 31 August 2017 to submit any reasons why he  should  not
    be deported.


 2. The claimant attended the hearing before me. He was not represented. He
    was content to proceed with the hearing. I  explained  to  him  that  I
    could not hear fresh evidence and that I  was  limited  to  considering
    whether the judge had materially erred in law. I explained to him  what
    this meant in simple terms. He had three companions. During the  course
    of the hearing, one companion tried to interrupt  him  or  prompt  him.
    When I asked her not to do so, she obeyed my instruction, for  which  I
    am grateful. I did have some difficulty with the other  two  companions
    who made noises of exasperation and, on one occasion, so loudly that  I
    found it difficult to concentrate. I then  told  them  to  stop  making
    noises or I would have to ask all three to  leave.  Fortunately,  there
    were no further difficulties.

Anonymity Order

 3. The judge made an anonymity order, stating, at para 20 that: "there are
    sensitive  issues  relating  to  the  appellant".  The  judge  gave  no
    explanation.

 4. Following the hearing before me on 21 August  2018,  I  considered  the
    documents on file and could not understand why the judge had  made  the
    anonymity order or what sensitive issues applied.  I  therefore  issued
    Directions on 22 August 2018 which said as follows:

       "2.    There is a strong public interest in open justice. It is  not
           enough for the judge simply to say  that  "there  are  sensitive
           issues  relating  to  the  appellant".  I  have  considered  the
           documents on file. I cannot see why the judge made the anonymity
           order or what sensitive issues may apply in this case to justify
           an anonymity order.


       3.     I am therefore  minded  to  lift  the  anonymity  order  when
           issuing my decision as to  whether  the  judge  made  materially
           erred in law.


       4.     If Mr DG objects to my discharging the  anonymity  order,  he
           must notify the Upper Tribunal in writing no later than 4 pm  on
           Wednesday  5  September  2018,  with  full   reasons   for   his
           objection."

 5. As at 24 September 2018, the claimant had not made any  representations
    or notified the Upper Tribunal in  writing  that  he  objected  to  the
    anonymity order being discharged.

 6. I considered the material before me. I could not see any reason why the
    judge said that there are sensitive issues relating to the claimant.  I
    could not see any. There is a strong public interest in  open  justice.
    In all of the  circumstances,  I  decided  to  rescind  or  revoke  the
    anonymity order.

The Secretary of State's decision

 7. The deportation order was made under regulations 23(6)(b) and 27 of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  (hereafter  the
    "Regulations").  The Secretary of State also certified  the  claimant's
    case under regulation 33 (paras 10-29).

 8. The supplementary decision letter is a very detailed  decision.  It  is
    more detailed than the decision letter  because  it  responded  to  the
    claimant's  representations  which  were  made  late  and  which   were
    therefore not before the Secretary of State  as  at  the  date  of  the
    decision letter. I shall therefore refer to a  greater  extent  to  the
    supplementary decision letter.

 9. The claimant's criminal convictions are set  out  at  para  11  of  the
    supplementary decision letter. Between 13 November 2015 and  22  August
    2017, the claimant had been convicted of 22 offences  on  7  occasions.
    There were 4  offences against the  person  (battery  x  1  and  common
    assault x 3), 3  offences  against  property  (destroying  or  damaging
    property x 3), 4 offences of  theft  and  kindred  offences  (theft  by
    shoplifting x 2, theft from a dwelling x 1 and burglary and theft  from
    a non-dwelling x 1) and 10 offences  relating  to  police,  courts  and
    prisons (assault of a constable x 3, breach of a conditional  discharge
    x 1, failing to comply with a  community  order  x  3  and  failing  to
    surrender to custody x 3). He received  sentences  of  imprisonment  as
    follows:

    (i)  On 24 November 2016, sentences of  6  weeks',  10  weeks'  and  20
         weeks' imprisonment were imposed upon variation, due to breach of /
         non-compliance  with,  sentences  imposed  for   several   offences
         (battery, assault on a constable,  common  assault,  destroying  or
         damaging property and theft by shoplifting).

    (ii)  In  addition,  on  24  November  2016,  he  received   concurrent
         sentences, upon conviction, of 6 weeks for theft  from  a  dwelling
         and 3 weeks for failing to surrender to custody  and  breach  of  a
         community order.

    His longest sentence was therefore for 20 weeks.

    The claimant had also received three cautions in total.  In  2014,  for
    common assault and in 2015 for possession of a Class  B  drug  and  for
    theft by shoplifting.

10. The Secretary of State did not accept that the claimant had acquired  a
    permanent right of residence (para 18  of  the  supplementary  decision
    letter). He found that the claimant's conviction history  indicated  an
    established pattern of repeated offending (para 30), that there  was  a
    significant risk of re-offending (para 34) and that  he  represented  a
    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  justify  his
    deportation on grounds of public policy (para  35).  The  Secretary  of
    State's  reasons  are  set  out  in  detail.  The  Secretary  of  State
    considered the issue of proportionality  (paras  36-47)  and  concluded
    that the decision was proportionate. The prospect of rehabilitation was
    considered at paras 49-53. The human rights claim was  then  considered
    in considerable detail, at paras 55-125.

The judge's decision

11. The appeal before the judge was  the  substantive  appeal  against  the
    deportation order under the Regulations.

12. In addition, as para 49 of the decision letter stated that the claimant
    had  been  served  with  a  notice  under  s.120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the judge  had  to  decide  any  human
    rights issues raised in the appeal. The claimant's human  rights  claim
    was based on his relationship with Ms K H and her minor son, M.

13. At para 3 of his decision, the judge said that it was not disputed that
    the claimant had not acquired a permanent right of residence.

14. The judge summarised the oral evidence before him at paras 6-10.  These
    read:


       "6.    The appellant stated that he came to the UK when he was 16  to
           join his mother in the UK. He obtained a NI  number  and  worked
           part time at the Premier Inn in Gatwick as well as  studying  at
           college.


       7. He described the circumstances of his first offence which  was  in
           November 2015 and he stated that he was street homeless  and  he
           got into a fight. The August 2016 [sic] were of a similar nature
           and concerned an attempt to  evict  him  from  a  property.  The
           November 2016 conviction was in respect of  theft  when  he  was
           street homeless. He did not dispute the convictions as set out.


       8. He met his partner about a one and half years ago  and  they  have
           been living together for about a year. He was like a  stepfather
           to her 5 year sold [sic] son.  He  accepted  that  his  previous
           convictions had been caused by being with the wrong company  and
           access to alcohol but he was now out of the previous area and he
           was dry. He had done substance misuse courses  as  evidenced  in
           his letters of support. He had not drunk in over a year and half
           and that [sic] he hoped to get  paid  work  in  the  hospitality
           sector.


       9. He had not contacted HMRC. He  accepted  that  he  he  [sic]  been
           homeless in the past because he had cased [sic] trouble for  his
           mother but now the relationship with her was supportive.


       10.    The second witness to give evidence was Ms K H and she adopted
           her written letter in support. She described  how  she  met  the
           Appellant and that he was her partner for about a year and  step
           father to her 5-year-old son. She accepted that he had  been  in
           with the wrong crowd but since he moved in with her he  had  had
           no further problems. She  referred  to  her  own  problems  with
           domestic violence in the past and the role that  [the  claimant]
           played in life. The Tribunal made a full note of  the  evidence,
           which appears in the Record of  Proceedings.  The  Tribunal  has
           taken into account all of this evidence and the other  evidence,
           to which the Tribunal was referred, as well as  the  submissions
           of both parties."

15. The judge's assessment of the issues before him is set out at paras 14-
    19. Para 20 concerns the anonymity order. I shall quote  the  whole  of
    paras 14-20. They read:


       "14.   The Tribunal  considered  all  the  evidence  before  it.  The
           Tribunal has at all times applied the civil standard of proof.


       15.    Having considered the evidence  with  care,  the  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that [the claimant] did produce credible  evidence  of
           insight into his crimes and into his  reformation.  He  candidly
           accepted in oral evidence that he had been pulled in  the  wrong
           direction by others especially when  it  came  to  alcohol.  The
           Tribunal was provided with evidence as to how he would deal with
           such a situation in the future namely that  he  has  moved  away
           from the previous home area to  be  with  his  girlfriend  in  a
           different area.


       16.    The Tribunal has been provided with evidence in  the  form  of
           the letter from Forward dated 2  February  2018  in  which  they
           notice completion of relevant alcohol work  and  recognition  of
           past mistakes. The Tribunal is satisfied that the evidence shows
           that [the  claimant]  has  reasonably  addressed  the  issue  of
           alcohol consumption, the impact of his actions  on  victims  and
           how he would deal with those self same  friends  and  associates
           who he accepts were the cause  of  his  previous  problems,  The
           Tribunal assessed his overall insight as good.


       17.    For the reasons given, the presence of insight, plus practical
           and pragmatic evidence as to how he would actually deal with his
           friends  and  associates  the   Tribunal   is   satisfied   that
           deportation on grounds of public  policy/  public  security  are
           [sic?] made out. There is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  [the
           claimant] poses such a risk and following  Aranz,  the  Tribunal
           notes that the burden is on [the Secretary of State] to  justify
           deportation. She has failed to  do  so  other  than  noting  the
           effect of the offences committed in general  terms  only  on  UK
           society.


       18.    Moreover, in respect of family life and  proportionality,  the
           Tribunal has been provided  with  credible  evidence  that  [the
           claimant] has family life in the UK with Ms K H and her son  and
           it would be disproportionate to expect [the claimant]  to  leave
           the UK at the present time. The Tribunal accepted  her  evidence
           as to the depth of this relationship as well  as  durability  of
           the same. The Tribunal was satisfied that it  would  be  in  the
           best interests of her son to continue to have [the claimant]  in
           his family life as he is at present.


       19.    In the light of its findings above the Tribunal did not go  on
           to consider Article 8 separately.


       20.    The Tribunal has  considered  whether  to  make  an  anonymity
           direction in this  case,  because  there  are  sensitive  issues
           relating to [the claimant]. The Tribunal considers it right that
           until further order [the claimant] and  other  parties  to  this
           matter should have their details protected for that  reason  the
           Tribunal makes an anonymity order."

The grounds

16. With regard to the judge's finding that the claimant  did  not  pose  a
    current risk to public policy or  security,  the  grounds  contend,  in
    summary, as follows:

    (i)  In stating that the claimant had  produced  credible  evidence  of
         insight into his crimes and into his  reformation,  the  judge  was
         relying on little more than the claimant's attempt in oral evidence
         to lay blame on others leading him astray (paras 12 and 15  of  the
         judge's decision).

    (ii) The judge failed to take into account the fact that  the  claimant
         was a persistent, prolific and violent offender  and  that  he  had
         failed to comply with the conditions of his sentences.

    (iii)    There was little evidence before the judge of  the  claimant's
         rehabilitation or steps taken by him to address his offending.

    (iv) The claimant's  breaches  of  community  orders  and  failures  to
         surrender to custody could not be explained away on the basis  that
         he was homeless. The claimant had demonstrated a disregard for  the
         law by disobeying community orders failing to surrender to custody.



    (v)  There was no evidence of what the claimant was doing in the United
         Kingdom and, accordingly, a  failure  to  secure  employment  would
         increase the risk of re-offending.

    (vi) The judge  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  Schedule  1  of  the
         Regulations which states, inter alia, that  protecting  the  public
         and combating the effects of persistent offending are considered to
         be in the fundamental interests of society in the United Kingdom.

17. In relation to proportionality under the Regulations, there were no age
    or health reasons preventing the claimant's deportation to  Poland  nor
    any reason why he would not be able to find employment or accommodation
    there on his return.

18. In relation to the Article 8 claim, there was no evidence,  beyond  the
    partner's  self-serving  evidence,  that  the   claimant   was   in   a
    relationship with the partner or that it would be in the best interests
    of her son for the claimant to remain in the United Kingdom. There  was
    a dearth of evidence and of reasoning in the judge's decision.

The hearing on 21 August 2018

19. I heard submissions from Ms Pal. She drew my attention to fact that the
    judge had not made any mention at all of the fact that the claimant was
    a persistent offender.

20. Ms Pal submitted that the judge had failed to take  into  account  that
    the claimant had failed to comply with the terms of his sentences.  The
    letter from the Forward Substance Misuse Team (hereafter "FSMT")  dated
    2 February 2018 shows that the claimant had engaged  with  a  substance
    misuse team. However, Ms  Pal  submitted  that,  given  the  claimant's
    persistent offending, the letter did not go anywhere near to suggesting
    that the claimant would not behave in a similar way again.

21. Ms Pal submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into  account  the
    public interest.

22. In relation  to  Article  8,  Ms  Pal  submitted  that  the  claimant's
    relationship with his partner commenced 6 months before the deportation
    order, i.e. after the claimant had been served  with  a  "Liability  to
    removal" document on 30 January 2017. At that time, he did not  mention
    that he was in any relationship. The family life of the partner's child
    is with his mother. There was no evidence beyond the partner's evidence
    for any finding that the claimant enjoys family life with the partner's
    son. Even if there was such family life, the relationship had only been
    of short duration.

23. Before hearing from the claimant, I  summarised  for  his  benefit  the
    Secretary of State's case and then gave him an opportunity to comment.

24. In the course of his comments, the claimant mentioned the  letter  from
    FSMT. In the course of doing so, I located a small bundle of  documents
    that had been submitted by the claimant to the judge and which had been
    placed on  the  correspondence  section  of  the  file  (hereafter  the
    "claimant's bundle"), which is the reason why I had not seen it  before
    the hearing. I am grateful to the  claimant  for  alerting  me  to  the
    existence of this bundle of documents.

25. In terms of submissions, the claimant said that he was found not guilty
    of the offence of 21 August 2017. This  evidence  was  not  before  the
    judge. He was bailed to his partner's address. He submitted  that  this
    shows that he is in a relationship with her. They are living  together.
    He submitted that, if he is  deported,  it  cannot  be  said  that  his
    partner's child will not be affected.

26. Initially, the claimant said that he  had  not  been  served  with  any
    immigration  papers  before  he  met  his  partner  but,   on   further
    discussion, he accepted that he was served immigration papers whilst in
    prison and that he met his partner after he left prison. He  said  that
    when he was in the day centre, both his partner  and  her  son  visited
    him. The son did not want to leave him and was crying.

27. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

28. It can be seen from paras 19-26 above that, despite  my  informing  the
    claimant that I could not hear fresh evidence,  he  did  in  fact  give
    fresh evidence. I have to disregard the fresh evidence because my  duty
    is to decide whether the judge made a material  error  of  law  on  the
    evidence that was before him. It is not open to me  to  consider  fresh
    evidence in order to support his findings. It is not open to me to make
    my own findings based on the fresh  evidence  unless  the  decision  is
    first set aside on the ground that the judge had material error of law.

29. In view of the fact that  the  claimant's  bundle  was  placed  on  the
    correspondence section of the file, I examined the file very  carefully
    to ensure that no documents are omitted from my  consideration  of  the
    issues in this appeal.  I shall deal with the claimant's bundle at  the
    appropriate points.

30. The judge said, at para 3, that it was not in dispute that the claimant
    had not acquired a permanent right of residence. This seems rather  odd
    because para 8 of the supplementary decision  letter  states  that  the
    claimant had stated in his representations of 31 August  2017  that  he
    has lived in the United Kingdom for most of  his  life,  that  he  last
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2013 and had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

31. However, assuming that the judge was correct, that there was no dispute
    that the claimant had not acquired a permanent right of residence  (if,
    for example, this as accepted by the claimant  at  the  hearing),  this
    would mean that the claimant had the lowest level of  protection  under
    the Regulations. This would  therefore  mean  that  the  judge  had  to
    consider two questions under the Regulations, as follows:

      (i)  whether  the  claimant  represented  a   genuine,   present   and
        sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
        interests of society; and

     (ii)     if so, whether the decision was proportionate.

32. I have set out the entirety of the judge's  reasoning  at  my  para  15
    above. I am driven to say that it is seriously  wanting.  There  is  no
    mention in the judge's reasoning, or anywhere  else  in  his  decision,
    that he considered question (i) or even that he was aware of  the  test
    to be applied in relation to the lowest level of protection.

33. Not only is it the case  that  there  is  no  mention  in  the  judge's
    decision that the applicant was regarded by the Secretary of State as a
    persistent offender, there is no mention in his reasoning  or  anywhere
    else in the decision of the claimant's criminal convictions.  There  is
    nothing to indicate that he  considered  whether  the  claimant  was  a
    persistent offender and, if so, that he had  taken  into  account  para
    7(h) of Schedule 1 of the Regulations, which  provides  that,  for  the
    purposes of the Regulations, the fundamental interests  of  society  in
    the  United  Kingdom  includes  combating  the  effects  of  persistent
    offending, particularly in relation to  offences  which,  if  taken  in
    isolation, may otherwise  be  unlikely  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    regulation 27. Indeed, there is nothing to indicate that  he  was  even
    aware of the existence of para 7(h).

34. At para 17 of his decision, the judge said: "There is no evidence  that
    the claimant poses such a risk". It  is  impossible  to  see  how  this
    sentence can be correct when the evidence before the judge was  in  the
    form of the claimant's criminal convictions. What the judge had  to  do
    was to consider that offending history, the  claimant's  oral  evidence
    and the letter from FSMT and then, having assessed the evidence  before
    him, reach a reasoned finding as to the threat that the claimant poses.
    What we  see  in  the  judge's  reasoning  is  reference  only  to  the
    claimant's oral evidence and the letter from FSMT and no mention at all
    of the criminal history.

35. What is clear from the judge's reasoning is that he simply accepted the
    claimant's  oral  evidence  by  which  he  gave  explanations  for  his
    offending behaviour and the letter from  FSMT.  It  is  instructive  to
    consider the contents of this letter. It reads:

         "I am writing this letter to inform you  that  Dawid  Grebowiec  is
              currently engaging with  the  Substance  Misuse  Team  within
              Brook House Immigration  Centre.  Dawid  Grebowiec  has  been
              engaging since January 2018, and has been punctual  with  his
              appointment times.

         Dawid Grebowiec is completing  a  non-structured  course  which  is
              designed to offer 1:1 session's [sic] and cell packs to  meet
              his individual's needs.

         This is to help Dawid Grebowiec gain knowledge,  understanding  and
              to recognise negative choices he  may  have  previously  made
              regarding substance misuse.  Dawid  Grebowiec  has  completed
              [sic] session on Cannabis and NPS and will continue  to  work
              with myself and complete  sessions  on  Low  Mood/Depression,
              Sleep problems.

         Dawid Grebowiec is very positive when talking about his future  and
              how he recognises the mistakes he had made in the past. Dawid
              Grebowiec speaks openly  and  honestly  about  his  past  and
              recognises his negative impact within the justice system."

36. The letter from FSMT does not say anything  about  the  risk  that  the
    claimant poses of  re-offending.  If  the  judge  considered  that  the
    claimant's engagement with the FSMT for a period  of  one  month  (from
    January 2018 to February 2018) was sufficient to reduce his risk of re-
    offending  so  that  he  did  not  present  a  genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat, it would have been necessary  for  him  to
    have explained why engagement with the FSMT for a period of  one  month
    was sufficient, having regard to the claimant's history of persistently
    failing to comply with  court  orders  including  orders  that  imposed
    rehabilitation activity requirements.

37. The claimant's criminal history, including his convictions for breaches
    of community orders and breaches of his bail conditions,  was  relevant
    to any assessment of the threat he poses along with his  oral  evidence
    and the letter from FSMT. It is impossible to see how the  judge  could
    have decided the risk the claimant posed without  taking  into  account
    the criminal history.

38. There is nothing to indicate that the judge took into  account  or  was
    even aware of para 3 of Schedule 1 of the Regulations which states:

         "Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national  has
             received a custodial sentence, or is  a  persistent  offender,
             the longer the sentence, or the more numerous the convictions,
             the greater the likelihood  that  the  individual's  continued
             presence in the United Kingdom represents a  genuine,  present
             and sufficiently serious threat affecting of  the  fundamental
             interests of society."

39. In all of the circumstances, I am driven to  the  conclusion  that  the
    judge did not  in  fact  take  into  account  the  claimant's  criminal
    convictions.

40. Indeed, having regard to the remainder of my reasons below, I  can  and
    do say that I have no confidence at all that the judge was  even  aware
    of the  contents  of  the  decision  letter  and/or  the  supplementary
    decision letter.

41. Para 18 of the judge's decision  mentions  proportionality  but  it  is
    clear that this was  in  connection  with  the  Article  8  claim.  The
    assessment of  proportionality  under  the  Regulations  entails  wider
    considerations and is a separate issue. In case it is said that, as the
    judge found that the decision was disproportionate for the purposes  of
    Article 8, any error in this respect is immaterial,  I  have  concluded
    that the judge also materially erred in law  in  reaching  his  finding
    that the decision was disproportionate in relation  to  the  claimant's
    Article 8 claim, for the following reasons:

     (i) As in  the  case  of  the  judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the
         deportation case under  the  regulations,  there  was  in  fact  no
         balancing exercise in the judge's reasoning. It  is  impossible  to
         see any weighing of the factors for and against the  claimant.  All
         one  sees  is  a  wholesale  acceptance,  without  any   assessment
         whatsoever, of the evidence given by the claimant and his partner.

     (ii)     There is nothing to indicate that the judge considered para  4
         of Schedule  1  of  the  Regulations  which  was  relevant  to  any
         balancing exercise and which states:

         "Little weight is to be attached  to  the  integration  of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around he same time as-

              (a) the commission of a criminal offence;
              (b) ...;
              (c) ..."

     (iii)    There is nothing to indicate that the judge took into  account
         the fact that the claimant's relationship with Ms K H and  her  son
         was of short  duration  and  established  after  the  claimant  had
         already been served with immigration papers.

     (iv)     Instead of a balancing exercise, one sees what is  clearly  an
         assumption that  the  mere  existence  of  a  genuine  relationship
         between the claimant and Ms K H was sufficient to trump the state's
         interests in immigration  control,  an  assumption  that  M's  best
         interests require the applicant to be in the United Kingdom and  an
         assumption that the best interests of a  child  trump  the  state's
         interests.  The  first  and  the  third  assumptions  are   plainly
         incorrect.

42. This decision falls far short of the standard that  can  reasonably  be
    expected. It is rare that it is necessary for the Upper Tribunal to say
    so. Regrettably, this is one of those rare occasions.

43. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of Judge Lal  in
    its entirety. None of his findings shall  stand.  His  summary  of  the
    evidence he heard, at paras 6-10 of his decision, may be relied upon by
    ether party.

44. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

45. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). In addition,  given
    that the claimant won his appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S Lal involved  the  making
of errors on points of law such that the decision on the  claimant's  appeal
is set aside in its entirety.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  re-hearing  of  all
issues in this appeal  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Lal.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 24 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
