
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00119/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 17th December 2014                         |On 22nd January 2015         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            MAGHDID KHALIL TAHIR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam of Burton and Burton Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
         tier Tribunal composed of Judge TRP Hollingworth and  Mrs  Bray  JP
         (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel')  who  in  a  determination
         promulgated on 20th June  2014  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the refusal of the Secretary of State to recognise him as a
         refugee and the decision, also dated 23rd December 2013, to  deport
         him from  the  United  Kingdom  made  pursuant  to  section  5  (1)
         Immigration Act 1971.

      2. The original grounds of challenge assert the Panel erred in:

             a.   Failing to grant an adjournment.

             b.    Failing  to  assess  the  asylum  claim  without  proper
                  reference to the background material relating to Iraq.  It
                  is said the determination is based  upon  a  situation  in
                  Iraq that no longer exists and  has  changed  dramatically
                  and so the appeal needs to be reconsidered.

             c.   Failing to properly consider the best  interests  of  the
                  children      which as a primary consideration  should  be
                  considered first and foremost. It  is  said  there  is  no
                  clear conclusion as to where the  best  interests  of  the
                  child lie.

             d.   The assessment of the relationship between the  Appellant
                  and the child is said to be flawed with no proper  account
                  being taken of a passage from  a  social  worker's  report
                  which shows the Appellant has a good relationship with the
                  child.

             e.   The  assessment  of  the  impact  on  the  child  of  the
                  Appellant's   removal is said to be inadequate.

             f.   The Panel failed to take proper account of the  delay  by
                  the  Respondent in pursuing deportation which resulted  in
                  family life between the Appellant and the  child,  for  if
                  there had been no delay the child would not have been born
                  and its welfare would not be  adversely  affected  by  its
                  father's deportation.

Background


      3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1975 and is a national of Iraq.
         He arrived in the United Kingdom without leave on 8th May 2001  and
         made a postal application for asylum five  months  later.  On  19th
         October 2001 the Appellant was arrested for unlawful  wounding  and
         served with illegal entry papers. On 18th February 2002 the  asylum
         application was refused on grounds of non-compliance as it is  said
         the Appellant failed to attend for  interview.   On  8th  September
         2003 the Appellant was involved in  an  offence  of  conspiracy  to
         commit violent disorder for which he received a 20  month  sentence
         of imprisonment.

      4. In January 2005 the Appellant was informed of the decision to  make
         a deportation order. On 9th September 2005 his appeal  against  the
         refusal of the asylum claim was refused by  the  Tribunal  and  the
         deportation order signed on 13th March 2006.

      5. On 21st December 2006 further representations were made which  were
         refused in January  2007.   On  26th  March  2008  the  Appellant's
         representatives stated a further asylum  claim  would  be  launched
         which led, on 3rd August 2009, to the March 2006 deportation  order
         being revoked.

      6. An independent social workers report was  commissioned  in  October
         2006 and on 19th December 2009 the Appellant's child Reece was born
         who has subsequently been the subject of a supervision  order  made
         in the Mansfield Family Proceedings Court involving Nottinghamshire
         County Council.  On 18th July  2013  further  representations  were
         made by new solicitors which were treated as a fresh  asylum  claim
         and eventually refused in a reasons for refusal letter  dated  23rd
         December 2013 which is also the  date  of  the  latest  deportation
         order.

Discussion


      7. The Panel record that an application was made for an adjournment by
         Mr Mohzam. He indicated to the Panel that there was no pre-sentence
         report or Oasys report and nor was  there  an  adequate  record  of
         interview. The Panel enquired whether correspondence had been  sent
         by the Appellant's solicitors seeking any such documents which  had
         not. The Presenting Officer objected  to  the  application  on  the
         basis these issues had not been raised before or at the time of the
         2005 determination. The Panel record at paragraph 14  their  ruling
         on the adjournment application,  which  was  to  refuse  it.   They
         record that they pointed out to both sides  that  they  would  have
         preferred to have such reports and that although  the  Home  Office
         may experience difficulties  obtaining  such  documents  the  Panel
         state no explanation was provided for why the  Appellant's  current
         representatives had not sought copies from earlier advisors.    The
         Panel found there was no guarantee that even if they adjourned  any
         further documentation would be forthcoming and did not consider  it
         in the interests of justice to adjourn in these circumstances.

      8. The documents that it is stated were required are those  ordinarily
         seen by Tribunals dealing with deportation  appeals.   The  grounds
         assert that an assessment of  the  Appellant's  rehabilitation  and
         likely future behaviour is clearly a factor of some significance in
         assessing proportionality and that although the Panel accepted that
         the Appellant posed  a  low  risk  of  reoffending  his  behaviour,
         attitude and rehabilitation, should have been considered in  detail
         by the Panel.  The grounds state that as this information  was  not
         before the Panel there was no assessment from the Probation Service
         or any other relevant professionals involved  with  the  Appellant.
         It is said the Panel should have adjourned so this  evidence  could
         be produced.

      9. These are not the first set of proceeding as noted by the Panel and
         do relate to a decision made on 23rd December  2013.   The  hearing
         took place on 12th June 2014 nearly 6 months later.  The First-tier
         Tribunal gave directions in relation to the filing of documents  to
         be relied  upon  by  the  parties  and  documents  that  came  into
         existence during the course of criminal proceedings would have been
         available to the Appellant and/or his previous representatives.  If
         the Appellant was alleging his  conduct  was  such  that  it  could
         impact upon the proportionality assessment no reason has been  made
         out for why  he  himself  could  not  give  this  evidence  to  the
         Tribunal. No satisfactory explanation has been provided for why the
         earlier  documents  had  not  been  obtained  and  no  satisfactory
         explanation provided for why a report  on  these  matters  was  not
         commissioned if it was deemed to be of such importance  whilst  the
         Appellant was waiting for the hearing of his appeal.

     10. As the Panel could not be satisfied the adjournment would result in
         the production of these documents it had not been established  that
         the interests of justice and fairness required the matter to be put
         off. The key principle when considering an adjournment  request  is
         that of fairness. The Panel clearly considered the submissions made
         in the application in detail which  was  opposed.  No  satisfactory
         explanation was provided for the situation  and  nor  had  it  been
         established  there  was  any   justification   for   granting   the
         adjournment that would produce something that had not been produced
         in the preceding six months. No procedural irregularity  sufficient
         to amount to a material error of law has been established.

     11. The grounds also asserts the  claim  was  assessed  without  proper
         reference to the background situation in Iraq as by  the  time  the
         decision was promulgated  the  situation  had  change  dramatically
         following the takeover by IS (Islamic State) of parts  of  the  KRA
         which is said to be the Appellant's home area.  It is also  claimed
         that his brother was involved in tackling extremist Islamic  groups
         which was not disputed by the Panel and hence his return had to  be
         assessed in light of the change in circumstances.

     12. This ground is without arguable merit. The Panel were  required  to
         consider the merits of the  claim  based  upon  the  evidence  made
         available at the date of the hearing on 12th June  2014.  If  there
         was material relating to the activities of IS at that  time  it  is
         reasonable to assume the  Appellant's  representatives  would  have
         brought it to the attention of the Panel.   If  there  has  been  a
         material change in  the  country  situation  between  the  date  of
         hearing and the date of decision, accepted as  being  the  date  of
         promulgation, which was brought the attention of  the  Panel  there
         may have been good grounds for reconvening the  hearing  yet  there
         was not. Two issues arise in relation  to  this  ground  the  first
         being that the grounds as pleaded acknowledge that it is  based  on
         post promulgation developments and in relation to a situation  that
         did not exist at the date of hearing or date  of  decision.  It  is
         hard to see how arguable legal  error  can  be  said  to  arise  in
         relation to something of which neither the Panel  nor  the  parties
         had  any  knowledge  or  notice.   The   second   point   is   more
         straightforward. The Appellant asserts that the  KRA  is  his  home
         area. Initially  IS  made  incursions  into  the  Kurdish  area  as
         demonstrated by the capture of Mosel and the Mosel Dam which is  in
         the north of Iraq nears the KRA border. They  advanced  no  further
         and since have been repelled by the Kurdish Peshmerga  forces  from
         the KRA and parts of Northern  Iraq.  It  is  also  the  case  that
         returns to Iraq are facilitated by flights to Baghdad  in  relation
         to which there is no such threat by IS at this time or at the  date
         of hearing or shortly thereafter, or Sulaymaniyah in the KRA. There
         is no evidence that such flights have been  suspended  or  to  show
         that the Appellant could not be safely returned to Iraq.  The  fact
         his brother may have assisted in the fight against IS  suggests  an
         action in accordance with the position of the  authorities  in  the
         Kurdish region.

     13. If there has been a material change  in  the  country  situation  a
         fresh claim can be made.

     14. Ground  three  asserts  the  Panel  failed  to  consider  the  best
         interests of the  child  properly  and  claim  that  as  a  primary
         consideration it should be considered first and foremost, but  that
         argument has no merit and is not supported by the case law  or  the
         finings made in relation to this issue. For example  in  Zoumbas  v
         SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 the Supreme Court held that there was no  error
         of law in the tribunal considering Article 8 proportionality  first
         before moving to consider the best interests of children who  would
         be removed as a family with their parents.  In  that  case  it  was
         contended that the Respondent had failed properly to  consider  the
         children's best interests because she  had  not  recorded  all  the
         relevant factors in the decision letter such as, for example,  that
         the children were born  in  the  United  Kingdom,  that  they  were
         English speakers, that the eldest child was doing well  at  school,
         and that two of the three children had never been to the Congo.  It
         was held that the SSHD did not have to record and deal  with  every
         piece of evidence in her decision letter.  The  decision-maker  was
         clearly aware of these factors and referred to them in  some  cases
         in general terms and that sufficed.

     15. The assertion in the grounds there is no clear  conclusion  by  the
         Panel as to where the best interests of the child lies, whereas the
         expert evidence states it is clear that the best interests lie with
         the Appellant being allowed to remain and take an  active  part  in
         the child's life, has no arguable merit. The opinion of the reports
         author was clearly a factor of which  the  Panel  were  aware.  The
         Panel specifically refer to the needs of the child in paragraph  89
         and state that the child's basic needs will be met by  the  network
         of family members around him. At paragraph 84 they acknowledge that
         the child's best interests are of primary  consideration  and  note
         the nature of the contact between the Appellant and the child which
         is limited. The Panel give adequate reasons for their  findings  in
         relation to the report before stating in paragraph 94 that there is
         not a great  deal  of  or  existence  of  evidence  indicating  the
         existence of any emotional or  psychological  consequences  to  the
         child if the Appellant is removed from  the  United  Kingdom.  They
         note in paragraph 95 that if the Appellant  is  removed  the  child
         will continue to be looked after by his primary carer  who  is  his
         mother, as he has been all his life.  It can  clearly  be  inferred
         from the determination that the Panel's conclusion is that the best
         interests of the child are to remain living in his mother's care in
         the United Kingdom with his needs being provided  for  by  her  and
         other family members, with no  evidence  of  consequences  for  the
         child if the Appellant is removed such  as  to  make  the  decision
         disproportionate. That is a decision the Panel are entitled to make
         on the basis of the evidence made available and that they had  been
         asked to consider.

     16. Paragraph 4 of the grounds challenges the Panel's assessment of the
         relationship between the Appellant and the child but  it  is  clear
         that proper account was taken of the  social  worker's  report  and
         other evidence  on  this  issue  and,  even  if  there  is  a  good
         relationship, the  quality  of  that  relationship  is  limited  to
         ongoing contact. That there may be a  good  relationship  does  not
         establish the existence of facts sufficient to  make  the  decision
         disproportionate. The best interests  of  the  child  are  not  the
         determinative factor. It  is  one  element,  albeit  one  of  great
         importance, that must be considered as part of the  proportionality
         assessment. In paragraph 92 the Panel note that at section 6.59  of
         the social workers report it  is  suggested  that  the  Appellant's
         absence is unlikely to have a major impact upon the child's day-to-
         day life.

     17. Paragraph 5 of the grounds criticises the Panel's assessment of the
         impact on the  child  which  is  based  upon  a  statement  in  the
         determination  that  there  was  not  a  great  deal  of   evidence
         indicating the existence of emotional or psychological consequences
         if the Appellant is removed. The grounds state reliance  is  placed
         upon the support from other family members  such  as  the  mother's
         aunt and her boyfriend  but  then  criticises  the  Panel  for  not
         hearing evidence from them although, one assumes, if their evidence
         was considered to be material they would have been called  to  give
         such evidence before the Panel by  Mr  Mohzam.  The  Panel  do  not
         dispute the social workers conclusion that the Appellant's  absence
         may have an increased impact upon the child as he grows  older  but
         that was not found to tip the  scales  in  the  Appellant's  favour
         which is the core finding the ground should be  addressing.  It  is
         clear the Panel considered all the evidence made available with the
         required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and  there  is  no   legal
         obligation upon them to conduct  a  'fishing  expedition'  to  seek
         additional evidence if the Appellant decides not  to  provide  such
         material. A Tribunal is entitled to  assume  that  any  evidence  a
         party seeks to rely upon will be made available to them  -  see  SS
         (Nigeria) [2012] EWCA Civ 550.

     18. Paragraph 6 of the grounds alleges the Panel erred  in  failing  to
         take proper account of the delay by the Respondent in  issuing  the
         deportation order as it is stated this has resulted in  the  family
         life between the Appellant and the  child.  It  was  suggested  the
         delay was from 2006 to 2013 although  as  the  most  recent  asylum
         claim was made in 2008, the delay is only  for  a  period  of  four
         years from 2008 to 2013, during which time  there  was  an  ongoing
         communication between the parties regarding relevant issues.

     19. The Panel took into account the nature of the  family  and  private
         life the Appellant has been able to develop in the United  Kingdom.
         At paragraph 98 the Panel recognise that if the  Appellant  entered
         the United Kingdom in 2001 he will have been  here  for  nearly  14
         years residence, albeit, a large part of which has  been  unlawful.
         The nature of the private and family life developed was  considered
         by the Panel and any assertion they failed to consider this element
         is without arguable merit.  Whether delay will result in a   breach
         of Article 8 is fact sensitive  as  illustrated  by  the  cases  of
         Kaplan and Others v Norway (Application no. 32504/11) ECtHR  (First
         Section) in which it was held that there was a breach of Article  8
         in removing the claimant to Turkey despite a  1999  conviction  for
         aggravated  assault,  in  part  because  family   life   had   been
         established before going to Norway, because of the  burden  on  the
         youngest autistic child, because on the facts the offence  was  not
         that serious, but also because the authorities took no measures  to
         deport the Claimant for  about  six  years  and  apart  from  minor
         offences he had not offended again, and ZZ (Tanzania) v SSHD [2014]
         EWCA Civ 1404 when there was an extensive delay, in which the Court
         of Appeal took into account when dismissing  the  appeal  that  the
         Respondent was overworked and under-resourced.   It  has  not  been
         established that there is any arguable merit in the claim delay was
         a determinative factor or that the Panel were unaware of the  delay
         and  failed  to  factor  the  effects  of  the  same   into   their
         proportionality assessment. Such an argument is irrational.

     20. The grounds as originally pleaded therefore fail  to  disclose  any
         material error of law in the determination.  An  additional  matter
         was, however, raised both pre and during  the  hearing  by  way  of
         application to amend the grounds.

     21. In a letter dated 10th December 2014  Burton  &  Burton  Solicitors
         wrote to the Upper Tribunal at Stoke requesting the hearing on  the
         17th December is vacated or stayed. The basis for  the  request  is
         said to be that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  TRP  Hollingworth  had
         resigned as a Deputy District Judge (Magistrates  Court)  following
         what had been reported as inappropriate comments  made  during  the
         course  of  a  hearing  as  confirmed  by  the   Judicial   Conduct
         Investigation Office. The letter states Judge Hollingworth is  also
         refraining from other duties.  The  letter  states  the  solicitors
         believe the hearing should  be  vacated  or  stayed  until  a  full
         investigation has been undertaken  and  further  submits  that  the
         determination of 29th June 2014 should be set aside. The basis  for
         such a contention is stated to be as follows:

             i.   The decision of 29/06/2014 is not one can now be held  as
                  an    impartial  one  due  to  the  ethnic   make-up   and
                  background of the      Appellant.

             ii.  Comments made  by  TRPH  are  clearly  inappropriate,  as
                  evidenced by  the fact that the  Prosecutor  stepped  down
                  from the case and her superiors made  a  formal  complaint
                  leading to the resignation of   TRPH.

             iii. This leads to the position that TRPH  held  stereotypical
                  views and     thus was not  impartial  in  his  privileged
                  position of  being  a  Judge  and    dealing  fairly  with
                  peoples' lives and futures.

             iv.  It is clear and evident that the decision  of  29th  June
                  2014 cannot stand      as this would  impeach  the  common
                  law principles set in stone that     every  individual  is
                  entitled to natural justice and fairness.

     22. The application was refused by a judge of the Upper Tribunal on the
         papers on the grounds that "the grounds of appeal did not raise any
         concerns about the panel's approach in considering and  determining
         the appellant's appeal and there is no reason why that  should  now
         be an issue. In any event all relevant matters can be considered by
         the Judge hearing the appeal on 17th December 2014".

     23. It is assumed the reference to a decision dated 29th June  2014  is
         to the decision promulgated on the 20th June 2014.  At the  hearing
         before the Upper Tribunal an application  was  made  to  amend  the
         grounds of appeal to include a challenge to the determination based
         upon the reasons set out in the above correspondence from Burton  &
         Burton.

     24. It is an established principle that justice must not only  be  done
         but must be seen to be done. Parties are  entitled  to  have  their
         case properly considered by an un-bias judge and, within reason, to
         have open to them avenues of challenge against decisions  that  are
         infected by legal error.  The original grounds of challenge to  the
         Panel's determination raise no issues of actual or  perceived  bias
         or breach  of  the  common  law  duty  of  fairness  or  the  above
         principles. It may be that the reason for this is that a reading of
         the determination gives rise to no  basis  for  such  an  assertion
         being made.

     25. This is also a Panel decision of both  Judge  Hollingworth  and  an
         experienced non-legal member who also sits  as  a  Justice  of  the
         Peace, Mrs Bray,  both  whom  contributed  to  the  decision-making
         process. No assertion is made about the suitability of Mrs Bray.

     26. Whilst it is accepted Judge Hollingworth has resigned as  a  Deputy
         District Judge (Crime) as a result of making what are  said  to  be
         inappropriate comments made whilst sitting in such capacity, he  is
         not suspended from other judicial duties and has agreed voluntarily
         not to sit pending the outcome of an investigation by the  Judicial
         Conduct Office. The application by Burton & Burton is based upon an
         inference Judge Hollingworth is guilty of being  racial  prejudiced
         and that this has impacted  upon  their  client's  case,  as  their
         client is not a British national but a national of Iraq.   It  does
         representatives no credit to "jump  on  the  bandwagon"  when  such
         issues arise without proper foundation or reason. An  allegation  a
         judge  is  racially  prejudiced  is  a  very   serious   allegation
         especially against  one  sitting  in  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal. If there was a genuine  concern
         regarding the approach of the Panel, both during  the  hearing  and
         determination process, it is reasonable to  expect  it  would  have
         appeared as a specific allegation in the original  grounds  pleaded
         but it did not.  There is no finding Judge Hollingworth is racially
         prejudiced or is unfit to hold judicial office. The issues  in  the
         determination  relating  to  whether  the  Appellant  was  able  to
         demonstrate his deportation was disproportionate as a result  of  a
         breach of his Article 8 rights which are not issues involving  race
         or ethnicity.  The material available creates no justification  for
         the Upper Tribunal finding any express or implied statements giving
         rise to cause for concern on racial grounds in the determination or
         to support an assertion Judge Hollingworth  is  prejudiced  to  the
         extent the Appellant did not receive a fair hearing.  Permission to
         amend the grounds to include this head as  an  additional  head  of
         challenge was refused on the basis it is not supported by  adequate
         evidence, appears to be based upon perception that clearly was  not
         present when the original grounds of appeal were drafted,  and  has
         not been shown at this stage to  have  any  arguable  prospects  of
         success. If the ground had been admitted permission will be refused
         on the same basis.

     27. In conclusion, having considered the determination, it is clear the
         Panel considered the evidence with the required degree  of  anxious
         scrutiny and have given adequate  reasons  for  the  findings  they
         made.  The Panel conducted a proper assessment  of  the  points  in
         favour of the Appellant and hose in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
         State before reaching a conclusion that the decision to  deport  is
         proportionate notwithstanding the period of delay.  That finding is
         within the range of those available to the Panel  and  no  arguable
         legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal has been
         established.

Decision

     28. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     29. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 21st January 2015
