
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00147/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st August 2019                  |On 17th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Robert [G]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D O'Connor, instructed by Birnberg Peirce
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State made the application for  permission  to  appeal
    but nonetheless I shall refer to the parties  as  they  were  described
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr [G] as the appellant and the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 7th October  1994  and  he
    appealed the decision to make a deportation order against him  on  14th
    December  2018  under  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016.

 3. The appellant was cautioned on 27th February  2013  for  theft  from  a
    dwelling and cautioned in December 2015 for possession of a  controlled
    Class B drug (cannabis) and Class A drug (cocaine)

 4. Between 2nd October 2014 and 15th October 2018, the  appellant  amassed
    16 convictions for 23 offences.  He  received  13  convictions  for  17
    offences of shoplifting, breach  of  conditional  discharge,  found  on
    premises for unlawful purposes, failing to surrender to custody as soon
    as practicable after an appointed time, 4 counts of failing  to  attend
    for/remain for duration of initial assessment following test for  Class
    A drugs, 2 counts for failing to surrender to custody at  an  appointed
    time,  concealing/disguising/converting/transferring/removing  criminal
    property and 2 counts of  travelling  on  the  railway  without  paying
    fares.  For these offences he was  ordered  to  pay  fines,  costs  and
    victim surcharges.

 5. He was convicted in September 2018 and again in October 2018 for  theft
    or attempted theft by shop lifting.

 6. The appellant then received a six-week custodial sentence for the index
    offence of shoplifting in October 2018.  As the determination  recorded
    "his intention had been  to  steal  two  bottles  of  wince  (sic)  and
    headphones to sell on for drugs".

 7. The judge recorded in  the  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing  that  the
    appellant came to the UK when he was 16 and in  2014  started  to  take
    illicit drugs owing to peer pressure.  He was working as a  waiter  and
    working to support his habit but was removed from the United Kingdom in
    February 2016 after receiving a caution.  He returned lawfully  to  the
    United Kingdom but in 2017 was hospitalised owing to a drug overdose.

 8. The appellant states he was in prison for the first time and this was a
    shock to him and he started on a methadone substitute and had been drug-
    free since and had moved back with his parents and was now working  for
    a construction company.

 9. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Lal  made  the  following  findings  at
    paragraph 15 that the appellant came to the United Kingdom in July 2011
    to join his parents and:

         "On balance the Tribunal is prepared to accept that  the  appellant
         has been able to show that he has a permanent right of residence in
         the UK as he would have accrued such as the dependant of his father
         up to the age of 21 and the Tribunal accepted his account  that  he
         was working as a waiter or a labourer in the UK after this".

10. The judge went on to set out the following:

         "16.  The  Tribunal  then  wet  (sic)  on  to  consider  the  index
             conviction which was  6  weeks  imprisonment  at  West  London
             Magistrates for the offence of shoplifting.  The Tribunal  had
             regard to the previous matters which all resulted in community
             penalties and or fines and  which  were  all  disposed  of  at
             summary level.

         17.   The  Tribunal  considered  the  evidence  thereafter  and  it
             accepted the account that it was only in prison for the  first
             time that he received help  with  his  addiction  issues.   It
             accepted that he was now drug free and this  was  because  his
             oral evidence was consistent with that of his mother  who  had
             experience of him when on drugs.  Secondly it was supported by
             the NHS i-access Referral dated 4 June  2019  which  supported
             the Appellant's own  account  that  he  was  drug  free.   The
             Tribunal noted that he was in full  time  employment  and  was
             living at home which were strong protective factors.   He  was
             no longer with his  girlfriend.   The  Tribunal  accepted  the
             Appellant came across as candid and insightful into  his  past
             drug  misuse  and  he  demonstrated  good  insight  into   his
             recovery.  The Tribunal accepted that he has  been  drug  free
             since October 2018 and that his past  offending  was  directly
             related to illicit substance misuse.

         18.  In the circumstances there was no credible evidence to suggest
             that the Appellant poses a risk either on serious  grounds  or
             that he poses a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
             threat to the public and following Arranz, the Tribunal  notes
             that the burden is on the Respondent to  justify  deportation.
             The Respondent has failed to  do  so  other  than  noting  the
             effect of the offences committed in general terms only  on  UK
             society.  There was no evidence to suggest a  risk  to  anyone
             else at the present time  or  towards  the  public  and  wider
             community.  There was no evidence to suggest a  propensity  to
             reoffend other than the fact of having convictions  where  the
             main aggravating feature was substance misuse which is now  no
             longer an issue.  The Tribunal could  see  no  wider  risk  to
             public security or broader public policy by  his  presence  in
             the UK.  In summary, the Tribunal assessed the  index  offence
             as being confined to  a  particular  context  where  the  main
             contributory factor has already been addressed.

         19.  On the contrary, the  evidence  that  the  Tribunal  did  have
             before it was that the Appellant appeared genuinely remorseful
             that it had come to this and the Tribunal was  satisfied  that
             the Appellant had shown great insight into  the  circumstances
             which lead to his conviction.  The Tribunal was satisfied that
             he has a good prospect to maintain work in the UK as before as
             well as remain  in  accommodation  provided  by  his  parents.
             These are both protective factors that would militate  against
             any risk previously identified."

Application for Permission to Appeal

11. The Secretary of State appealed on two grounds.  First the Secretary of
    State noted that the judge accepted the appellant arrived in the UK  in
    July 2011 which meant that he could qualify for the permanent residence
    in July 2016 providing he had resided continuously in  accordance  with
    the EEA Regulations.  Prior to that time, however,  the  appellant  had
    already been the subject of administrative removal on 18th January 2016
    precisely for not residing in accordance with the EEA Regulations.  The
    judge acknowledged this removal at [7] but failed to factor  this  into
    the continuity of residence assessment.  If it had been done it was not
    possible for the appellant to have been lawfully in the UK long  enough
    to acquire permanent residence and thus the  enhanced  protection  from
    removal under the EEA Regulations because of his status.

12. At the appeal before me Mr O'Connor conceded that the judge  had  erred
    in approach to the matter of permanent residence and indeed  Regulation
    3(3)(c) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 confirms  that  as  a
    person removed from the UK any continuity of residence would have  been
    broken.  As such the appellant could not qualify to have the  right  of
    permanent residence.

13. At paragraph 18 the judge erred in relation to applying the test  which
    was relevant to those with permanent residence.

14. Nevertheless, Mr O'Connor argued that at paragraph 18 the judge had, in
    the alternative, applied the lower test in accordance  with  Regulation
    23 and Regulation 27.

15. Paragraph 23(6)(b), the Regulation which governs exclusion and  removal
    from the United Kingdom under the 2016 Regulations, states as follows:

         "23. -   (6)  Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8),  an  EEA  national
                  who has entered the United Kingdom or the family member of
                  such a national who has entered the United Kingdom may  be
                  removed if-

                  (a)  that person does not have or ceases to have  a  right
                      to reside under these Regulations;

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                      removal is justified on  grounds  of  public  policy,
                      public security or public health in  accordance  with
                      regulation 27; or

                  (c)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                      removal is justified on grounds of misuse  of  rights
                      under regulation 26(3)."

16. Regulation 27 is set out as follows:

         "27. -   (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an
                  EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
                  security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                  person  with  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  and public security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                  grounds of public security in respect of an  EEA  national
                  who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                      is in the best interests of the person concerned,  as
                      provided for in the Convention on the Rights  of  the
                      Child adopted by the General Assembly of  the  United
                      Nations on 20th November 1989.

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
                  United  Kingdom  include  restricting   rights   otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person."

17. I am not satisfied that the judge set out the correct test,  understood
    that test or that he did apply the "lower" test.  As can be  seen  from
    the references above the  Secretary  of  State  must  decide  that  the
    person's removal is justified on  grounds  of  "public  policy,  public
    security or public health" in  accordance  with  Regulation  27(5)  and
    Regulation 27 also refers to "the public  policy  and  public  security
    requirements of the United Kingdom".

18. The judge merely stated at paragraph 18,  when  he  was  said  to  have
    applied the alternative that there was no credible evidence to  suggest
    that he "poses a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to
    the public".  That, as can be seen from above, at  Regulation  23(6)(b)
    and Regulation 27 is  not  the  test.   Nor  did  the  judge  make  any
    reference to Article 7 of Schedule 1 of the EEA  Regulations  2016  and
    the variety of factors with which the judge needed to engage.

19. I find there is an error of law which is material  because  it  is  not
    clear that the judge applied the correct test.

20. The second ground of appeal was that it was  simply  not  correct  that
    there was no evidence of a propensity to reoffend as found by the judge
    at paragraph 18.  The second ground adumbrated that the  appellant  had
    numerous offences recorded on the PNC report which clearly contradicted
    this finding.  The appellant may have stopped the use  of  drugs  since
    late 2018 and there had  been  no  further  offending  since,  but  the
    respondent did not consider this to be a sufficient period of time  for
    the judge to find there was no longer any  risk  of  threat.   The  PNC
    report showed periods of no offending only for it to resume later.  The
    fact that since  the  end  of  October  2018  the  appellant  had  been
    incarcerated and under the threat of deportation meant it likely he had
    remained on his best behaviour to avoid further action against him.

21. In summary it was contended that the judge  had  failed  adequately  to
    reason why the  appellant  was  no  longer  a  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society particularly with regard to Schedule 1
    of the EEA Regulations 2016, namely Article 7(b)(c)(h) and (j).

22. As set out at Schedule 1:

         "7.   For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
                  values."

23. At the hearing before me Mr O'Connor submitted that Schedule 1  Article
    7 was not  relevant  and  did  not  relate  to  whether  the  appellant
    represented a genuine threat.  Bearing in mind the  specific  reference
    at Regulation 27(5) I cannot  accept  that  submission.   As  Mr  Tufan
    pointed out Regulation 27(8) obliges a court  or  Tribunal  considering
    whether the requirements of the Regulations are met to have  regard  to
    the considerations contained in Schedule 1.  Those  are  considerations
    of public policy, public security  and  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.

24. Schedule 1 Article 7 sets out what is to be construed when  considering
    the fundamental interests of society and nowhere did the judge  address
    the considerations set out.  Specifically 7(g) refers to offences where
    a victim might not be readily identifiable but  where  there  is  wider
    societal harm such as the misuse of  drugs  and  indeed  curiously  the
    judge stated that 'there was no evidence to suggest a  risk  to  anyone
    else at the present time'.

25.  Further,  7(h)  referred  to  combatting  the  effects  of   persisted
    offending.  It is not the case that the respondent had simply failed to
    do other than note the effect of  the  offences  committed  in  general
    terms only on UK  society.   There  is  a  record  of  the  appellant's
    persistent offending which the judge did  not  set  out  in  his  brief
    determination.  To state there was no evidence to suggest a  propensity
    to reoffend omitted the extensive record of offending and was  reasoned
    on the basis that the main aggravating  feature  was  substance  misuse
    "which is now no longer an issue".  There were no  medical  reports  in
    relation to his substance misuse being reformed and as pointed out, the
    judge did not  address  the  point  that  he  had  lapses  of  previous
    offending.  The protective factors of living at home and  working  were
    factors which had been in  evidence  previously  and  contrary  to  the
    reasoning at paragraph 19.

26. To conclude that the main contributory factor,  substance  misuse,  had
    already been addressed was inadequately  reasoned  and  premature  when
    considering the duration of the appellant's substance misuse (from  the
    age of 16 years in 2014), the  extent of his previous substance  misuse
    as recorded in the decision, (he had been hospitalised in 2017) and the
    lack of firm medical evidence.  The i-access referral from the NHS  was
    dated 4th June 2019 and was just that, a referral. There was no medical
    evidence for his drug reformation save for  the  appellant's  assertion
    and his mother's view that the appellant was drug free.  The St Peter's
    Hospital discharge summary dated 30th December 2017 identified that the
    appellant was admitted to hospital for six days from 25th December 2017
    and that he was living with his parents and  the  presenting  complaint
    was 'cocaine/amphetamine overdose'.

27. I therefore consider for  the  reasons  given  that  the  findings  are
    materially flawed, and the decision cannot stand.

28. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Signed        Helen Rimington                Date 11th September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
