
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00964/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Oral Decision & Reasons              |
|On 11th March 2015                     |Promulgated On 24th March 2015       |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          SIKANDER PAYANDA MOHAMMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Rashid &
Rashid,  Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination  of  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Maxwell  promulgated  on  16  December  2014
    allowing the appeal of Mr Mohammad both under the Immigration Rules and
    on human rights grounds.   He however dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and no challenge was made to that finding.  For the purposes of
    continuity I shall refer to Mr Mohammad as the appellant as he  was  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 15 May  1993.
    He reached his majority on 15 May 2011.  On 21 January 2013 he told  me
    that he committed an offence for which he was subsequently sentenced on
    3 April 2013 in the Crown Court at Isleworth.  He was then sentenced to
    a period of detention in a Young Offenders Institution.  The period  of
    detention was set at fourteen months.  As  a  result  of  the  decision
    attempts were made to deport the appellant.

 3. The background of the case is that having arrived on 16 August 2003  he
    subsequently claimed asylum and that was refused  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave as a result of the Secretary of State's  policy  in
    respect of unaccompanied minors.  That was confirmed, as it were, by  a
    grant of indefinite leave to remain on 9 November 2010.  That grant  of
    course predated the commission of the offence on 21 January 2013.

 4. The judge in the Criminal Court gave  a  sentence  of  fourteen  months
    which  was  analysed  by  Judge  Maxwell  in  paragraph   41   of   his
    determination where he says that he was assisted to an  extent  by  the
    sentencing remarks, a copy of which were in his bundle.  Looking at the
    types of offence which fall within a Section 20 wounding, he reasonably
    took the view that this was a category  2  offence.   Whilst  it  would
    properly be regarded as serious, the offence was not one  of  the  most
    serious within category 2, let alone the most serious offence that  can
    occur in a case of Section 20 wounding.  It was to be  contrasted  with
    the Section 18 offence; there being no intention on  the  part  of  the
    appellant to cause serious harm.

 5. It was as a result of that conviction that the process  of  deportation
    was begun.

 6. The judge heard evidence both from the appellant and his sister who was
    already living in the United Kingdom, having entered as a  spouse.   He
    also heard other evidence from witnesses.  In paragraph 11  he  records
    that the appellant said he had little command  of  Pashtu  and  it  was
    apparent that evidence was given as to the extent to which he  and  his
    sister and family were "westernised".

 7. The judge also heard of the appellant's relationship  with  a  European
    Union citizen who described herself as  being  in  full-time  education
    studying for an undergraduate degree  at  Westminster  University.   It
    provides insight into the degree of integration which  the  family  had
    achieved in the years since their arrival in the United Kingdom.

 8. There is no doubt that the judge was in error in referring to  a  prior
    version of the Immigration Rules.  However the applicable parts of  the
    Rules are now encapsulated in statute in the form of ss. 117A, B and  C
    of the 2002 Act as inserted by s. 19 of the 2014 Act.   The  judge  set
    out those requirements and in particular  the  requirements  of  public
    interest considerations. Those public interest considerations fall into
    two sections. Those set out in s. 117B which refer to all  applications
    but also  those  set  out  in  s.  117C  which  relate  solely  to  the
    deportation of foreign criminals.

 9. It is noteworthy that a foreign  criminal  includes  a  person  who  is
    sentenced to a term of detention in a Young Offenders Institution.   It
    is also clear that the appellant fell into  the  definition  a  foreign
    criminal as a person who had been  sentenced  to  a  period  of  twelve
    months' imprisonment or more.

10. However, he did not fall within  the  more  serious  category  for  the
    purposes of the exceptions, namely a person who has been  sentenced  to
    at least four years' imprisonment.  The judge set out those provisions.
    In my judgement it is clearly  these  provisions  which  carry  greater
    weight than the Immigration Rules as they amount to primary legislation
    couched in mandatory terms.

11. The process by which the courts and the tribunal have been  invited  to
    place weight on the policies put forward by the Secretary of State have
    led to a path where the courts have consistently stated that where  the
    requirements are elevated to the status  of  primary  legislation,  the
    greatest weight should be attached to  such  statutory  provisions.  It
    follows accordingly that if the judge properly considered the terms  of
    ss. 117B and C, he could  not  have  made  any  error  in  relation  to
    identifying the wrong Immigration Rules since the statutory  provisions
    are the over-arching control and guide as to what amounts to the public
    interest.

12. In the circumstances of this case the judge was concerned  to  consider
    Exception 1 and it was plain  that  the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life.  He  was  required
    to  consider  whether  the  appellant  was  socially   and   culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom and he was also required to consider
    whether  there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into Afghanistan were he to be deported there.

13. The exceptions fit into the scheme of things in that the starting point
    is that the public interest requires the appellant's deportation unless
    the relevant exceptions applied.  Accordingly  it  is  clear  from  the
    determination  that  the  judge  pursued   the   application   of   the
    requirements of Exception 1.  He considered the material in relation to
    the appellant's integration into the United Kingdom  and  he  concluded
    that the appellant spoke English, which he considered to  be  idiomatic
    and without a trace of a non-English accent.  He  also  considered  the
    question of financial independence but took into account the fact  that
    he could work and was capable of working had he not been prevented from
    doing so.  He took into account his education and  he  also  took  into
    account the milieu in which the appellant lived as part of  the  family
    of his sister and her husband.  He came  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  That is a finding which was properly open to the judge on the
    material that was provided to him.

14. The issue, however, remains whether there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles in appellant's integration into the country to which  it  was
    proposed he be returned.  This was dealt with by the judge  principally
    in paragraph 34.  He considered the fact that  the  appellant's  sister
    had returned to Afghanistan but appears to have accepted that  she  had
    done so twice but in order to see  the  parents  of  her  husband.   He
    concluded that on the basis of the material that he had before him,  he
    was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant  and
    his sister were unaware of the whereabouts  of  their  own  parents  or
    siblings, if indeed they were still alive, and he  was  also  satisfied
    that the sister's  parents-in-law  could  not  be  regarded  as  family
    members for the purpose of providing him any support.  The  appellant's
    sister told the judge that they would not support him and  he  accepted
    what she had to say on that tissue.

15. In those circumstances he concluded that on  balance  of  probabilities
    the appellant had proved he had no cultural, family or  other  ties  to
    Afghanistan and it was on that basis that he went on  to  consider  the
    fact that he had lived in the United Kingdom for a  minimum  period  of
    fifteen years and had in  that  time  developed  a  private  life.   He
    therefore concluded in paragraph 38 that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant fell within Exception 1:  that  there  would  be  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into the country into which he
    was to be deported.

16. There are a number of criticisms which are made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State as to the application of s. 117C and the  exception  set  out  in
    subparagraph (4), namely Exception 1.  It is apparent  that  the  judge
    did not treat this as being determinative. That was a correct  decision
    to make.  It is clear that the outcome of a s. 117 consideration is not
    in mandatory terms.  It is, as part of Part of 5A, a mandatory duty  to
    take into account, to have regard to, various considerations. They  are
    called considerations both in ss. 117B and 117C and the obligation is a
    mandatory requirement to have regard to or to  take  into  account  the
    various factors, but there is no obligation that treats that  as  being
    determinative.  That was the approach that was adopted by the judge and
    it is supported by the words of s. 117C(7) which expressly states  that
    the various considerations are to be taken into account but no more.

17. So the issue before me is whether the judge was  right  in  making  the
    crucial finding that there would  be  significant  obstacles  into  his
    integration.

18. In paragraph 43 the judge describes those obstacles. He says  that  the
    appellant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
    his life and that, as a fact, he is socially and culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom. Both of those facts are not  in  dispute.   He
    then went on to say

         "Given that he has a poor command of his  native  language  coupled
         with the difficulties met  by  'westernised'  Afghanis  upon  their
         return (as conceded by the respondent in the  reasons  letter)  and
         the absence of any network of support by way of family  or  friends
         anywhere  in  Afghanistan,  I  find  there  are  very   significant
         obstacles to his integration into Afghanistan."

19. The reference to the refusal letter and  the  difficulties  faced  upon
    return appears to be a reference to paragraph 73 of the refusal  letter
    in which the Afghanistan Independent Human  Rights  Commission  in  its
    fifth report dealing with the situation of economic and  social  rights
    in Afghanistan looked at the situation of returnees. Its  report  dated
    November/December 2011 spoke of a lack of employment opportunities; the
    difficulties faced by reintegrating into a different  society  and  the
    effect of societal treatment of those returned, in the sense that  they
    are discriminated against and humiliated.  Whilst it is not for  me  to
    judge whether that is an adequate description of the difficulties faced
    by returnees, it was certainly a  matter  that  was  mentioned  by  the
    Secretary of State and mentioned without comment in the refusal letter.



20. It follows that the judge was correct in saying that the  Secretary  of
    State appears to concede that there are difficulties faced by those who
    are returning. It also followed from his previous finding in  paragraph
    34 of the determination that the appellant and his sister  are  unaware
    of the whereabouts of his parents and siblings and that there  were  no
    obvious persons to whom he could return.

21. The issue before me is whether it was an error of law on  the  part  of
    the judge to reach  a  conclusion  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Afghanistan.  It is plain  that  they
    were obstacles and the judge gave a number of reasons why he considered
    those obstacles were very significant.  It is in my judgement very easy
    in cases such as this to impose one's one judgment of what are  or  are
    not very significant obstacles but I should avoid  simply  imposing  my
    own view in deciding whether or not the judge made an error of  law  in
    that finding of fact.

22. In my judgment, it is a finding of fact.  It is not a  finding  of  law
    and accordingly the only issue before me is whether it was open to  the
    judge on the material that was before him  to  conclude  without  being
    irrational or perverse that there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    his integration into Afghanistan.  He referred to the  links  that  the
    appellant had.  He referred to his presence in the United Kingdom.   He
    referred to the  family  as  being  westernised.  He  referred  to  the
    appellant speaking idiomatic English without a trace of  a  non-English
    accent and that the circumstances in Afghanistan would not be assisted,
    as far as he was concerned, by support mechanisms there.

23. In such circumstances I do not think it is open to me to say that  this
    was a finding that was perverse or irrational or otherwise unlawful  in
    that the decision was not properly reasoned.  As I have  already  said,
    the issue in this case is not the application of the Immigration  Rules
    but the application of ss 117B and C.  I am not able to  say  that  the
    judge erred in law in the judge's handling of those matters.

24. It is true that there was little evidence about his poor command of his
    native language except that he himself said that.   He  did  not  speak
    Pashtu save to a limited extent as recorded by the judge  in  paragraph
    11.  But then the judge took into account the fact  that  there  was  a
    considerable degree  of  integration  about  which  the  appellant  had
    provided information and which supported the fact  that  the  appellant
    had to a large extent become as if he were a settled  British  citizen.
    I would not regard that finding as being perverse.

25. I need say only one other thing and I can direct that to the  appellant
    directly:

     You have committed a serious offence.  You have  been  sentenced  to  a
    significant period of imprisonment as a result of that.   There  is  no
    doubt that you did considerable harm to your victim as is reflected  in
    the sentence of imprisonment.  Some may say that you were lucky in  the
    course that was adopted by Judge Maxwell in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    What he said and what I repeat to you is that you have now had  a  full
    warning as to what the consequences will be of any  falling  below  the
    standard that is expected of  you.   If  you  commit  further  acts  of
    criminal misconduct you will once again come before  a  Tribunal  if  a
    decision has been made to deport you. When that event occurs the  words
    that I am now speaking will be played back to  you and you will  recall
    them.  You cannot afford to commit any further offence or you  will  be
    returned to Afghanistan and the balance which has operated  so  far  in
    your favour will operate against you. You must be made fully  aware  of
    that.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal made to error of law and the  Secretary  of  State's
challenge to the Judge's decision is dismissed.  The  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand, namely,  appeal  of  Mr  Mohammed  is
allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal and therefore there can  be
no fee award.

                            [pic]

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

