
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal ref: DA/00182/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 14 February 2019                  |On 20 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G P
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to
    them as they were in the FtT.

 2. On 6 December 2017, the SSHD  made  a  deportation  order  against  the
    appellant under regulation 33  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016.

 3.  FtT  Judge  Wyman  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a   decision
    promulgated on 14 August 2018.

 4. The SSHD appeals to the UT on the grounds set  out  in  an  application
    dated 21 August 2018.

 5. Notice of the hearing was issued on 17 January 2019 to the appellant at
    the last address recorded with the UT, which appears to be his  address
    for purposes of immigration bail.  It  is  of  course  the  appellant's
    responsibility to ensure that the tribunal has his current address.  He
    did not appear and was not represented.  No communication from  him  or
    on his behalf has been received.  The hearing proceeded in his absence.

 6. The strongest point in the SSHD's grounds, as Mr  Govan  submitted,  is
    from [15] onwards.   The  judge  held  at  [57]  that  the  appellant's
    offending did not reach the level of a threat to public security.  That
    was not  the  test.   His  deportation  required  to  be  justified  by
    reference to public policy.  His offending did not have  to  reach  the
    level of seriousness which the judge applied.

 7. The error is fundamental to the decision, and requires  it  to  be  set
    aside.

 8. Mr Govan did not ask for the decision to be remade on the basis of  the
    materials which had been before the FtT.  He  sought  a  remit,  for  a
    fresh decision to be made in the FtT on up  to  date  information.   He
    indicated that the respondent would be submitting evidence  of  further
    criminal convictions incurred by the appellant.

 9. Further evidence to be relied upon by the SSHD should  be  provided  to
    the FtT and to the appellant as soon as  practicable.   The  matter  is
    recorded here to give the appellant advance notice.

10. The appellant should also now consider what evidence to provide to  the
    FtT and (although this is for him to decide) whether to instruct  legal
    representatives.  Any preparations  should  be  made  immediately  upon
    receipt of this decision.  An adjournment of any hearing is not  likely
    to be granted if shortage  of  time  to  prepare  results  from  delay.



11. Under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, the
    case is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.  The member(s) of  the
    FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Wyman.

12. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Although there is little apparent
    justification for departing from the presumption in  favour  of  public
    justice, anonymity is retained at this stage.

      [pic]

      Dated 14 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
