
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00106/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2019                  |On 30 December 2019                  |
|Extempore decision                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                Mariusz Bloch
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rylatt, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mariusz Bloch,  is  a  citizen  of  Poland,  born  on  3
    February 1975.  He appeals against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew promulgated on 8 August 2019 dismissing his appeal against
    the respondent's decision to make a deportation order against him on  4
    February  2019  under  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").



Factual background

 2. The appellant claims to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  fifteen
    years ago.  In 2016, he came to the attention of the  authorities  when
    he was arrested for having a bladed article in a public place.  He  was
    cautioned.  Thereafter, he received a number of convictions for several
    offences culminating in the index offence for which  the  Secretary  of
    State pursued his deportation.  On 9 November 2018 in the  Crown  Court
    at Croydon the appellant was convicted of handling stolen goods and was
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.

 3. Turning to the offence, the appellant had been working in a garage.  He
    was found in the early hours of the morning stripping a recently stolen
    Audi RS3 car, presumably for spare parts.  He was doing  so  under  the
    instruction of the person he worked for at the garage.   There  was  no
    mitigation advanced on  his  behalf  at  the  sentencing  hearing;  the
    sentencing judge noted that he was entitled  to  25%  discount  on  the
    sentence he would otherwise have received on account of pleading guilty
    at the plea and trial preparation hearing.  Prior to his  imprisonment,
    the appellant had been a user of amphetamines and other substances.  He
    claimed that he had addressed his substance abuse and, in doing so, had
    tackled the underlying cause of his behaviour.

Permission to appeal

 4. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  M
    Simpson on the basis that at paragraph 34 of the  decision,  the  judge
    appeared to have reached her conclusion on the overall  proportionality
    and  lawfulness  of  the  deportation  order  before  considering   the
    remaining factors in the case.  There are five grounds  of  appeal  and
    Judge Simpson did not restrict her grant of permission to  any  grounds
    in particular.

 5. There are five grounds of appeal.  First,  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider material evidence from the  appellant  on  the  issue  of  his
    claimed  ten  years'  residence  or  alternatively  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for placing no weight on that evidence.  Secondly, the
    judge failed to direct herself concerning the test for "worker"  status
    under EU law.  The third ground was the primary ground upon which Judge
    Simpson granted permission, outlined above.  The fourth ground is  that
    the judge erred in relation to her treatment of the appellant's claimed
    rehabilitation, or alternatively, that she provided inadequate  reasons
    for placing no weight on his evidence  of  rehabilitation.   The  fifth
    ground is that the judge erred by considering  Article  8  pursuant  to
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  when  this
    was in fact an EEA appeal.

Discussion

 6. I will deal first with the basis upon which the appellant was expressly
    granted permission to appeal. It was common ground at the hearing  that
    the judge erroneously appeared to have concluded at paragraph  34  that
    the deportation order should be maintained before having considered the
    remaining factors in the case.  Paragraph 34 of her decision stated:

         "Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is no evidence to show that
         the appellant has addressed his offending behaviour.   Although  he
         has been assessed as being at low risk he remains  a  risk.   I  am
         satisfied the evidence and the appellant's past history  shows  the
         appellant has a propensity to reoffend and that he does not respect
         the laws of the United Kingdom.   I  am  satisfied  that  in  these
         circumstances  the  deportation  order   should   be   maintained."
         (Emphasis added)

 7. Mr Rylatt's contention is that  the  judge  put  the  cart  before  the
    horses.  This was not, in his submission, a simple case of an erroneous
    sentence mistakenly having been inserted at  the  wrong  point  in  the
    decision.  Rather it evidenced a failure in logic.

 8. There is some superficial force to Mr Rylatt's submission,  but  it  is
    only superficial.

 9. It is necessary to read the judge's decision as a whole.  It  is  clear
    that when one does so, the judge has surveyed all  relevant  evidential
    factors and does not fail in her operative reasoning when reaching  her
    conclusion that the deportation order  was  consistent  with  the  test
    contained in the 2016 Regulations.  At paragraph 24  of  the  decision,
    the judge recites at some length the judge's  sentencing  remarks  from
    the Crown Court.  She then proceeds in paragraphs 25 to 33  to  analyse
    the offender manager's views as set out in the OASys Report provided on
    behalf of the appellant.  She considers the circumstances in which  the
    offence was committed, she considers the nature of the offence and  she
    also considers the fact that the appellant's offending was  fuelled  by
    his use of amphetamines.  She rejects the appellant's suggestion, which
    had been set out in his evidence and in his own remarks to his offender
    manager, that he had stopped using amphetamines  and  that  he  was  no
    longer subject to their influence.  It is against that background  that
    the judge then considered that the  appellant's  circumstances  of  his
    current work, namely working for the same individual who "had  employed
    him" in the garage where he was found during the police  search  to  be
    stripping  a  stolen  car,  provided  grounds  to  conclude  that   the
    appellant's circumstances had  not  changed  sufficiently  to  merit  a
    departure from his previous risk profile.

10. Having analysed those risk factors in paragraph 34, the judge proceeded
    at paragraph 35 to find that the decision was proportionate.  She noted
    that although the appellant had been in this country for some years, he
    had spent most of his life in Poland, he still had a mother and  father
    there as well as a sister, he spoke Polish and was  familiar  with  the
    country.  The judge then considers whether the best  interests  of  the
    appellant's child  was  such  that  his  deportation  may  be  rendered
    disproportionate on that account.  She concluded that it would  not  be
    rendered disproportionate.  There is no merit to this ground of appeal.

11. I reject the submission that the judge did not  consider  the  evidence
    adduced by  the  appellant  purportedly  demonstrating  his  15  years'
    residence. The judge referred at paragraph 12 to that claim made by the
    appellant,  and  in  the  paragraphs  following,  until  paragraph  17,
    analysed the evidence he provided, including  his  statement  and  oral
    evidence. The judge accepted at paragraph 13  that  the  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom in around 2006,  at  least  initially.  That
    finding was based in part upon evidence  provided  by  the  appellant's
    sister. The judge then gave reasons at paragraph 14 as to why  she  was
    unable to accept the appellant's assertions that  he  had  remained  in
    this country ever since. One of the reasons provided by the  judge  was
    the inconsistency between his evidence and that  of  his  sister.   The
    appellant had said that the garage where the offending  took  place  no
    longer existed.  By contrast, his sister's statement said at  paragraph
    4 that the appellant was "working at the garage", in the present tense.
     Neither the sister's written evidence, nor her oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing, was  that  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    constantly since his initial arrival in  2006.  At  paragraph  16,  the
    judge explained  why  her  overall  findings  were  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for as long
    claimed. She had no employment records covering the time,  nor  records
    from HMRC. Although in  his  statement  at  paragraphs  9  and  11  the
    appellant had stated that he had enjoyed various employment during  his
    time here, there were no dates, and  no  wider  supporting  documentary
    evidence. Nor was there anything to demonstrate that the appellant  had
    registered as a jobseeker during any interim periods.

12. The judge reached findings of fact  which  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence she heard. She had the benefit of seeing  the  appellant  give
    evidence and considering the entirety of the evidence in the  case.  As
    an appeal lies only to this tribunal on a point of law, rather  than  a
    finding of fact, it is necessary for an appellant to  demonstrate  that
    findings of  fact  were  irrational,  perverse,  or  otherwise  legally
    flawed. Mr Rylatt's clear and helpful submissions on  this  point  have
    not demonstrated that the judge fell into  such  error  when  analysing
    this aspect of the appellant's case.

13.  At  paragraph  42  the  judge  addressed   the   appellant's   claimed
    rehabilitation, which is a  factor  to  which  I  will  return,  before
    concluding in her global conclusion at paragraph 43 that the  appellant
    meets the test of deportation contained in the  2016  Regulations.   At
    paragraph 43 she said:

         "Accordingly, and for all these reasons, I find that the  appellant
         does continue to pose a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
         threat to one of the fundamental interests of  the  United  Kingdom
         society and I am satisfied that his deportation is  both  justified
         and proportionate."

14. The question for my consideration is whether the erroneous insertion of
    a sentence indicating that the judge had reached a  conclusion  by  the
    time she had got to paragraph 34 in her  reasoning  is  such  that  the
    entire decision is infected by the error of law which Mr Rylatt submits
    that it is.

15. It is trite law that decisions of this Tribunal and indeed of any court
    are not to be construed in the same way as  one  would  construe  black
    letter legislation.  They are documents  which  set  out  a  series  of
    reasons drawn together  in  an  overall  global  conclusion.   This  is
    precisely what the judge did on this occasion.

16. There is no indication from  the  judge's  operative  reasoning  as  it
    continues throughout the decision that  the  judge  was  influenced  by
    having, as Mr Rylatt submits, put the coach  before  the  horses.   The
    judge considered all relevant factors; her remarks in paragraph 34 must
    be viewed in that context.  In paragraph  34  she  was  addressing  the
    appellant's propensity to reoffend.  She provided unquestionably  sound
    reasons as to why she rejected the appellant's assertions that  he  had
    stopped using amphetamines, a factor which had led  to  his  offending,
    and that he had addressed the overall circumstances  of  his  offending
    behaviour.  The remarks the judge made at the end of paragraph 34  were
    in my judgment in relation to the issue of propensity to reoffend.  The
    judge was saying in paragraph  34  that  she  was  satisfied  that  his
    deportation should be maintained insofar as it turned on his propensity
    to reoffend.  She was  not  closing  off  the  possibility  that  other
    reasons  could  mitigate  against   that,   as   her   later   analysis
    demonstrates.  There is no merit to this ground of appeal.

17. Turning to the fourth ground of appeal Mr Rylatt submits that the judge
    made   irrational   findings   concerning   the   appellant's   claimed
    rehabilitation.  At paragraph 42,  she  said  that  the  appellant  had
    "adduced no evidence to show that he has done any  rehabilitative  work
    in custody save or (sic) his  attendance  at  DART  [Drug  and  Alcohol
    Recovery Team]".  Mr Rylatt submits that the appellant's own remarks to
    the offender manager and his description in his statement of being free
    from alcohol and drugs problems was such that there was evidence  going
    to his claimed rehabilitation, and it was  simply  the  case  that  the
    judge had failed to take that into account.  I reject this  submission.
    As outlined a moment ago, the judge considered all the factors relating
    to  the  appellant's  claimed  rehabilitation  in  the  course  of  her
    reasoning  between  paragraphs  25  and  34.   She  records  that   the
    appellant's own remarks to the offender manager were that  he  had  not
    used amphetamines.  She made the entirely valid finding that she had no
    evidence that he has "in fact" stopped  taking  amphetamines.   What  I
    take this to  mean  is  the  judge  is  referring  to  the  absence  of
    independent evidence of the sort that is available to those who used to
    be substance abusers but are no longer.  So  much  is  clear  from  the
    following extract of the decision:

         "He gives no evidence as to the support he has required or  whether
         he has been prescribed medication to  assist  with  any  withdrawal
         symptoms.  No negative drug tests have been placed  into  evidence.
         I cannot know whether the appellant's claims are  credible  or  not
         and I am unable to make any findings in this regard  as  I  do  not
         have the evidence before me."

    There the judge was referring to the sort of evidence  which  would  be
    entirely reasonable to expect to support a claim of  this  nature,  and
    she found that there was no such evidence.   That  was  not  a  finding
    which was irrational or  otherwise  outside  the  range  of  reasonable
    findings that were open to this judge to make.

18. I return now to the final two grounds of appeal as they  can  be  dealt
    with rather briefly.  The second ground of appeal  is  that  the  judge
    erroneously  stated  that  the  2016  Regulations  do  not  contain   a
    definition of "worker" status.  There is some superficial force in that
    criticism of the judge's reasoning  at  paragraph  20:  see  regulation
    4(1)(a) of the 2016 Regulations which  defines  the  term  "worker"  by
    reference to Article 45  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the
    European Union.  However there is no materiality to  this  error.   The
    judge correctly noted that employment under  the  Regulations  must  be
    genuine and effective and not marginal or  supplementary.   That  is  a
    term which the  judge  attributes  to  the  respondent's  own  guidance
    concerning the assessment of worker status.   It  is  a  concept  which
    finds support both in the European and domestic  authorities.   In  the
    case of Begum v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  2
    CMLR 13 this Tribunal summarised the jurisprudence on what amounts to a
    worker.  At paragraph 16 Mr Justice McCarthy said:

         "A worker is a person who pursues effective and genuine activities,
         to the exclusion of activities on such a small scale to be regarded
         as purely marginal and ancillary ..."

19. As such, the judge correctly directed herself  as  to  the  substantive
    test for the assessment of worker status and correctly recited that  in
    her decision even if she did incorrectly attribute  it  solely  to  the
    respondent's guidance rather than to the authority to which I had  just
    referred.  It no doubt features in the respondent's guidance concerning
    "worker" status, although, being an  autonomous  EU  law  concept,  its
    provenance is EU law.  Nothing turns on this.  Mr Rylatt was unable  to
    submit before me any reasons why the judge should rationally have found
    that the appellant was a person who was employed in the sense of  being
    a "worker" for the 2016 Regulations for a period which would place  him
    in a higher category of protection  from  removal  and  the  basic  and
    lowest level that the judge applied.  This is not a material error.

20. The final ground of appeal relates to the judge's  application  of  the
    public interest  factors  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act.   I  consider  nothing  to  turn  on  this
    criticism.  First the judge addressed this issue having made conclusive
    findings that the 2016 Regulations did not operate so as to render  the
    appellant's deportation unlawful.  She correctly addressed the position
    of Article 8 having already considered  the  position  under  the  2016
    Regulations.  This is entirely consistent with  the  approach  of  this
    Tribunal in Badewa (Sections 117A-D and EEA  Regulations)  [2015]  UKUT
    00329 (IAC).  The headnote states:

         "The correct approach to be applied by Tribunal judges in  relation
         to ss.117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         (as amended) in the context of EEA removal decisions is:

         (i)  first to decide if a person satisfies the requirements of  the
             Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   In
             this context ss.117A-D has no application;

         (ii) second where a person has raised Article  8  as  a  ground  of
             appeal, ss.117A-D applies."

    The judge plainly adopted the approach required by Badewa.

21. The second reason as to why this is not a material error is because the
    protection from removal conferred by the 2016  Regulations  is  greater
    than that enjoyed by those subject to immigration control under Article
    8.  That means that the appellant suffered no prejudice in  having  his
    case additionally considered under Article 8 of the ECHR once the judge
    had dismissed his appeal under the 2016 Regulations.   This  ground  is
    therefore dismissed.

Conclusion

22. Drawing the above analysis together therefore I  find  that  the  judge
    reached findings which were open to her on  the  facts  concerning  the
    appellant's claimed length of residence.  She did not misdirect herself
    in relation to the appellant's putative worker status.  In relation  to
    her analysis at paragraph 34 it is necessary to consider  the  decision
    as a whole and not attempt to construe it as a  black  letter  statute.
    In relation to rehabilitation the judge reached the findings which were
    open to her on the facts and finally for the reasons I  have  just  set
    out the judge adopted the correct approach in relation to Article 8  in
    the context of deportation appeals.  For these reasons this  appeal  is
    dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of Judge Andrew did not involve the making of an error of law.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 20 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

