
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00108/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 21 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  marek [w]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Dickinson, Fursdon Knapper Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, and therefore is an EEA national,
    who was born on 13 November 1978.  He has lived in the  United  Kingdom
    since May 2006.  Previously, whilst in Poland,  he  was  convicted  (at
    least on the Secretary of State's case) on 15 May 2005 of two  offences
    - attempted robbery with a firearm, imitation firearm, shotgun  or  air
    weapon and obtaining property by deception.  He was sentenced to  three
    years' imprisonment.

 3. Whilst in the United Kingdom, it is accepted  that  the  appellant  has
    acquired a permanent right of residence as an EEA national based upon a
    period of five years' employment between September 2006  and  September
    2011.

 4. Whilst in the UK, the appellant  formed  a  relationship  with  another
    Polish national ("DK") and they have two sons now aged 12 and  7  years
    old.

 5. On 22 September 2016, the appellant was  cautioned  by  the  Devon  and
    Cornwall Police for shoplifting.  Further, on  1  September  2017,  the
    appellant was convicted at the Bournemouth Crown Court of two offences,
    namely assault occasioning actual bodily harm contrary to s.47  of  the
    Offences Against the Person Act 1861 and of attempting to  pervert  the
    course of justice.  He was sentenced to four  months  and  six  months'
    imprisonment consecutively on those two counts, making a total  of  ten
    months' imprisonment.  Those offences  arose  in  the  context  of  the
    breakdown of his relationship with DK in May 2016.  The former involved
    domestic violence against DK and the latter involved subsequent threats
    made to DK if she did not drop the prosecution  against  him  for  that
    offence.

 6. The appellant was in prison from 1  September  2017  until  30  January
    2018.  Thereafter, he was detained in immigration  detention  until  he
    was released on 15 June 2018.

 7. On 26 January 2018, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  deport
    the appellant pursuant to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052) (the "EEA Regulations 2016").

 8. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant had resided in
    the UK for a continuous period of five years in accordance with the EEA
    Regulations 2016 (or its predecessor) and, therefore,  did  not  accept
    that he had acquired a permanent right of residence.  The Secretary  of
    State concluded that, having regard to the appellant's  offending  both
    in Poland and in the UK, that he  had  a  propensity  to  reoffend  and
    represented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".  Further, given
    his  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of  State   concluded   that   his
    deportation would be proportionate.  As  a  result,  the  Secretary  of
    State concluded that  the  appellant's  deportation  was  justified  on
    grounds of public policy under reg 27 of the EEA Regulations 2016.

The Appeal

 9. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Andrew
    allowed the appellant's appeal.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant
    could only be removed on "imperative grounds of public security" as  he
    had resided in the UK for a continuous period of  at  least  ten  years
    (see reg 27(4)(a) of the EEA Regulations 2016).  The judge  found  that
    the appellant was not at risk of reoffending and that,  in  any  event,
    his two offences  in  Poland  and  the  UK  did  not  reach  the  "high
    threshold" of establishing "imperative grounds of public security".

10. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal with  permission.
    In a decision dated 3 July 2018, UTJ Rintoul set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   He  accepted  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider whether the appellant could establish the required
    residence for ten continuous years prior to the decision to deport  him
    as she had failed to take into account  the  impact,  if  any,  of  the
    period of imprisonment following  his  conviction  in  the  UK.   Judge
    Rintoul accepted, however, that the appellant had at least  established
    a permanent right of residence in the UK.  He  set  aside  the  judge's
    other findings in relation to a lack  of  propensity  to  reoffend  and
    adjourned the appeal in order for the decision  to  be  remade  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

11. As a consequence of a transfer order dated 10 August 2018,  the  appeal
    was listed before me in order to remake the decision.

The Issues

12. It is accepted that the appellant has been resident in the UK since May
    2006.  His only periods  of  absence  from  the  UK,  set  out  in  his
    statements and oral evidence, were two short visits to Poland  in  2013
    (to attend the christening of his brother's daughter) and in  2014  (to
    attend his mother's funeral).

13. Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State  accepted  that  the
    appellant had established, based upon  his  employment  in  the  UK,  a
    permanent right of residence.  That was, of course,  also  accepted  by
    UTJ Rintoul.  It is clear from the evidence set out in  Judge  Andrew's
    decision that that period of employment  ran  from  September  2006  to
    September 2011 when the appellant was employed by  Johnsons  Stalbridge
    Linen Services (see para 18 of Judge Andrew's decision).

14. Further, it is accepted that  the  appellant  has,  therefore,  both  a
    permanent right of residence and was, at the date of the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to deport him on 26 January 2018, been resident in the
    UK for a period of eleven years and eight months.

15. Whilst Mr Howells accepted that the appellant's deportation could  only
    be justified on "serious grounds of public policy"  by  virtue  of  reg
    27(3) based upon the appellant's permanent right of residence,  he  did
    not accept that the appellant had established a  continuous  period  of
    ten years' residence prior to the deportation decision  on  26  January
    2018.  Mr Howells contended that the appellant's imprisonment between 1
    September 2017 and, when he was released, on 30 January 2018 broke that
    period of continuous ten years' residence by negating  his  integration
    in the UK.

16. Mr Howells, however, accepted that if the appellant could establish the
    ten years' continuous residence and that his deportation could only  be
    justified  on  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  under   reg
    27(4)(a), the appellant's offending did not reach  the  high  threshold
    required to establish that ground for deportation.   On  that,  he  was
    clearly right  that  the  appellant's  offending  (or  risk  of  future
    offending)  comes  no-where  near  reaching  the  high   threshold   of
    "imperative grounds of public security".

17. The first issue which must, therefore, be determined in this appeal  is
    whether the appellant can only be deported on  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security".  If that is  the  only  basis  on  which  he  can  be
    deported, it is accepted that his appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016
    should succeed.

18. If, however, the appellant is  not  entitled  to  the  protection  from
    deportation on that ground alone, the further issues arise whether  his
    offending and behaviour establishes "serious grounds of public  policy"
    and, if they do, whether it is  established  that  his  deportation  is
    proportionate.

19. Mr Howells contends that his offending does establish "serious grounds"
    and that his deportation is proportionate.

20. Ms Dickinson, who represented the appellant, in addition to  contending
    principally that the appellant could only be  deported  on  "imperative
    grounds of public security", also contends that his offending does  not
    reach the "serious grounds" threshold, in particular  that  his  Polish
    offences in 2005 (even if both were established)  do  not  establish  a
    "present" threat and his UK offences likewise even in the light of  the
    restraining order made following his conviction for the  s.47  offence.
    In  any  event,  she   contends   that   his   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate given the lack of ties he  has  with  Poland  and  the
    impact that his deportation would have on his family in the UK and  his
    two children in the UK.

21. In addition, reliance was placed upon Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Law

22. The relevant law, set out in the EEA Regulations 2016 and decisions  of
    the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), was not a matter  of
    dispute between the parties.

23. The appellant is an EEA national and his deportation  must,  therefore,
    comply with EU law as set out in reg 27 of the  EEA  Regulations  2016.
    That provide, so far as relevant, as follows:

         "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
             public health

         27.  (1) In this regulation, a 'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                  person  with  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  and security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                  grounds of public security in respect of an  EEA  national
                  who -

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  ....

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
                  United  Kingdom  include  restricting   rights   otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also been taken in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles -

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)  the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  yon  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned.

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that the threat does not need to imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations and general prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ('P') who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of  origin.

             (7)  ....

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
                  of this regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)  have
                  regard to  the  considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1
                  (considerations of public policy, public security and  the
                  fundamental interests of society etc.)."

24. Regulation 27(8) cross refers to Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations 2016
    which sets out a number of considerations which, in particular, a court
    or Tribunal must "have regard to" in considering the issues  of  public
    policy, public security  and  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.
    Schedule 1 provides as follows:

         "Regulation 27

          CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
                    FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
             or public security values: member of States enjoy considerable
             discretion,  acting  within  the  parameters  set  by  the  EU
             Treaties, applied where relevant  by  the  EEA  agreement,  to
             define  their  own  standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
             extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
             nationality or language does not amount to integration in  the
             United Kingdom; a significant degree  of  wider  cultural  and
             societal integration must be present before a  person  may  be
             regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence or  the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued present in the United Kingdom represents a  genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around the same time as -

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the  fundamental  interest  of
             society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family members of an EEA national was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
             family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

         6.   It is consistent with the public policy  and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including -

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include -

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  relating to the misuses of drugs or crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimensions as mentioned in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protection  shared
                  values."

25. It may be helpful briefly to summarise the correct approach.  It is for
    the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish  the  justification  for   the
    deportation of an EEA national (or relevant 'family member') under  the
    EEA Regulations 2016.  There is  a  hierarchy  of  protections  against
    expulsion or deportation which "increases in proportion to  the  degree
    of integration of the Union citizen in the host Member State" (B v Land
    Baden-Wurttemberg; SSHD v Vomero (Cases C-316/16 and  C-424/16)  [2018]
    Imm AR 1145 at [48] ("B and Vomero")).

26. First, deportation of an EEA national or 'family member' will  only  be
    justified on grounds of  "public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health" in general.

27. Secondly, however when an individual has a permanent right of residence
    there must be "serious grounds of public policy and public security" in
    order to justify any deportation.

28. Thirdly, in the case of an  EEA  national  who  has  been  continuously
    resident in the UK for at least ten  years  prior  to  the  deportation
    decision (and that is the relevant date  from  which  to  count  back),
    deportation can only be justified on the  most  serious  ground  namely
    "imperative grounds of public security".  In  order  to  rely  on  this
    'most serious ground' the individual must  first  establish  that  they
    have a permanent right of residence (see, B  and  Vomero  at  [49]  and
    [61])

29. In establishing these grounds, the individual conduct must represent  a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society".  That, in general, requires that  it
    be established that the individual has a propensity to reoffend in  the
    future.  However, in exceptionally serious cases, it may be  that  past
    conduct (which in general alone cannot establish  a  "present"  threat)
    may suffice (see SSHD v Robinson (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 85 at [80] -
    [86] per Singh LJ).  It was not  suggested  in  this  appeal  that  the
    appellant's offending was an "extreme  case"  where  his  past  conduct
    alone might, even under the "serious grounds"  basis  for  deportation,
    suffice.

30. Fourthly, in reaching any assessment, in particularly  in  relation  to
    proportionality,  all  the   relevant   circumstances   including   the
    individual's age, state  of  health,  family  and  economic  situation,
    length of residence in the UK and social and  cultural  integration  in
    the UK, rehabilitation prospects in both countries and any  links  with
    his or her own country, must be taken into account.

31. Fifthly, regard must be had to the considerations set out in Schedule 1
    in the same way as in a  non-EEA  removal  or  deportation  appeal  the
    considerations in s.117B and s.117C respectively  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 must be  taken  into  account  (on  the
    latter see, Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at [49]-[50]).

32. Sixthly, in determining whether an individual has resided in the UK for
    ten  continuous  years,  regard  should  be  had  to  any   period   of
    imprisonment prior to the decision to deport that individual (see B and
    Vomero).  A period of  imprisonment  does  not  automatically  break  a
    period of residence such that it  is  no  longer  'continuous'  (B  and
    Vomero at [71] and [80]).  The issue is whether:

         "those periods of imprisonment have broken  the  integrative  links
         previously forged with the host Member State with the  result  that
         the  person  concerned  is  no  longer  entitled  to  the  enhanced
         protection provided for in [reg 27(4)(a)] - to carry out an overall
         assessment of the situation of that person at the precise time when
         the question of expulsion arises.  In the context of  that  overall
         assessment,  periods   of   imprisonment   must   be   taken   into
         consideration together  with  all  the  relevant  factors  in  each
         individual case, including, as the case may be,  the  circumstances
         that the person concerned resided in the host Member State for  the
         10 years preceding his imprisonment..."

    (see B and Vomero at [70]).

33. In relation to an  EEA  national  who  has  satisfied  the  '10  years'
    continuous residence' requirement prior  to  the  offending,  the  CJEU
    recognised in B and Vomero that it was particularly so that a period of
    imprisonment does not automatically break "the integrative  links  that
    that person has previously forged" and so result in a discontinuity  of
    residence (at [71]).




34. In relation to the issue of when a period of imprisonment would  result
    in a break in the 'integrative links' with the host Member  state,  the
    CJEU in B and Vomero said this (at [72]- [75]):

         "[72]    As part of the overall assessment, mentioned in  paragraph
             70 above, which, in this case, is for the referring  court  to
             carry out, it is necessary to take into  account,  as  regards
             the integrative links forged by B with the host  Member  State
             during the period of residence before his detention, the  fact
             that, the more those integrative links  with  that  state  are
             solid  -  including  from  a  social,  cultural   and   family
             perspective, to the  point  where,  for  example,  the  person
             concerned is genuinely rooted in the society of that State, as
             found by the referring court in the  main  proceedings  -  the
             lower the probability that a period of  detention  could  have
             resulted in those  links  being  broken  and  consequently,  a
             discontinuity of the ten - year period of  residence  referred
             to in Article 28(3)(a) of the Directive 2004/38.

         [73] Other relevant factors in that overall assessment may include,
             as observed by the Advocate General in point 123 to 125 of his
             Opinion, first, the nature of the offence that resulted in the
             period of imprisonment in question and  the  circumstances  in
             which that offence  was  committed,  and,  secondly,  all  the
             relevant factors  as  regards  the  behaviour  of  the  person
             concerned during the period of imprisonment.

         [74] While the nature of the offence and the circumstances in which
             it was committed shed light on the extent to which the  person
             concerned has, as the case may be,  become  disconnected  from
             the society of the host Member  State,  the  attitude  of  the
             person concerned during his detention may, in turn,  reinforce
             that disconnection or, conversely, help to maintain or restore
             links previously forged with the host Member State with a view
             to his future social integration in that State.

         [75] On that last point, it should also be born in  mind  that,  as
             the Court has already pointed out, the  social  rehabilitation
             of the Union Citizen in the  State  in  which  he  has  become
             genuinely integrated is not only in  his  interests  but  also
             that of the European Union in general (judgment of 23 November
             2010, Tsakouridis, C-145/09, EU: C: 2010: 08, paragraph 50)."

35. The CJEU reiterated the central issue in determining whether  the  most
    serious protection in reg 27(4) applied was whether, as a result of the
    period of imprisonment, it had been shown that the "integrative  links"
    with the host Member State had been broken (see [82]  and  [83]).   The
    'holistic' assessment was reiterated in [83] of the CJEU's judgment:

         "...the condition of having 'resided in the host Member  State  for
         the previous  ten  years'  laid  down  in  that  provision  may  be
         satisfied where an overall assessment of  the  person's  situation,
         taking  into  account  all  the  relevant  aspects,  leads  to  the
         conclusion that, notwithstanding that  detention,  the  integrative
         links between the person concerned and the host Member  State  have
         not been broken. Those aspects include, inter alia, the strength of
         the integrative links forged with the host Member State before  the
         detention of the person concerned, the nature of the  offence  that
         resulted in the period of detention imposed, the  circumstances  in
         which that offence was committed and  the  conduct  of  the  person
         concerned throughout the period of detention."

36. It is essentially the application of that approach definitively set out
    by the CJEU in B and Vomero which is the focus of the principal dispute
    between the parties as to whether the appellant's imprisonment  between
    1 September 2017 and 30 January 2018 - a period of five months) had the
    effect of breaking the continuity of the period of his residence so  as
    to prevent him establishing, dating back from the deportation  decision
    taken on 28 January 2018, a period of ten years' continuous residence.

37. Although I was not referred to it by the parties,  reg  3  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016 deals with the issue  of  "continuity  of  residence".
    Regulation 3(3)(a) sets out the 'default' position that  continuity  of
    residence  "is  broken"  when  "a   person   serves   a   sentence   of
    imprisonment".  The effect reflects the CJEU's position that  a  period
    of imprisonment will break the continuity of residence for the purposes
    of established the required 5 years' residence in  accordance  with  EU
    law in order to establish a permanent right of residence (see Onuekwere
    v SSHD (Case C-378/12) [2014] Imm AR 551).  However, reg 3(4) goes  on,
    in effect, to 'disapply' that provision when considering reg 24(4), and
    whether  the  10  years'  residence  requirement  is  met,  in  certain
    circumstances:

         "(4) Paragraph (3)(a) applies, in principle, to an EEA national who
         has resided in the United Kingdom for at least ten years, but it
         does not apply where the Secretary of State considers that-

             (a)  prior to serving a  sentence  of  imprisonment,  the  EEA
             national had forged integrating links with the United Kingdom;

             (b)  the effect of the sentence of imprisonment was  not  such
             as to break those integrating links; and

             (c)  taking into account an  overall  assessment  of  the  EEA
             national's situation, it would not  be  appropriate  to  apply
             paragraph (3)(a) to the  assessment  of  that  EEA  national's
             continuity of residence."

38. Although not expressed in precisely the terms of  the  CJEU  in  B  and
    Vomero, the effect is  likely  to  be  indistinguishable.   The  search
    remains, adopting a  'holistic  assessment',  whether  the  integrative
    links with the UK have been broken by the period of imprisonment.

39. With that legal approach in mind, I turn  now  to  the  facts  of  this
    appeal.

Discussion and Findings

40. On behalf of the appellant,  Ms  Dickinson  relied  upon  a  number  of
    documents contained in the appellant's  bundle  filed  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 7 September 2018.  These  include  two  witness  statements
    from the appellant dated 22 March 2018 and 5 September 2018 (at pages 1
    - 6 and 7 - 8 respectively); two statements from his sister,  Katarzyna
    dated 22 March 2018 and 5 September 2018 (at pages 9 - 11 and 12  -  13
    respectively); two statements from his brother, Tomasz dated  21  March
    2018 and 5 September 2018 (at pages 14 - 15 and 16 - 17  respectively);
    two statements from his brother-in-law, Shaun dated 22 March 2018 and 5
    September 2018 (at pages 18  -  21  and  22  -  23  respectively).   In
    addition, Ms Dickinson relied upon a document from HM  Prison  Service,
    Portland (at page 30) attesting to  the  appellant's  'good  behaviour'
    whilst in prison.  Ms Dickinson also referred me to a brief  supporting
    letter from the appellant's ex-partner, DK dated 8  February  2018  (at
    page 168) attesting to the appellant being a "good father" for his  two
    children and stating that she would like to see the  appellant  and  be
    part of the children's  life  in  the  future  and  that  it  would  be
    beneficial for them and they would lose contact with  him  if  he  were
    deported to Poland.  She also referred me to a number of photographs in
    the bundle.

41. Mr Howells indicated  that,  despite  their  presence  at  the  hearing
    centre, he did not require that any  of  the  appellant's  family  give
    evidence as he did not wish to ask them anything of significance.   The
    appellant, however, gave oral evidence before me.

42. The only issue of contention concerned the  appellant's  conviction  in
    2005 in Poland.  The Secretary of State's case is that, in addition  to
    a conviction for obtaining property by  deception,  the  appellant  was
    also convicted of attempted robbery.  The  Secretary  of  State  relied
    upon the PNC printout disclosing convictions for both  offences  on  15
    November 2005 at the District Court in Gliwice in Poland.   As  regards
    the obtaining by deception, the  printout  states  that  the  appellant
    received a sentence of imprisonment for one year and for the  attempted
    robbery a period of imprisonment of two  years  and  six  months.   The
    overall penalty was one of three years' imprisonment.

43. Mr Howells informed me that despite two requests on 20 October 2018 and
    15 February 2009, the Polish authorities had not responded to  requests
    from the Home Office for clarification concerning these convictions.

44. The appellant's evidence both in  his  witness  statements  and  orally
    before me was that he had been imprisoned for two years and six  months
    but only on an offence of obtaining by  deception.   That  offence,  he
    said, arose out of a non-payment  of  a  loan  which  he  received  for
    purchasing a television.  The appellant was adamant that he  had  never
    been charged with attempted  robbery.   It  was  his  "mates"  who  had
    committed that offence and not him.  The attempted robbery offence  had
    been dropped against him.  When asked in cross-examination  whether  it
    was normal to receive a sentence of two and a half years'  imprisonment
    in Poland for defence in relation  to  the  television,  the  appellant
    answered "yes".  He did not accept that the  length  of  that  sentence
    reflected a further offence.  He accepted that he had no  documents  in
    relation to his conviction or in relation to the offences.

45. Because of the view I take below concerning the sole basis  upon  which
    the appellant may be deported, namely  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security", it is not strictly necessary to resolve the factual  dispute
    since Mr Howells  accepts  that  the  combination  of  the  appellant's
    offending in Poland and in the UK  cannot  meet  that  high  threshold.
    Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the appellant was  convicted  of  the
    offence of attempted robbery in Poland.

46. I accept that it is  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish  the
    convictions upon which he relies to deport the appellant.   The  detail
    given on  the  PNC  printout  is  significant,  in  my  judgment.   The
    Secretary of State has done all that could be  reasonably  expected  of
    him  to  obtain  further  elucidation  from  the   Polish   authorities
    concerning these offences which has simply not been  forthcoming.   The
    detail, however, in  relation  to  two  distinct  offences  is,  in  my
    judgment, only consistent with the appellant having been  convicted  of
    two offences.  Despite his being adamant that he was not  convicted  of
    attempted robbery, if that were so it is curious in  the  extreme  that
    the record should disclose a discrete penalty - wholly consistent  with
    the period of imprisonment that he accepts was imposed - for an offence
    of attempted robbery.  Mr Howells contended that, given the appellant's
    description of the offence of  obtaining  property  by  deception,  the
    length  of  imprisonment  was  not  consistent  with  that   level   of
    criminality.  That would, in my judgment, certainly be the case if  the
    appellant had been convicted in the Crown Court in England  and  Wales.
    There is, however, no evidence concerning the range of  sentencing  for
    such an offence in Poland.   I  do  not,  therefore,  base  my  factual
    finding that the Secretary of State has established  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellant was convicted of attempted robbery  on
    that matter.  The level of sentence does, however, appear  to  be  very
    severe indeed for an offence of obtaining a  television  by  deception,
    the substance of which was that the appellant did not repay the loan he
    obtained in order to purchase it.  That apart, the  facts  are  not  in
    dispute.

47. The appellant came to the UK in May 2006.  As the  judge  found,  based
    upon documentation before her, the appellant has worked in the UK  from
    21 August 2006 first at Johnsons Stalbridge Linen Services and latterly
    at Malcolm Barnecutt Bakery Ltd from that date until  his  imprisonment
    in September 2017.  That, of course, is the  basis  upon  which  it  is
    accepted that he has established a permanent right of residence.

48. During that time, he also established family life in the UK with DK and
    they had two sons now aged 7 and 12 years old respectively.   DK  is  a
    Polish national  herself.   Their  relationship,  however,  broke  down
    sometime in 2016, perhaps around May of that year.   It  was  following
    that breakdown that the incident of domestic violence occurred followed
    by the actions which gave rise to the  conviction  for  perverting  the
    course of justice.

49. When their relationship broke down, the appellant left  his  employment
    with Johnsons Stalbridge Linen Services in Devon and moved to  Cornwall
    where he  started  working  for  Malcolm  Barnecutt  Bakery  Ltd.   The
    appellant's evidence, which I accept,  is  that  he  has  regained  his
    employment with the bakery since his release from immigration detention
    in June 2018.

50. During his time in the UK, the appellant has only been back  to  Poland
    for two very brief periods in 2013 and 2014 to attend the  marriage  of
    his brother's daughter and his mother's funeral.

51. I accept on the basis of all the evidence that his family is now  based
    in the UK.  His evidence is, and I accept it supported as it is by  his
    family members, that his sisters and their partners and  children  live
    in the UK.  The evidence, which was not challenged, is that they are  a
    close and interconnected family in the UK.

52. The whole focus of his life is centred on the UK.

53. Mr Howells submitted, on the basis of para 2 of Schedule 1 to  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016, that in order to be regarded as  "integrated  in  the
    United Kingdom, an individual should have more than  "extensive  family
    and societal links with persons of the same nationality  or  language".
    He submitted that the appellant's links were with his Polish family  in
    the UK.  Whilst he undoubtedly does have those links, as I have already
    said, his links to the UK are much more.  He has lived here for  almost
    twelve years at the date of decision and, until his imprisonment  on  1
    September 2017, had worked continuously with two employers  -  a  linen
    service and a bakery - in the UK.  That is the basis for  his  accepted
    permanent right of residence which, in itself, provides  some  evidence
    of his integration in the UK.  It is, as the  CJEU  recognises  in  its
    decisions, an important part of integration, and its recognition,  that
    an individual based upon the exercise of Treaty rights over a five-year
    period is granted the right permanently to reside in  a  country  other
    than their own within the EU.  Whilst I  "have  regard"  to  the  links
    which the appellant had within his own family (not  all  of  which,  by
    marriage, are Polish), I  also  have  regard  to  the  long  period  of
    residence - itself more than ten years - prior to  his  conviction  and
    imprisonment on 1 September 2017.  I am  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    establishes that he was by that date firmly  integrated  into  the  UK.
    His family is in the UK and  his  links  with  Poland  were  much  less
    significant as evidenced by the fact that he only  returned  to  Poland
    for two short visits in 2013 and 2014 in order to attend family events.

54. I bear in mind that the appellant has two children in the UK  now  aged
    12 and 7 years old.  They were born in the UK and have lived  here  all
    their lives.  They will continue to do so.

55. In his evidence, the appellant  accepted  that  he  had  not  seen  his
    children since his imprisonment on 1 September 2017.  Mr Howells placed
    some reliance upon  this.   However,  there  is  an  explanation.   The
    appellant's children live in Devon whilst he lives in Cornwall.   As  a
    result of his conviction, he is  subject  to  a  restraining  order  in
    relation to his ex-partner and, as I understand it, as a result of  his
    release from immigration detention is subject to  a  curfew  between  3
    p.m. and 5 p.m. and between 9 p.m. and 11 p.m.  The appellant works  at
    night at the bakery.  The present situation in respect of  his  contact
    with his children is not, in my judgment, representative of a  lack  of
    interest by the appellant in his two sons.  He told me in his  evidence
    that his two sons do not know about his offending as they do  not  need
    to know.  That may be an understandable position to take  even  if  not
    one which every parent would.  I bear in  mind  the  supporting  letter
    from DK, his ex-partner even though that is dated over a year ago on  8
    February 2018.  The evidence from his  family  and  contained  in  that
    letter is mutually supportive of his continued intention to be involved
    with his children, at least when possible.

56. The appellant's actual period of  imprisonment  was  only  five  months
    after which he was detained in  immigration  detention.   I  take  into
    account the only evidence concerning his behaviour in prison which  was
    that he was a  good  prisoner.   Mr  Howells  did  not  seek  to  argue
    otherwise in his submissions.

57. Whilst the appellant's offending in the UK was not  insignificant,  the
    offences were connected to a single incident of domestic  violence  and
    were  not,  in  my  judgment,  of  a  nature  which,   in   themselves,
    demonstrated that the appellant had disconnected from the fabric of  UK
    society so as to break his integrative  links  with  UK  society.   The
    period of imprisonment was short and, immediately following his release
    from immigration detention which followed in completing  the  requisite
    period of his term of imprisonment, the appellant returned to work in a
    UK company where he had worked prior to his imprisonment.   As  I  have
    said, the whole focus of his life is in the UK.

58. In relation to the issue of  rehabilitation,  which  was  not  explored
    extensively in argument before me, it is readily apparent that  support
    from his family in the UK is important to that  and  he  has  no  close
    family in Poland.  The prospects  for  rehabilitation  are,  therefore,
    enhanced in the UK and may be reduced if he returns to Poland.

59. In my judgment, the appellant was firmly integrated in society prior to
    his imprisonment and that period of  imprisonment  did  not  break  his
    integrative links with society so as to create a 'discontinuity' in the
    period of his residence prior to the Secretary of State's  decision  on
    28 January 2018.  The appellant is, therefore, entitled  to  rely  upon
    reg 27(4)(a) namely that as a result of  a  continuous  period  of  ten
    years' residence prior to the decision to deport him  he  may  only  be
    deported on "imperative grounds of public  security".   As  Mr  Howells
    accepted, the Secretary of State cannot establish that and consequently
    the appellant's appeal must succeed under the EEA Regulations 2016.

60. In the light of that finding, it is not strictly necessary  for  me  to
    make any findings or reach any decision on the  issue  of  whether  the
    Secretary of State could establish  the  "serious  grounds"  basis  for
    deporting the appellant.  However, I will briefly give my  reasons  for
    concluding that the Secretary  of  State  could  not  succeed  even  in
    establishing that basis for deporting the appellant.

61. First, whilst I accept that the appellant was  convicted  of  attempted
    robbery in Poland in 2005, that conviction is now over  thirteen  years
    ago.  The appellant has shown no inclination or  propensity  to  repeat
    that level of offending since that time.  No material was drawn  to  my
    attention that could conceivably justify a finding that  the  appellant
    has a propensity or that there is any risk of him committing a  serious
    offence such as attempted robbery in the future.

62. However, there is the issue of the appellant's  offending  in  the  UK.
    That is, of course, much more recent.  That  offending,  including  the
    perverting the course of justice offence, was committed in the  context
    of a  domestic  dispute  between  the  appellant  and  his  ex-partner.
    Certainly, when the appellant was sentenced for that offence  the  oral
    report of the probation officer, which the sentencing  judge  accepted,
    was that the appellant was "not really  prepared  to  accept  the  full
    extent of his offending and, over and above that, to accept how he  had
    been behaving to his ex-partner".  That clearly  raises  the  potential
    for the appellant, at least when presented with a  similar  challenging
    situation in a personal relationship, to further offend  in  this  way.
    There is  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  sought  to  address  his
    behaviour through the Probation Service (see letter dated 23 July  2018
    at page 203) but, at that time, although willing to do so had  not  yet
    attended a 'Respectful Relationships' course.  The appellant told me in
    his oral evidence that he had completed that course two weeks  ago  but
    he had no documentation to support that.  Even if  I  accept  that  the
    appellant has completed such a course, and I see no reason why I should
    not, there is no supporting evidence from the Probation Service  as  to
    the appellant's response during the  course  which  counters  the  view
    given by the probation officer when the appellant  was  sentenced.   On
    the basis of this evidence, therefore, I accept that  there  remains  a
    risk, albeit a low one, that the appellant may reoffend in  a  domestic
    context if a challenging situation were to occur such has  led  to  his
    conviction.

63.  Secondly,  however,  despite  the  significance  of  the   appellant's
    offending (and if he were to reoffend his offending in the future is in
    the context of his personal relationships), the Secretary of State must
    establish that there are "serious grounds" of  public  policy.   Whilst
    the appellant's future risk of offending would, undoubtedly, reach  the
    lowest level envisaged by the EEA Regulations 2016 (namely  grounds  of
    public policy), I am not  satisfied  that  the  offending  reaches  the
    heightened standard of "serious grounds".

64. The fact that the appellant is subject to a restraining  order,  in  my
    judgment, reflect no more (and no less) than a future risk to  his  ex-
    partner and is, therefore, relevant (and I take  it  into  account)  in
    finding that the appellant continues to present a risk to others in his
    personal relationships, albeit a low risk.

65. Consequently, while I acknowledge the significance and abhorrence of  a
    risk  (albeit  low  risk)  of   violence   in   his   future   personal
    relationships, and although I accept that the appellant does  represent
    a "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting"  a
    fundamental interest of society, that risk does not amount to  "serious
    grounds" of public policy  which,  as  the  Secretary  of  State's  own
    guidance  makes  plain,  requires  "stronger  grounds  than  would   be
    applicable for a person  who  does  not   have  a  permanent  right  of
    residence" (see, 'EEA decisions on grounds of public policy and  public
    security' (14 December 2017) at page 13 of 43).

66. Thirdly, on the basis of  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  that  the
    appellant's integration in the UK has  concomitantly  resulted  in  him
    retaining few if any links with Poland.  His family is,  for  practical
    purposes,  in  the  UK.   It  may  well   be,   therefore,   that   his
    rehabilitation would be adversely affected by his return to Poland.

67. Finally, both representatives  made  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    proportionality  of  the  appellant's   deportation   under   the   EEA
    Regulations 2016.   It would be one further step in making  unnecessary
    findings to the outcome of this appeal to reach any concluded  view  on
    whether his deportation would be  disproportionate.   A  conclusion  on
    this issue can only be reached if a counter-factual position  is  taken
    on issue of "serious grounds".  Suffice it  to  say  that  the  factors
    weighing in the appellant's favour, when balanced against the  counter-
    factual "serious grounds" being established, do  not  given  he  is  an
    adult in good health with (in my view) the ability to readjust to  life
    in Poland despite living in the UK since  2006,  carry  any  convincing
    weight.  The impact upon his children, even if he were to be able to re-
    establish contact with them, would be no more than would be expected by
    the deportation of an individual.  Whilst their best interest would, no
    doubt, be furthered by continued contact with the appellant,  there  is
    no compelling evidence of significant  impact  upon  them  beyond  what
    inevitably follows when a non-residential parent is  deported.   Having
    regard  to  all  the  circumstances,  if  "serious  grounds"  had  been
    established by the  Secretary  of  State  (which  they  are  not),  the
    contention that his deportation would be  proportionate  would,  in  my
    judgment, carry considerable force and likely succeed.

Decision

68. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    was set aside by the decision of UTJ Rintoul dated 3 July 2018.

69. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 on the basis that it  has  not  been
    established that his deportation is justified on "imperative grounds of
    public security".

70. In the light of this, it is unnecessary to reach a decision on Art 8 of
    the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                5 March 2019






