
[pic]
Hzk29h

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00505/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TK
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Reynolds, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

 1. I have anonymised the respondent because this decision  refers  to  his
    asylum claim.

 2. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davey dated 23  April  2015  in  which  he  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal on asylum and Article 8  grounds.   In  grounds  of
    appeal the SSHD submitted that the decision contained three  errors  of
    law: (1) the judge failed to use the factual  findings  of  a  previous
    2009 decision of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  as  his  starting
    point; (2) no reference was made to the relevant and applicable country
    guidance decision of MO (illegal exit -  risk  on  return)  Eritrea  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC); the judge attached insufficient weight to  the
    public interest and section 117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 3. I heard submissions from both representatives on each ground of appeal.
     After hearing submissions, I indicated that I was satisfied  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law  in  failing  to  direct  himself  in
    accordance with and apply Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702, and that  the
    appeal would need to be remade.  Both representatives  agreed  that  in
    these circumstances the matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I reserved my decision regarding Article 8.  I now  give  my
    reasons in full in relation to each ground of appeal.

Ground 1 - Devaseelan

 4. The judge has simply failed to direct himself or apply  the  well-known
    Devaseelan  guidelines,  which  includes  the  following:  "the   first
    Adjudicator's determination should always be the starting-point".   The
    Devaseelan guidelines are always to be applied to the determination  of
    a factual issue, the dispute as to which has already been  the  subject
    of judicial determination in an appeal against an  earlier  immigration
    decision involving the same parties - see Mubu and others  (immigration
    appeals - res judicata) [2012] UKUT 00398(IAC).

 5. This is a case in which the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal had already
    considered and dismissed the respondent's appeal on asylum grounds in a
    decision dated 11 November 2009.  That Tribunal conducted an  in  depth
    assessment of the respondent's claim that he participated  in  military
    service in Eritrea before departing the  country  unlawfully  in  2009.
    That Tribunal accepted him to be Eritrean (this had  been  disputed  by
    the SSHD) and that he had undertaken military service in the past.  The
    Tribunal did not accept the credibility of the respondent's claim as to
    the length of his service in the military,  the  adverse  attention  he
    came to or that he escaped.  Importantly, that Tribunal did not  accept
    that he left Eritrea illegally.

 6. By the time Judge Davey came  to  consider  whether  deportation  would
    breach the Refugee Convention there was further guidance to  assist  in
    the determination of who left Eritrea illegally and who was  likely  to
    be at risk as a result of this.  The  headnote  in  MO  summarises  the
    position clearly:

         "(i) The figures relating to UK entry clearance applications  since
         2006 - particularly since September 2008 - show a very  significant
         change from those considered by the Tribunal in MA (Draft  evaders-
         illegal departures-risk) Eritrea CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00059  and  are
         among a number of indications that it has become more difficult for
         Eritreans to obtain lawful exit from Eritrea.

         (ii) The Eritrean authorities continue to envisage lawful  exit  as
         being possible for those who are  above  national  service  age  or
         children  of  7  or  younger.  Otherwise,  however,  the  potential
         categories of lawful exit are limited to two narrowly drawn medical
         categories and those  who  are  either  highly  trusted  government
         officials or their families or who are members of ministerial staff
         recommended by the department to attend studies abroad.

         (iii) The general  position  concerning  illegal  exit  remains  as
         expressed in MA, namely  that  illegal  exit  by  a  person  of  or
         approaching draft age and not medically unfit cannot be assumed  if
         they had been found wholly incredible. However, if such a person is
         found to have left Eritrea on or after  August/September  2008,  it
         may be, that inferences can be drawn from their health  history  or
         level of education or their skills profile as to whether legal exit
         on their part was feasible, provided that such  inferences  can  be
         drawn in the light of the adverse credibility findings.

         (iv) The general position adopted  in  MA,  that  a  person  of  or
         approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still not above  the
         upper age limits for military service, being under 54 for  men  and
         under 47 for women) and not medically  unfit  who  is  accepted  as
         having left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to  be  regarded
         with serious  hostility  on  return,  is  reconfirmed,  subject  to
         limited exceptions in respect of  (1)  persons  whom  the  regime's
         military and political leadership perceives as  having  given  them
         valuable service (either in Eritrea or abroad); (2) persons who are
         trusted family members of, or are themselves part of, the  regime's
         military or political leadership.  A  further  possible  exception,
         requiring a more case-specific analysis, is (3) persons (and  their
         children born afterwards) who fled (what later became the territory
         of) Eritrea during the war of independence.

         (v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum  seekers
         as such are not generally at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
         harm on return, on present evidence  the  great  majority  of  such
         persons are likely to be perceived as  having  left  illegally  and
         this fact, save for very limited  exceptions,  will  mean  that  on
         return they face a real risk of persecution or serious harm."

 7. Whilst Judge Davey referred to the earlier 2009  Tribunal  decision  on
    two occasions he did not engage with it in any meaningful way  or  give
    reasons for not using it as a starting point for his own  findings.   I
    am satisfied this constitutes a material error of law.   I  acknowledge
    that the complexion of the asylum claim had changed and  narrowed,  and
    was supported by further country  expert  evidence  regarded  by  Judge
    Davey to be cogent.  There are prima facie persuasive reasons why  this
    respondent is likely to have left  Eritrea  illegally,  notwithstanding
    the findings of the 2009 Tribunal.  Those findings must nonetheless  be
    used as a starting point.  It is noteworthy that the respondent was not
    found "wholly incredible" by the 2009 Tribunal.

 8. In all the circumstances it is important that a very careful  and  more
    nuanced assessment of the  respondent's  claim  to  have  left  Eritrea
    illegally is undertaken, using the  previous  findings  as  a  starting
    point but having considered all the evidence  that  is  now  available,
    including the guidance contained in MO.

Ground 2 - CG

 9. The judge has referred to considerable background evidence  but  failed
    to refer to MO.  MO was included in the respondent's bundle and  it  is
    difficult to understand why it has been  ignored  by  the  judge.   The
    judge was not assisted by the SSHD's representative who offered  little
    assistance in relation to the Refugee Convention claim, asserting to be
    'without instructions'.  I accept that much of the background  evidence
    contains similar evidence to that highlighted in MO.  I am  nonetheless
    satisfied that in failing to apply MO there has been a  material  error
    of law.

10. As MO makes clear it is important to assess when  the  respondent  left
    Eritrea and if it was after August 2008.  The respondent claims to have
    left on 21  August  2009  but  this  claim  needs  to  be  specifically
    addressed in light of the 2009 Tribunal findings and all the up to date
    evidence.

Ground 3 - Article 8

11. Mr Clarke focused his submissions on the failure on  the  part  of  the
    judge to direct himself to the very  strong  policy  contained  in  the
    relevant legislation that those with a history  of  criminal  offending
    should be deported unless there are compelling reasons, which  must  be
    exceptional -  see  McLarty  (Deportation  -  proportionality  balance)
    [2014] UKUT 00315 (IAC).  The judge clearly took into account  the  low
    level nature of the respondent's single offence, which  resulted  in  a
    sentence of eight months and regarded the case  to  be  exceptional  in
    many respects.  It was entirely open to the judge to  make  the  latter
    finding for the reasons he has provided.  Indeed it is difficult to see
    how any judge could have come to any  other  conclusion  regarding  the
    exceptionality of the family situation.  The respondent's marriage is a
    'pre-flight' relationship that was long established in  Eritrea.   They
    were reunited in the UK and have lived together  since  December  2011.
    They have three children.  The respondent's spouse  is  a  refugee  and
    there are  therefore  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  returning  to
    Eritrea.

12. Mr Clarke was correct to  submit  that  the  judge  has  not  expressly
    directed  himself  to  the  importance  of  the  policy  of   deporting
    criminals.   However  the  judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the   SSHD's
    objectives in pursuing deportation and expressly referred  to  this  at
    paragraph 43.  This is not a case in which the public interest fell out
    of account when the judge conducted the balancing exercise.   Not  only
    did the judge refer to the SSHD's objectives (which are  well  known  -
    there is a strong policy to deport those with criminal records) but  he
    also referred to the nature of the respondent's offending.   The  judge
    was factually correct  in  noting  that  an  eight  month  sentence  of
    imprisonment meant that this was not an 'automatic'  deportation  case.
    When his reasoning is read as a whole I am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    properly directed himself to the importance of the public interest.  At
    the beginning of  his  assessment  he  addressed  the  key  issue:  the
    presence of exceptional features to the case.  In order for the  public
    interest to be outweighed in  a  case  of  this  sort,  there  must  be
    exceptional circumstances.  That is also how he ended  his  assessment:
    he concluded that the public interest was outweighed by the exceptional
    circumstances of the case.

Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

13. By paragraph 7.2 of the relevant practice statement for appeals  on  or
    after 25 September 2012, I must be satisfied that:

         "the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule  2  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

14. I am satisfied that findings in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention
    claim need to be entirely remade using the 2009 decision as a  starting
    point, and this is most appropriately done in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In all the circumstances I am satisfied that it would be  proportionate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material  error  of  law  regarding  the  assessment  of  the   Refugee
    Convention claim and I set this part of the decision aside.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.

17. The claim arising under the Refugee Convention and  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

    (1)    The hearing shall be listed on the first available  date  before
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor   House.    Tigrinya
         interpreter.  TE 2.5 hours

    (2)    The respondent shall file and serve a comprehensive indexed  and
         paginated bundle containing all evidence he  wishes  to  rely  upon
         together  with  a  skeleton  argument  cross-referencing  to   that
         evidence 28 days before the hearing.

    (3)    The SSHD shall file and serve a summary of her updated  position
         in light of that evidence 14 days before the hearing.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
23 October 2015

