
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00111/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 1 August 2019                              |On 21 August 2019            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Bruno Miguel Da Silva Soares Dos Santos
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mumin, Counsel, instructed by of UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 30 April  2019  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Herwald which allowed the appeal of Mr  Dos  Santos
    against a decision dated 11 February 2019 to deport him.  The  decision
    to deport Mr Dos Santos was made under Regulation 27 of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the 2016 Regulations).

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the respondent and to Mr Dos Santos  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a national of Portugal, born on 7 May 1993.   He  came
    to the UK in 1993 when just a few months old.

 4. The appellant first came to the attention of the authorities in the  UK
    on 31 January 2006, at the age of 12 years' old, when he was  cautioned
    for being carried in a motor vehicle taken without consent.

 5. Between 25 June 2007 and 4 March 2016 the appellant amassed a total  of
    21  convictions  for  50  offences  and  received  various   sentences,
    including custodial sentences. Those offences included:

           - nine offences of theft between 2007 and 2015

           - two public order offences between 2010 and 2012

           - twenty-three offences relating  to  the  police/courts/prisons
             between 2007 and 2015

           - five drug offences between 2008 and 2016

           - three fire arms/shot gun/offensive  weapons  offences  between
             2011 and 2016

           - seven miscellaneous offences between 2008 and 2015

           - one nonrecordable offence in 2012

 6. On 25 June 2012  the  appellant  was  sent  a  warning  letter  by  the
    respondent concerning his criminal activity.  As  indicated  above,  he
    continued to offend.

 7. On  4  March  2016  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    conspiring/supplying a class A controlled drug - Heroin and Cocaine and
    two counts of possessing an offensive weapon in a public place.  He was
    sentenced to a total of seven years' imprisonment.

 8. The respondent then commenced deportation action against the appellant.
    This led to a decision to make a deportation order  dated  11  February
    2019. The appellant appealed against the decision to make a deportation
    order. His appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal in Manchester  on
    16 April 2019.

The Law

 9. Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations states:

         Decisions taken on grounds of public policy,  public  security  and
         public health

         27.- (1) In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has a right of permanent residence  under  regulation
                  15 and who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                  continuous period of at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the
                  relevant decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989.

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                  even in the absence of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy and public security  in  relation  to  a  person
             ("P") who is resident in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision
             maker must take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,
             state of health, family  and  economic  situation  of  P,  P's
             length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.

             ...

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

10. The CJEU has indicated in B v Land of Baden-Wurttemberg  and  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Franco Vomero (C-316/16 andC-424/16)
    17 April 2018 that  in  order  to  obtain  the  "imperative"  level  of
    protection provided for in Regulation 27(4), the EEA national must show
    that he qualifies for permanent residence, that  is,  can  show  .  The
    Court set out in paragraph 60:

         "60. A Union citizen who has  not  acquired  the  right  to  reside
         permanently in the host Member State because he had  not  satisfied
         those conditions and who cannot, therefore, rely on  the  level  of
         protection  against  expulsion  guaranteed  by  Article  28(2)   of
         Directive  2004/38  cannot,  a  fortiori,  enjoy  the  considerably
         enhanced level of protection  against  expulsion  provided  for  in
         Article 28(3)(a) of that directive."

11. Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations sets out  how  an  individual  can
    acquire permanent residence, providing that:

         15.- (1) The following persons acquire the right to reside  in  the
             United Kingdom permanently-

               a) EEA national who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;

12. Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations is  also  relevant  as  it  sets  out
    factors to be taken into account when considering deportation. Schedule
    1 provides:

             ...

             2.   An EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national
             having extensive familial and societal links with  persons  of
             the  same  nationality  or  language  does   not   amount   to
             integration in the United Kingdom;  a  significant  degree  of
             wider cultural and societal integration must be present before
             a person may be regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

             3.   Where an EEA national or the  family  member  of  an  EEA
             national has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

             4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an
             EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national  within
             the United Kingdom  if  the  alleged  integrating  links  were
             formed at or around the same time as-

                  (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

                  (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests
                  of society;

                  (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA  national
                  was in custody.

             5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or
             the family member of an EEA national who is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

13. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant maintained  that  he  had
    obtained permanent residence and was integrated, having been in the  UK
    for ten years prior to the deportation decision and that prison had not
    acted to interrupt his integration. He was therefore  entitled  to  the
    "imperative" level of protection from expulsion.

14. The First-tier Tribunal addressed this issue in paragraphs 13 to 22  of
    the decision. In  paragraphs  16  and  17,  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence concerning the appellant's education.  He  had  been  expelled
    from school after fighting and had gone to a school for  children  with
    behavioural difficulties. He had not obtained  any  qualifications  and
    appeared to have  "dropped  out".  Nevertheless,  having  considered  a
    letter from a primary school, a letter from the police referring  to  a
    meeting at a secondary school and a letter from a college,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant had been educated in the  UK
    "albeit relatively unsuccessfully."

15. In paragraph 18, the judge accepted that the appellant had been in  the
    UK from the age of 3 months old onwards.  He  identified  that  if  the
    appellant sought to rely on his years in education  to  show  permanent
    residence he would need to show that he had held comprehensive sickness
    insurance. This requirement is set out in Regulation  4(d)(ii)  of  the
    EEA Regulations. The First-tier Tribunal found in paragraph 18  of  the
    decision that "there is no evidence of this."

16. In paragraph 19, the First-tier Tribunal found:

         "There is no evidence since attaining adulthood that the  Appellant
         has produced, to show  that  he  was  ever  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom. There was no evidence that he has ever worked, for he  has
         conceded that he has not. He said  he  had  claimed  benefits,  but
         there is no evidence of that."

17. The First-tier Tribunal concluded in paragraph 20 of the decision  that
    the appellant could not show that he had obtained permanent residence:

         "There is insufficient evidence to show that he has  been  residing
         in the UK or working continuously for five years in accordance with
         the 2016 Regulations."

18. In paragraph 21, the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant's  mother  had  worked
    for five years in accordance with the EEA  Regulations.   That  was  so
    where she had stated at the hearing that she had worked  "for  a  brief
    period" after coming to the UK, stopped working when the appellant  was
    approximately 4 years' old and had not worked again until 2017.

19. In paragraphs 22 and 23, the First-tier Tribunal went on to  find  that
    even though he had not  acquired  permanent  residence,  the  appellant
    qualified for the "imperative" level of protection.

20. The First-tier Tribunal went on to consider the provisions of  Schedule
    1 of the EEA Regulations. In paragraph  26  he  found  the  appellant's
    offending clearly had a severe and  negative  impact  on  society.  The
    sentencing judge had found that the appellant had played a  significant
    role in the drugs offences and had given no thought to the  welfare  of
    others. In paragraph 27 the First-tier Tribunal noted  that  the  index
    offence had involved firearms  and  that  the  appellant  had  previous
    convictions concerning firearms.

21. In paragraph 32, the First-tier Tribunal found that there were  serious
    grounds  of  public  policy  and  public  security  for  expelling  the
    appellant.

22. Also in paragraph 32, the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  Offender
    Management Assessment at Annex J of the respondent's bundle was adverse
    to the appellant, showing, for example, that he had lied about  putting
    his criminal past behind him by moving away from the  family  home.  In
    paragraphs 33 and 34, the First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant
    "has shown little by way  of  remorse".  In  paragraph  36,  the  judge
    expressed concern that whilst awaiting sentencing for the index offence
    the appellant had continued to deny being involved, maintaining that he
    was in the wrong place at the wrong time.  He  had  also  denied  other
    offences from 2013.

23. The First-tier Tribunal concluded in paragraph 37:

         "There is nothing in the evidence I heard, oral or written,  before
         me today, to suggest that any of this is incorrect. The  Appellant,
         it seems to me, may well continue to be a  danger  to  society.  He
         prays in aid today the effect his girlfriend has on him. But he has
         known her for eleven years. They have, she said, been partners  for
         eleven years, and yet during that period, she has  been  unable  to
         exert any  pressure  on  him  to  desist  from  offending,  and  in
         particular, to desist from very serious offending."

24. In paragraph 38 the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant  had
    "an  antisocial   attitude   towards   the   public   and   community".
    Notwithstanding  these  highly  adverse  findings  concerning  remorse,
    reoffending, and threat posed by the appellant, the Tribunal  concluded
    in paragraph 38 that the "imperative" level of protection  set  such  a
    high threshold for justification for expulsion that  it  could  not  be
    said that the appellant represented that "imperative" threat and  that,
    as a result, the appeal had to be allowed.

Decision on Error of Law

25. The finding that the appellant  could  benefit  from  the  "imperative"
    level of protection is wrong in law.  As  shown  by  the  extract  from
    Vomero set out above, in order to qualify for the 10 year  "imperative"
    level of protection, the appellant had to show  that  he  had  acquired
    permanent residence. The judge had already  provided  rational  reasons
    for concluding in paragraph 20 that this  appellant  had  not  acquired
    permanent residence.

26. The basis on which the appeal was allowed, the appellant qualifying for
    "imperative"  level  protection,   therefore   discloses   a   material
    misdirection of law. This error of law is sufficiently fundamental  for
    the decision to be set aside to be re-made.

27. The presumption in paragraph 7 of Part  3  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012 is that any  re-making  will
    take  place  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  was  nothing  before  me
    displacing that presumption and I proceeded  to  re-make  the  decision
    after hearing submissions from the advocates.

28. It is of note that there was no cross-appeal or Rule 24  response  from
    the appellant. Following the guidance provided in the reported case  of
    Smith (appealable decisions; PTA requirements; anonymity)  [2019]  UKUT
    00216 (IAC), there is therefore no challenge to  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that are unaffected by the error of  law  and  they
    are preserved.

29. The First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 20 that  the  appellant  has
    not acquired permanent residence. He is  therefore  unable  to  benefit
    from either the "imperative" or "serious"  levels  of  protection  from
    expulsion.

30. There is also no challenge to the finding in paragraph  32  that  there
    are  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public  security   for
    expelling" the appellant. The findings in paragraphs 37 as to his being
    a danger to society and in paragraph 38 that his history "indicates  an
    antisocial attitude towards the public and community" also stand.

31. It follows, where the appellant cannot benefit even from  the  "medium"
    level of protection, that he must be  found  to  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  a   fundamental
    interest of society. It is impossible to argue otherwise  in  light  of
    his very serious criminal history and failure to show  any  substantive
    acceptance of responsibility or remorse for  his  offences.  The  OASys
    report identifies him as a prolific offender, as having  offended  with
    impunity with a "barely acceptable response" to periods of supervision.
    He had demonstrated "general rule breaking behaviour and  an  inability
    to learn from his mistakes". As above, he continued to deny  the  index
    offence (and others) even after conviction. He has been found to show a
    medium risk of causing serious harm to the public.

32. Where that is so, consideration must be given to the proportionality of
    his deportation.

33. Regulation 27(6) requires consideration of factors  such  as  the  age,
    state of health, family and economic situation of  the  appellant,  his
    length of residence in the UK, his social and cultural integration  and
    the extent his links with Portugal.

34. The high point of the appellant's case is his long residence in the UK,
    having come at the age of 3 months, now being 26 years' old. His length
    of residence in the UK contrasts with his very  limited  experience  of
    Portugal. The appellant's statement indicated that he had  visited  the
    country once, in 2012, since coming to the UK. Also, his immediate  and
    extended family are all in the UK and he has a partner of long-standing
    here. His mother, siblings,  partner  and  others  provided  statements
    setting out that they very much want him to stay in the UK, that he was
    remorseful and that he had no  links  with  Portugal.  The  appellant's
    statement was to the same effect.

35. Against those matters, it is not my view  that  the  appellant  can  be
    found to be socially and culturally integrated in the UK.  Paragraph  2
    of Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations sets out that for  the  appellant
    to be regarded as integrated there must be  a  "significant  degree  of
    wider, cultural and societal integration" beyond his Portuguese family.
    Nothing here shows that kind of integration.  As above, from the age of
    14 onwards this appellant has been a prolific offender. He was expelled
    from school. He has never worked. The relationship with his  girlfriend
    had no effect on his offending and, as became apparent  at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing, the partner did not even know of the  extent  of
    his criminal history; see paragraph 27. It is not  my  conclusion  that
    the appellant can be regarded as having formed integrative links in the
    UK in any way capable of weighing against deportation in light  of  the
    threat that he poses.

36. Further, paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 provides that little weight is to be
    attached to any integration  if  the  alleged  integrating  links  were
    formed at the same time as the commission of a criminal offence  or  an
    act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests  of  society  or  the
    person was in custody.  The appellant has  been  committing  ever  more
    serious offences since the age of 14. I am entirely satisfied that this
    leads to little weight being attached to any  of  his  claims  to  have
    formed integrating links in the UK.

37. Also, paragraph 3 of Schedule 1  indicates  that  where  someone  is  a
    persistent offender, "the longer the sentence, or the more numerous the
    convictions, the greater the likelihood that the individual's continued
    presence in the  United  Kingdom  represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society". This appellant is a prolific offender who has received a very
    serious sentence of 7 years'  imprisonment.  This  factor  weighs  very
    heavily indeed in favour of expulsion.

38. With regard to paragraph 5 of  Schedule  1,  as  discussed  above,  the
    appellant has asserted but not shown in any active or  substantive  way
    that he has reformed or rehabilitated.  He  denied  the  index  offence
    even after conviction. His witness statement  refers  to  a  "lapse  in
    judgement" regarding the index offence. That description  is  not  born
    out by the facts. It ignores his very long history of  offending,  some
    serious. In addition, the nature of the index offence was that he and a
    group of other young men hired a car to drive to a house that was being
    used as a base to supply Class A drugs. When it was raided, the  police
    found a cutting  room,  heroin,  cocaine,  phenacetin,  cash  and  drug
    paraphernalia throughout the house. The car contained  a  combat  knife
    and a baseball bat, amongst other items. It is inappropriate  to  refer
    to participating in a serious Class A drugs operation of that nature as
    a "lapse in judgement". It was  a  substantial  undertaking  to  become
    involved in such serious and anti-social crimes. The use of the  phrase
    suggests that the appellant still fails to appreciate  the  seriousness
    of his offence or take proper responsibility for it.

39. The appellant is now aged 26. He is healthy. It is not disputed that he
    speaks Portuguese. It was not suggested that his economic situation  in
    Portugal would be significantly different from  the  UK  where  he  has
    always been on benefits. His criminal offending, his inability to  show
    proper remorse, failure to  rehabilitate  and  absence  of  integrative
    links in the UK beyond his family circle outweigh by  some  margin  the
    fact of his knowing little about Portugal,  being  separated  from  his
    family and leaving the country in which he has grown up.

40. For all of these reasons I conclude that it is  proportionate  for  the
    appellant to be deported and find that  the  respondent's  decision  to
    deport the appellant was made correctly.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade.

The appeal against deportation under the EEA Regulations 2016 is refused.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 15 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

