
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00226/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |     Determination         |
|                                           |Promulgated                |
|On 6 January 2015                          |     On 12 January 2015    |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR MOHAMMED MUSHTAQ KHAN
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr T Melvin a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: the respondent attended but was not legally
represented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan who  was
      born on 6 August 1955 ("the claimant"). The  Secretary  of  State  has
      been given permission to appeal the determination  of  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Freestone ("the FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's appeal against
      the Secretary of State's  decision  of  28  January  2014  to  make  a
      deportation order against him under the provisions of the  UK  Borders
      Act 2007 on the basis that she was required to do so by section 32 (5)
      of that Act because he was a foreign national who had  been  convicted
      in the UK of an offence and sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
      at least 12 months and he did not fall within one  of  the  exceptions
      set out in section 33.


   2. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard his appeal on 4 August  2014.
      The Secretary of State was legally represented but  the  claimant  was
      not. The FTTJ heard oral evidence from the claimant in English.


   3. The claimant argued that to remove him from the UK  would  breach  his
      Article 8 human rights. The FTTJ found that  the  claimant  could  not
      meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 or  399A  of  the  Immigration
      Rules  because  he  had  been  sentenced  to  more  than  four   years
      imprisonment.  In  these  circumstances   the   public   interest   in
      deportation would only be outweighed by other factors where there were
      very compelling circumstances. The claimant had committed a number  of
      offences. The index offence was very serious and he had been sentenced
      to 7 years imprisonment.


   4. The FTTJ referred to section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 which came into effect for all  appeals  heard  on  or
      after 28 July 2014. She heard the appeal on 4 August 2014.  She  found
      that the claimant had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
      life and there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
      into Pakistan. He was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
      his adult sons notwithstanding a lack of contact for several years. He
      had medical problems. The FTTJ  found  that  these  factors  were  not
      enough to satisfy the requirements of section 117C(6)  but  there  was
      one exceptional factor  which  made  the  case  very  exceptional  and
      amounted to very compelling circumstances.  This  was  the  claimant's
      length of residence in the UK. He came here when he  was  12  and  had
      been here for 47 years. He was  now  aged  59.  He  had  been  granted
      indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  1989.  Even  if  his   periods   of
      imprisonment were disregarded he had 37 years lawful residence  during
      which he had become fully integrated in the culture  and  language  of
      the UK. It was accepted that although he had visited Pakistan  he  did
      not have any ties there particularly because his first visit  was  not
      until 22 years after his arrival in the UK.


   5. The FTTJ concluded that this was one of the very rare cases where  the
      very compelling circumstances of the claimant's  length  of  residence
      outweighed the very significant weight to be attached  to  the  public
      interest in deportation. She allowed the appeal under the  Immigration
      Rules and on human rights grounds.


   6. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. The grounds submit that the FTTJ erred in law in reaching  the
      conclusion  that  the  claimant's  circumstances,  namely   his   long
      residence, outweighed the pressing public interest in  deporting  him.
      Paragraph  117C(6)  applied   unless   they   were   very   compelling
      circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and  2.
      The exception in paragraph 117C(4) where a foreign criminal  had  been
      lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life could not  apply  and
      the appellant was required  to  demonstrate  compelling  circumstances
      over and above this exception. The FTTJ's finding failed to pay proper
      regard to paragraph 117C(6). Applying these provisions there were  not
      any compelling or exceptional circumstances that  could  outweigh  the
      very pressing public interest in deporting the claimant.


   7. I have been provided with written submissions  from  Mr  Melvin  which
      include an application to amend the grounds of  appeal  by  adding  an
      additional ground which argues that the FTTJ  also  erred  in  law  by
      failing to apply the amended provisions of the Immigration Rules which
      came into effect on 28 July 2014, in particular  paragraph  399A  (a),
      (b) and (c) or the fact that the amended Immigration Rules should have
      been treated as a complete code in considering  the  Article  8  human
      rights grounds. I was also provided with copies of YM (Uganda) v  SSHD
      [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 and SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.


   8. Mr Melvin submitted that it was not clear whether the FTTJ had applied
      the provisions of the Immigration Rules in force before 28  July  2014
      or those which came into force on that date. YM Uganda made  it  clear
      that at a hearing after that date  the  new  Rules  should  have  been
      applied. It was not clear which set of  Rules  the  FTTJ  had  applied
      although it looked as if she applied the old Rules. It was an error of
      law not to apply the new Rules and to make it clear that this had been
      done.


   9. Mr Melvin went on to  argue  that  in  effect  the  FTTJ  treated  the
      claimant's length of residence as a very compelling circumstance. This
      was not enough; more was needed. Length  of  residence  was  a  factor
      which was already covered. The FTTJ also allowed the appeal on Article
      8 human rights  grounds  apparently  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Firstly, it was an error of law to do so because the Article  8  tests
      under the Rules were a complete code. Secondly, even if she  had  been
      entitled to consider Article 8 grounds outside the Rules there was  no
      indication that she had followed Razgar principles.


  10. In reply to my question, Mr Melvin accepted that the  facts  found  by
      the FTTJ were not in dispute as opposed to the conclusions drawn  from
      those facts. I was asked to find that there were errors of law, to set
      aside the  decision,  and  to  remake  it  without  the  need  for  an
      adjournment or further evidence.


  11. I explained to the claimant the purpose of the hearing, what was being
      alleged as errors of law and the likely consequences if I  found  that
      there were errors and set aside the decision. An interpreter had  been
      provided but was not needed as it was clear that  the  claimant  spoke
      good English. The claimant was brought to the hearing from immigration
      detention accompanied by three officers. He was not restrained in  any
      way and sat in the body of the  court,  although  a  secure  dock  was
      available. His two sons attended the hearing.


  12. The claimant said that he had been in the UK since he was aged  11  �.
      He would be 60 years of  age  on  6  August  2015.  He  first  visited
      Pakistan when he was 35. He had made further visits  since  then.  The
      only people he knew were in the UK. Originally he came from  somewhere
      in Kashmir. He had two sons by his wife from whom he was divorced.  He
      had no other family. In reply to my question he said  that  there  had
      been no change in his circumstances since the evidence he gave to  the
      FTTJ. If I set aside the decision  he  would  not  wish  to  give  any
      further  evidence.  He  had  been   in   immigration   detention   for
      approximately 11 months and had never made any application  for  bail.
      One of his sons had attended the hearing before the FTTJ  but  because
      of a mix-up at the court never made it into the hearing room.


  13. I reserved my determination.


  14. In paragraphs 15 of YM Uganda Aikens LJ helpfully set out the  current
      and former provisions of the Immigration Rules;
         "The 2012 Rules were modified by Statement of Changes to the
         Immigration Rules of 10 July 2014 (HC 532) which were laid before
         Parliament on 10 July 2014. I will call these the 2014 Rules. I
         have set out below the relevant 2012 Rules, as amended by the 2014
         Rules. I have put the new 2014 provisions in square brackets and I
         have crossed through the provisions of the 2012 Rules which are
         deleted by the 2014 Rules, in the hope that both the 2012 Rules and
         the 2014 Rules modifications can be plainly seen:
         A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at [28 July 2014] are met,
         regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.'
         ...
         397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention. Where
         deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
         deportation is outweighed.
         [A.398. These rules apply where:
         (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
         deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
         him to be revoked.]
         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is
         conducive to the public good [and in the public interest] because
         they have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years; (b)
         the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good [and in the public interest] because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
         the public good [and in the public interest] because, in the view
         of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm
         or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard
         for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
         not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors [the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.]
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if - (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the
         UK and (i) the child is a British citizen; or (ii) the child has
         lived in the UK continuously for at least the seven years
         immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision; and in
         either case (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
         leave the UK [it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
         country to which the person is to be deported]; and (b) there is no
         other family member who is able to care for the child in the UK [it
         would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
         person who is to be deported]; or (b) the person has a genuine and
         subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a
         British citizen, [or] settled in the UK, or in the UK with refugee
         leave or humanitarian protection, and (i) the person has lived in
         the UK with valid leave continuously for at least the 15 years
         immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) and (ii) there are
         insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK [(i) the relationship was formed at a
         time when the person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their
         immigration status was not precarious; and (ii) it would be unduly
         harsh for that partner to live in the country to which the person
         is to be deported because of compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and (iii)
         it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK
         without the person who is to be deported].
         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if - (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least
         20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties
         (including social, cultural or family ) with the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or (b) the person
         is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half of his life
         living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the date of the
         immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and
         he has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the
         country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
         [(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
         his life; and (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the
         UK; and (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his
         integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
         deported].
         399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be
         granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be
         given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems
         appropriate. Where a person who has previously been granted a
         period of leave under paragraph 399B would not fall for refusal
         under paragraph 322(1C), indefinite leave to remain may be granted.
         [where an Article 8 claim from a foreign criminal is successful:
         (a) in the case of a person who is in the UK unlawfully or whose
         leave to enter or remain has been cancelled by a deportation order,
         limited leave may be granted for periods not exceeding 30 months
         and subject to such conditions as the Secretary of state considers
         appropriate;
         .......]
         [399C. Where a foreign criminal who has previously been granted a
         period of limited leave under this Part applies for further limited
         leave or indefinite leave to remain his deportation remains
         conducive to the public good and in the public interest
         notwithstanding the previous grant of leave.]
         [339D. Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters the
         United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances]."

  15. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 set out  where  the  public
      interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D as follows;


         "117A Application of this Part
         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.
         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals
         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.
         (4) Exception 1 applies where-
         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
         C's life,
         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
         and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


         117D Interpretation of this Part
         (1) In this Part-
         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;
         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
         seven years or more;
         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
         Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
         (a) who is not a British citizen,
         (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
         (c) who-
         (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
         months,
         (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
         or
         (iii) is a persistent offender.
         (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject  to  an
         order under-
         (a) section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
         (insanity etc),
         (b) section 57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
         (insanity etc), or
         (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order  1986
         (insanity etc),
         has not been convicted of an offence.
         (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced  to
         a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
         (a) do not include a person who has received a  suspended  sentence
         (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or  any  part
         of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
         (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to a  period  of
         imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
         sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to  that
         length of time;
         (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention, or  ordered  or
         directed to be detained, in an  institution  other  than  a  prison
         (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution  for  young
         offenders) for that length of time; and
         (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention,
         or ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
         provided that it may last for at least that length of time.
         (5) If any question arises for the purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it."


  16. I will adopt the description of the two sets of Rules in YM Uganda and
      refer to them as the 2012 Rules and the 2014 Rules. I find that it  is
      not clear which set of Rules the FTTJ applied. There is  reference  to
      paragraphs 399 and 399A in paragraph 27 but they are not  set  out  in
      full. However, I find that the provisions of  paragraphs  117A,  117B,
      117C and 117D of the Immigration Act 2014 were designed to fit in with
      and reflect the provisions of the 2014 Rules. The  FTTJ  set  out  the
      provisions of Section 117C in paragraph 30. I find that  if  the  FTTJ
      correctly applied the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 then  she
      correctly applied the provisions of the 2014 Rules.  If  there  is  an
      error of law in the application of the Immigration Act 2014 then there
      is also an error in the application of  the  provisions  of  the  2014
      Rules. In substance, although I allow the  application  to  amend  the
      grounds of appeal, the amendment adds nothing material to the original
      grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


  17. I find  that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  in  her  application  of  the
      Immigration Act 2014 and the 2014 Rules.  The  provisions  of  section
      117C are accurately set out in paragraph 30. However  section  117C(6)
      has not been correctly applied. The fact that the  claimant  had  been
      lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life was a factor properly
      taken into account under Exception 1. What was needed if the  claimant
      was to succeed were very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
      those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 (my emphasis). The FTTJ  treated
      the claimant's length of residence in the UK as an  additional  factor
      amounting to very compelling circumstances which made his case a  very
      exceptional one. This was, in effect, double counting. It had  already
      been taken into account, or should have been.  The  claimant  had  not
      established  very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
      described in Exceptions 1 and 2 and the FTTJ erred in law  in  finding
      that he had. I find that this is a material error of  law  and  I  set
      aside the decision.


  18. It appears from the fact that the FTTJ allowed the appeal  both  under
      the Immigration Rules and, separately, on human  rights  grounds  that
      she considered the Article 8 grounds outside  the  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Act 2014 and the 2014 Rules. In doing so she erred in  law
      because the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 and the 2014  Rules
      are a complete code.

  19. Both sides agree that in these circumstances  there  is  no  need  for
      further evidence or an adjournment. Both have said all that they  wish
      to say.


  20. There is no dispute as to the FTTJ's findings of fact, which I  adopt.
      I do  not  follow  the  conclusions  drawn  from  those  findings.  In
      paragraph 29 it is said that the claimant has committed  a  number  of
      offences. That is correct, but needs to be read  in  conjunction  with
      paragraphs 11 to 17. The claimant has been a persistent offender for a
      variety of offences some  of  them  serious  for  the  lengthy  period
      between  1977  and  2010.  The  offences  included  burglary,   theft,
      endeavouring  to  obtain  money  or  goods  by  a  forged  instrument,
      obtaining property by deception, taking  a  vehicle  without  consent,
      driving whilst disqualified, breach of  a  suspended  sentence,  using
      documents with intent to deceive, forgery, drunk driving and, finally,
      producing a Class B controlled drug. For the last and index offence he
      was sentenced to 7 years imprisonment. The judge's sentencing  remarks
      set out in paragraph 16 are  relevant  including  the  fact  that  the
      claimant, unlike most of his co-defendants, did not plead  guilty  and
      ran what the judge described as a "hopeless and  last-ditch"  defence.
      The enterprise in which he was involved was described  as  a  "massive
      episode of cultivating cannabis".  At  that  stage  the  claimant  was
      assessed as posing a medium risk of  reoffending.  In  one  sense  the
      claimant is socially and culturally integrated into the UK. In another
      sense he is not because over a long period he  has  neither  respected
      nor observed the laws of this country. The Probation Officer  observed
      that he expressed remorse for his offending but this  appeared  to  be
      predominantly associated with the consequences for himself rather than
      his victims.


  21. It is accepted that the  claimant  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with his sons despite  a  lack  of  contact  for  several
      years. However, they are now aged about 30 and 32 and live with  their
      mother. They do not live with the claimant. There is  no  evidence  of
      any relationship beyond the normal emotional ties existing  between  a
      parent and adult children.  There  is  no  indication  that  they  are
      financially dependent on  the  claimant  and  the  claimant  does  not
      suggest that he is in a relationship with anyone else.


  22. The claimant suffers from hypertension and hepatitis B both  of  which
      can be treated in Pakistan. Whilst he did not  visit  Pakistan  for  a
      long time after he came to this country he visited on  at  least  five
      occasions between 2003 and 2008. At one  stage  he  claimed  that  his
      family owned a business in Pakistan. He is clearly an intelligent  and
      resourceful man.


  23. I find that the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
      interest and the claimant is a  foreign  criminal.  He  has  committed
      serious offences, particularly the last index offence and has  been  a
      persistent offender over a long period  which  reinforces  the  public
      interest. He was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  more  than
      four years. Exception 1 does not apply because,  whilst  he  has  been
      lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life  and  is
      socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom  there  would
      not be very significant obstacles to his integration into the  country
      to which it is proposed he be deported. In this respect I do not reach
      the same conclusion as the FTTJ. The claimant is  an  intelligent  and
      resourceful man whose inconsistent evidence as to the  extent  of  his
      contacts and connections in Pakistan together with the  fact  that  he
      has made at least five visits to that country  does  not  persuade  me
      that he has established that there are very significant  obstacles  to
      his integration. Exception 2 does not apply because the claimant  does
      not have a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
      partner, or a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
      qualifying child. He has not shown that the effect of his  deportation
      on his sons would be unduly harsh.


  24. I find that the claimant cannot bring himself within either  Exception
      1 or 2. Even if he  had  been  able  to  show  that  there  were  very
      significant obstacles to his reintegration into Pakistan which brought
      him within Exception 1 he has not  established  that  there  are  very
      compelling circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions
      1 and 2.


  25. I find that in the circumstances of this case the  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Act 2014 and the 2014 Rules provide  a  complete  code  by
      which to judge the claim on Article 8 human rights grounds.  There  is
      no need to consider the claim outside these provisions.  However,  had
      it been necessary to do so, I would have reached the same conclusion.


  26. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  27. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I remake  the  decision  and
      dismiss the claimant's appeal.














      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 7
      January 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

