
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00405/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates               |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18th November 2013                         |On 28th November 2013        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ARTURS VISOCKIS
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Ms White instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of  First-tier
        Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish and  Mr  HG
        Jones  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the  Panel")   who   in   a
        determination promulgated on 26th June 2013 allowed  Mr  Visockis's
        appeal against the decision to deport him from the United  Kingdom,
        made pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European
        Economic Area) Regulations.



Background


     2. Mr Visockis is a citizen of Latvia born on  31  December  1983.  He
        arrived in the United Kingdom on 9th December 2009 with four of his
        five children in exercise of  his  right  of  free  movement  under
        European law.


     3. On 17th February 2011 he was convicted at Derby  Magistrates  Court
        of shoplifting for which he received  a  twelve  month  conditional
        discharge plus costs followed by four  convictions  for  theft  and
        breach of a conditional discharge between 17th  February  2011  and
        14th May 2012.


     4. Mr Visockis has been made the subject of the decision to deport him
        from the United Kingdom as a result of a conviction on  20th  April
        2012 at Derby  Crown  Court  of  escape  from  lawful  custody  and
        burglary for which he was sentenced, on 14th May  2012,  to  thirty
        seven months imprisonment in total.


     5. The Panel noted that Mr Visockis was  in  a  relationship  akin  to
        marriage which has lasted for some fourteen years with  the  mother
        of their five children, four of whom were born  in  Latvia  between
        25th February 2001 and 18th December 2010 and the youngest who  was
        born in the United Kingdom. Mr Visockis's partner  joined  him  and
        the children in the UK in March 2010.


     6. Mr Visockis also has other members of his own family in the  United
        Kingdom such as his parents and an uncle.


     7. The Panel considered the  sentencing  remarks  and  a  NOMS  Report
        prepared following a request from UKBA on 30th  October  2012.  The
        author of the report assesses the risk of  serious  harm  as  being
        'medium' on the basis that due to the nature of the  offence  there
        is the possibility for Mr Visockis to cause physical and  emotional
        harm to members of the public based upon the fact it was not  clear
        who caused harm to the victim of the burglary.


     8. In relation to the likelihood of reconviction it is noted  that  Mr
        Visockis has  mainly  been  convicted  of  acquisition  crimes  for
        financial gain which he claims  has  been  to  support  his  family
        although it is also noted that concerns exist  regarding  the  fact
        that the offences were committed  to  fund  his  drug  and  alcohol
        usage.  Mr Visockis is said  to  have  admitted  that  he  injected
        heroin in the past and that since remand in  custody  he  had  been
        prescribed methadone although did not engage with the Recovery Team
        in custody as he did not feel that his drug use was an issue.


     9. The OASys assessment, referred to in the NOMS Report, was completed
        on  the  18th  December  2011  which  assessed  the  likelihood  of
        reconviction as 'medium' and risk of serious harm as 'medium'.   As
        a result of the nature of the offence  Mr  Visockis  will  also  be
        subject to Multiagency Public Protection  Arrangements  (MAPPA)  on
        release.


    10. The  Panel  set  out  their  findings  from  paragraph  15  of  the
        determination. In relation to the risk of reoffending they note  Mr
        Visockis' offending history and the reasons for the same but accept
        his evidence that he has been drug-free for the past fifteen months
        [20].  As  a  consequence  the  Panel  find  that  given  his  drug
        dependency was so substantially the cause of the  index  offensive,
        the removal of that dependency has  greatly  reduced  the  risk  of
        reoffending [20]. They find as a  consequence  that  a  substantial
        part of the public policy  or  public  security  consideration  for
        removal is also greatly reduced [20].



Discussion



    11. Mr Visockis' immigration history  and  family  composition  is  not
        disputed.  He came to the United Kingdom to exercise treaty  rights
        of free movement as an EEA national but it is accepted he  has  not
        acquired a right of permanent residence in the United  Kingdom  and
        so it is the lower test namely whether his removal is justified  on
        grounds of public policy, public security, or public health,  which
        is applicable to this appeal.


    12. At the outset of the hearing, we provided a preliminary  indication
        of the concerns we have regarding the determination, based upon the
        Secretary of State's grounds,  and  invited  submissions  from  the
        advocates.  Our first concern was that the use of the term "greatly
        reduced" in paragraph 20 may give rise to concern based  upon  lack
        of clarity/reasoning regarding the question  "from  what  to  what"
        regarding the level of risk.  This is  particularly  important  for
        one of the factors that has to  be  proved  is  that  Mr  Visockis'
        personal conduct represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
        serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
        society - Regulation 21 (5) (c).


    13. Another concern we  had  is  that  the  finding  by  the  Panel  in
        paragraph 21 that the Secretary of State accepted that Mr  Visockis
        has family life with his parents and a named uncle  in  the  United
        Kingdom is factually incorrect, if this is a  reference  to  family
        life recognised by Article 8 ECHR.  In paragraph 39 of the  reasons
        for refusal letter such family life was rejected.


    14. We are also concerned that the  proportionality  exercise  has  not
        been properly conducted as  it  should  be  an  assessment  of  the
        proportionality of the decision in relation to  the  free  movement
        provisions of EU law, not just Article 8 ECHR, and that  inadequate
        reasons have been given  for  why  Mr  Visockis'  partner  and  the
        children cannot return to Latvia with him as they are  all  Latvian
        citizens who have grown up in that country.


    15. Having heard submissions in response we  retired  to  consider  the
        matter further and upon returning to court  advised  the  advocates
        and Mr Visockis that our primary finding is that the  Secretary  of
        State has not proved that the Panel  have  made  a  legal  error(s)
        material to the decision to allow  the  appeal.  We  now  give  our
        reasons.


    16. As made clear to Mr Visockis in court  it  is  not  a  question  of
        whether we ourselves would have made this decision but whether  the
        Panel's conclusions as to risk are within the range  of  those  the
        Panel were permitted to make on the evidence. We have come  to  the
        conclusion on the basis of  the  findings  made  by  the  Panel  in
        paragraph 20 of the determination that they are.


    17. Ground 1 of the Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  the  Panel's
        findings alleges they failed to provide adequate reasons for  their
        conclusions regarding the risk of harm and reoffending posed by  Mr
        Visockis.  It is alleged  the  Panel  failed  to  provide  adequate
        reasons for why the probation report  should  not  be  relied  upon
        despite being eight months old or  why  it  was  accepted  that  Mr
        Visockis will  gain  employment  and  why  his  family's  financial
        circumstances are sufficient to prevent him from reoffending in the
        future given that financial circumstances are considered  to  be  a
        risk factor.


    18. There is reference in the grounds to  alleged  fraudulent  activity
        but the key challenge is based upon a submission the  Panel  failed
        to provide adequate reasons as to why it accepted that Mr  Visockis
        has been drug-free for the past fifteen months.


    19. In relation to the claim Mr Visockis has  been  involved  in  other
        fraudulent activities there is reference in the NOMS report,  under
        the  heading  'Lifestyle  and  Associates'  that  Mr  Visockis  has
        previously reported that several different women were  the  mothers
        of the children.  The Panel were clearly aware  of  the  allegation
        and record in paragraph 21 of the  determination  this  information
        which, as Miss White submitted on her client's  behalf  before  the
        First-tier Tribunal, was contained in a report heavily reliant upon
        repetition  of  previous  material  with  no  particulars  of   the
        assertion given, which was denied by Mr Visockis.  If the Secretary
        of State believed there was merit in such an  allegation  it  would
        have been open to her to provide corroborative evidence before  the
        Panel. She did not and therefore cannot  criticise  the  Panel  for
        attaching  the  weight  they  did  to  what  is  no  more  than  an
        uncorroborated allegation.


    20.  In  relation  to  the  risk  of  reoffending,  the  Panel  clearly
        considered all the available  evidence  with  the  degree  of  care
        required in an appeal of this nature and gave adequate reasons  for
        their findings. The weight they gave to the evidence  is  a  matter
        for them and they note in paragraph 20 of  the  determination  that
        both the Sentencing Judge's remarks and the  NOMS  report  make  it
        clear that the index offence was strongly motivated by Mr Visockis'
        drug addiction.  The Panel had before them  Mr  Visockis'  evidence
        that he had been completely drug-free  since  his  final  five  day
        course of diazepam fifteen months ago. They placed  weight  upon  a
        certificate confirming a negative drug test dated 25th  April  2012
        and evidence that Mr Visockis  has  attempted  to  corroborate  his
        assertion by a letter dated 28th May 2013 from  the  Lifeline  Drug
        Service who were unable to assist as testing is not a service  they
        provide.  The Panel accepted that  Mr  Visockis  has  continued  to
        cooperate with his designated worker and  considered  reports  from
        the prison education service.   It is the weight  placed  upon  the
        evidence considered cumulatively that is the basis for the  Panel's
        acceptance of the credibility of Mr Visockis' statement that he has
        remained drug-free which is the basis for their finding that at the
        date of the hearing he remained  drug-free  for  the  past  fifteen
        months.  It was not proved before us that this finding is perverse,
        irrational, or contrary to the evidence.


    21. On the basis that addiction was found to be a key component in  his
        offending it was found  that  the  risk  of  reoffending  had  been
        "greatly reduced" as a result of his lack  of  drug  use.  That  is
        based on an assessment of the evidence that the Panel were able  to
        consider since the date of the  publication  of  the  NOMS  report,
        which is itself based upon evidence from late 2011.


    22. If the risk has been "greatly reduced" it must be reduced from  the
        medium risk of reoffending and as a result of the  removal  of  the
        key cause of such  offending.  As  stated  above  if  the  personal
        conduct does not represent a  genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently
        serious threat the removal of the EEA national will be a breach  of
        the United Kingdom's Treaty obligations.


    23. It may be argued that the  Panel  have  committed  legal  error  by
        failing to specifically define what they mean when  they  say  that
        risk of reoffending has been greatly reduced and whether this means
        that a genuine, present, and sufficiently serious  threat  has  not
        been proved.  We  find  having  considered  the  evidence  and  the
        determination as a whole that this can be inferred  from  paragraph
        20.  This case highlights the fundamental  difference  between  the
        deportation of  non-EEA  nationals  where  their  conduct  and  the
        commission of the index offence may be sufficient to warrant  their
        removal from the United Kingdom alone and EEA nationals  where  the
        criminal convictions do not in themselves  justify  a  decision  to
        deport.  What is required in an EEA case is an  assessment  whether
        there is  a  genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
        affecting one of the fundamental interests of society,  based  upon
        an assessment of the likely future conduct, which is  the  relevant
        test. As we do not find that it was proved before  the  Panel  that
        Regulation 21 (5) (c) could be  satisfied  the  other  concerns  we
        noted need not be considered any further as without such  a  future
        risk removal will be contrary to European law.


Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          We make no such order.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th November 2013












