
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00600 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2013                           |On 24 December 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G M
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Y Gwashawanhu, Solicitor from Bake & Co
Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On my own motion I make an order under rule  14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of the respondent's name or any other matter likely to  lead
    members of the public to identify the respondent or his  children.  This
    is because one of his children has been the subject  of  proceedings  in
    the Family Court  and  identifying  her  is  probably  contrary  to  the
    requirements of Section 97 (2) of the  Children  Act  1989.  Failure  to
    follow this order may be punished as a contempt of court.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow (on human rights grounds) an appeal by  the
    respondent (hereinafter  "the  claimant")  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent that he was liable for automatic  deportation  under  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 because he did not come within  one  of
    the exceptions set out in Section 33 of that Act.

 3. It is  necessary  to  begin  by  looking  carefully  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

 4. The claimant was born in 1979 and so is now  about  34  years  old.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 when he was about  23  years  old.
    He claimed asylum  but  the  application  was  refused.   He  was  given
    temporary admission which lasted until 2008.

 5. In November 2004 he was conditionally discharged for  six  months  after
    being convicted of drunk and disorderly behaviour.

 6. After he arrived in the United Kingdom he started  a  relationship  with
    one J T and  went  through  a  customary  marriage  ceremony  with  her.
    Children were born of the relationship in 2004 and 2007 and in 2009  the
    claimant, J T, and the children were given indefinite leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom.  The children became British  citizens  in  December
    2011.

 7. The claimant was not faithful to J T.  In 2008, whilst living with J  T,
    he  commenced  a  relationship  with  another  woman  and  although  the
    relationship ended in early  2009  that  woman  gave  birth  to  another
    daughter of the claimant in 2009.  The claimant wanted contact with  the
    daughter of the alternative relationship.

 8. On the autumn of 2011 the appellant visited the  home  where  she  lived
    with his daughter and another daughter and a man  unconnected  with  the
    previous relationships.  He had been drinking and  arrived  at  about  5
    o'clock in the morning having announced his intention of so  doing.   He
    entered the house by breaking a glass pane  in  the  door  and  then  he
    struck the woman on her face and body leaving marks and bruises.   After
    leaving the house he again tried to contact the woman to discuss contact
    with his child and then began to threaten her so that she was frightened
    for her safety unless he was detained.

 9. He was convicted of various offences, the most serious being an  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm to which he pleaded  guilty  and  he  was
    sentenced  to  a  total  of  twenty  months'  imprisonment.   The  judge
    commented adversely on the claimant having targeted a vulnerable  victim
    and carried out a premeditated offence.   The  offence  was  made  still
    worse by his having broken into the victim's home in the early hours  of
    the morning and assaulted in the presence of her 12 year  old  daughter.
    The pre-sentence report observed that he denied responsibility  for  his
    actions and attempted to minimise his  role  although  that  has  to  be
    contrasted with the guilty plea.  He is also subject  to  a  restraining
    order.

10.  On  9  March  2012  he  was  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    deportation.

11. He claimed that he could not live safely in the country of which  he  is
    a national because of his involvement with an  opposition  party  there.
    Additionally he said that he regretted his violent behaviour.   He  also
    pointed out that he had been in regular employment and  wanted  to  care
    for, and support his children.

12. The Secretary of State considered the case under the  Immigration  Rules
    and particularly paragraph 399 and 399A of HC 395.  She found  that  the
    claimant had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
    three children who were under the age of 18 and who lived in the  United
    Kingdom and that the children were British citizens and that one of them
    had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at  least  seven  years
    preceding the date of the immigration decision.  She further found  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the three  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  However, she was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances satisfied the requirements of paragraph 399(b)(ii)  of  HC
    395 as she was not persuaded  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the United Kingdom  and
    in any event the claimant had not had valid leave  continuously  for  at
    least fifteen years preceding the date of the immigration decision.

13. Nevertheless the Secretary of  State  was  satisfied  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    therefore not reasonable to expect  the  partner  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

14. It must follow that the Secretary of State accepted  that  her  decision
    would destroy a nuclear family. Nevertheless the respondent then decided
    that this was not a case where there were exceptional circumstances that
    meant the public interest in deportation would be  outweighed  by  other
    factors.

15. The claimant gave oral evidence and explained  that  a  male  child  had
    also been born to the relationship between him and J T.  He said that he
    was contrite about his behaviour and had learnt for  his  experience  in
    prison.

16. Additionally he said that the victim  of  the  assault  had  applied  to
    amend the restraining order so that he  could  see  his  daughter.   The
    application was refused in the way it was sought but the order varied so
    he could see his daughter through the intervention of a  solicitor.   He
    had rekindled his relationship with J T and described it  as  a  "strong
    marital relationship" although of course they are not actually  married.
    He had employment with two cleaning companies and  his  partner  was  in
    full-time higher education.

17. He was supported by J  T  who  said,  amongst  other  things,  that  his
    attitude had changed completely since his release from  prison  and  the
    change was for the  better.   She  could  not  contemplate  raising  the
    children on her own.

18. In cross-examination she explained how the claimant had misbehaved  when
    he drank too much.

19. She said that when the claimant had been in custody  she  was  supported
    by her aunt.  She particularly focused on paragraph 399(b) which applied
    where there was "no other family member who was able  to  care  for  the
    child in the UK".  She said that the  social  services  had  provided  a
    report showing  that  since  the  claimant's  release  from  prison  his
    presence in the family home had been a stabilising factor  so  that  the
    family were no longer of interest.

20. Additionally she had suggested that removing him was a  disproportionate
    interference with the private and family life of the claimant because of
    the effect it would have on  his  relationship  with  his  partner,  his
    children including his son, who could not reasonably be expected to join
    them in Zimbabwe.   She  also  submitted  that  the  claimant  had  been
    rehabilitated.

21. The First-tier Tribunal was not easily impressed.  It said that  it  had
    "very considerable reservations as to whether the [claimant's]  attitude
    towards his offending has  genuinely  changed."   It  was  however  more
    impressed with  the  evidence  of  J  T  about  his  improved  behaviour
    subsequent to his release.  Nevertheless it was not  persuaded  that  it
    had been given a complete  picture  about  the  claimant's  attitude  to
    drink.

22. The Tribunal was satisfied that J T was able to care  for  the  children
    and so the claimant's  circumstances  were  not  assisted  by  paragraph
    399(b) of HC 395.  It concluded that the application could  not  succeed
    under the Rules.

23. In conducting  the  balancing  exercise  the  Tribunal  found  the  best
    interests of the children were to be with both parents and that it would
    be unreasonable to expect the older children to  go  to  the  claimant's
    home country.  The best interests of the children lay in living  in  the
    United Kingdom with their parents.  In the final paragraph the  Tribunal
    said that it had:

         "given significant weight to the public interest and doubts  remain
         as to whether  the  [claimant]  has  genuinely  changed.   However,
         overall, and having regard to the prevention of disorder and crime,
         we  find  that  the  interference  with  the  family  life  of  the
         [claimant], [JT] and the three children of the family arising  from
         the deportation of the [claimant] is  sufficiently  serious  as  to
         amount to a breach of the [claimant's] protected  right  to  family
         life and the protected right of his family members to the enjoyment
         of family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
         Rights."

24. Given the Tribunal's findings it may have been better  to  have  allowed
    the appeal with reference to paragraph 398 of HC 395 because there  were
    exceptional circumstances so that the public interest in deportation  is
    outweighed by other factors but the Tribunal clearly allowed the  appeal
    because it was satisfied that the effect of deportation on removal would
    be disproportionate to the public interest in removing the claimant.

25. The Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    essentially  make  three  points.  They  complain  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal wrongly followed MF (Nigeria) [2012] UKUT  00393  (IAC).   They
    complains that the Tribunal should not have  regarded  the  Rules  as  a
    starting point before conducting  a  jurisprudentially-based  Article  8
    assessment but should have asked itself in the exceptional circumstances
    to allow the appeal under the Rules if the appeal would not otherwise be
    allowed under the Rules and the complain that  insufficient  regard  was
    given to the public interest.  They also  complain  generally  that  the
    reasoning is inadequate.

26. There is also a complaint there was no finding about  the  risk  of  re-
    offending.

27. Mrs Gwashawanhu produced a skeleton argument.

28. She submitted it was perfectly plain that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that the claimant had changed his ways.  Although  unimpressed
    with the claimant's  evidence  they  were  more  impressed  with  J  T's
    evidence about the claimant's change of attitude after his release  from
    prison.  The Tribunal had not produced  figures  alleging  a  percentage
    risk of re-offending but there was clear evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    which the Tribunal had clearly accepted that the claimant was a  changed
    man and there was no basis to criticise them for ignoring the risk of re-
    offending.

29. She drew attention to the decision MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192  CA.   Paragraph  45  in  particular  makes   it   plain   that   a
    proportionality test applied properly outside the new  Rules  or  within
    the new Rules should not make a difference to the outcome.

30. She submitted that the determination was framed in the lines of the  old
    jurisprudence and that may not have been the best  approach  to  a  case
    made after the rules had been amended but it was not inherently wrong in
    law because it had produced a sustainable and understandable result.

31. Ms Everett contended that there  was  no  proper  consideration  of  the
    public interest.

32. I find  this  somewhat  vexing  criticism  although  I  accept  that  is
    encouraged by jurisprudence and I am  not  in  any  way  criticising  Ms
    Everett for raising it.  It was quite plain to the Tribunal that it  was
    dealing with a case of automatic deportation so there  was  a  statutory
    presumption in favour of deportation.  The whole reason that  there  was
    an appeal is that in the ordinary course of events the claimant ought to
    be deported but he was seeking to persuade the Tribunal that  he  should
    be deported.  I do not accept that the  determination  would  have  been
    substantially improved if there had been a paragraph where the  Tribunal
    expressly  reminded  itself  that  the  person  subject   to   statutory
    deportation should normally be deported.  It is  quite  plain  that  the
    Tribunal was aware that it was dealing with a man who in a fit of drink-
    induced nasty temper invaded the privacy of a  person's  home  and  used
    violence, and that this misconduct amounted to a serious  offence  which
    was reflected in the sentence imposed by the court.   The  Tribunal  did
    say in the last  paragraph  of  the  Determination  that  it  had  given
    "significant weight to the public  interest".  There  is  no  basis  for
    saying that it had lost sight of that in its deliberations. Although  it
    would have been better to have said a little more I am quite unpersuaded
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

33. It is clear from paragraph 24 of the  Determination  that  the  Tribunal
    had doubts about the claimant having changed his behaviour but noted  to
    his credit that he had kept out of trouble  since  being  released  from
    custody in 2012 and that he had abided by restraining orders imposed  by
    the Crown Court. Whilst  this  might  not  seem  much,  given  that  the
    claimant knew that he would be subject to intense scrutiny, the  offence
    giving rise to the deportation order was committed whilst  the  claimant
    was jealous and intoxicated. Jealous, intoxicated  people  tend  not  to
    behave  properly  and  so  even  a  few  months  of  good  behaviour  is
    significant support to the contention  that  the  clamant  had  changed.
    Further, although the public interest in deporting an offender  includes
    expressing society's disapproval  of  immigrant  law  breakers,  and  so
    deporting  reformed  characters  is  legitimate,  the  fact   that   the
    claimant's victim supported his application to see more of  their  child
    was  known  to  the  Tribunal  and  suggested  a  degree  of  trust   or
    reconciliation that must have diminished the interest in removing him.

34. In deciding if the First-tier Tribunal erred in law there are three  key
    questions. Does a fair minder reader know what the  Tribunal  did?  Does
    that reader know why it did it? Were the  reasons  permissible  in  law?
    When all is said and done it is quite plain why the Tribunal allowed the
    appeal because it was persuaded that  breaking  up  a  family  of  three
    children and leaving them without a father as well  as  diminishing  his
    role in the life of another daughter was too great an interference  with
    the private and  family  life  of  the  people  concerned.   That  is  a
    permissible and intelligible decision and I do not interfere with it.

35. I find no material error on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 December 2013               |








