
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00667/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Francis [N]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
(Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sweden.   He  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2000 when he was aged 4.  He appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's  decision  to  deport  him
    made on 9 October 2018.


2.   It had become clear that the only issue of challenge with which I  need
    to deal today is the first ground concerned with  the  refusal  by  the
    judge to adjourn.  Other points of challenge were made with  regard  to
    his assessment but in light of the conclusion to which I have  come  on
    the adjournment point it is unnecessary to address those matters.

3.   The judge noted the following at paragraph  3  of  his  decision.   The
    appellant did not attend the hearing  and  was  not  represented.   The
    Tribunal had been advised by HMP Huntercombe where  the  appellant  was
    detained that he had refused to leave his cell to be transported  to  a
    prison nearer to Birmingham in order to attend the hearing.  On the day
    before the hearing he contacted the Tribunal to say  that  he  was  not
    ready to deal with the matter and wanted time to  instruct  solicitors.
    The judge noted that he had been represented in the Crown Court and  at
    the hearing of his last appeal and had had access to  legal  advice  in
    the past.  He noted that the decision was served  on  9  October  2018.
    The appellant had been notified of the hearing date on 6 November 2018.
     The hearing was on 16 January 2019.  The  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant had had ample time to prepare for the hearing and  there  was
    no suggestion that he had attempted to instruct solicitors and  in  the
    circumstances he was satisfied he should proceed  in  his  absence  and
    resolved to do so.

4.   In the grounds of appeal it was argued that the  judge  had  failed  to
    appreciate the level of unfairness resulting  from  the  inequality  of
    arms at the appeal which concerned complex issues of fact and  law.   A
    previous appeal on the same issue had been allowed at a  time  when  he
    had legal representation and he had positively asked  for  the  current
    appeal not to go ahead in the absence of legal representation.

5.   There was also applied a statement  from  Mr  Stern  who  is  a  senior
    immigration caseworker at the appellant's now representatives Turpin  &
    Miller.  At a meeting on 24 January 2019 Turpin  &  Miller  were  first
    instructed and at that time the appellant explained to Mr Stern that he
    had only observed for the first time on 14 January 2019 that there  was
    a hearing date on the 16th.  He said he  had  not  received  any  prior
    notification of this.  A copy  was  provided  of  a  fax  sent  to  the
    Tribunal on 15 January 2019 requesting an  adjournment  to  seek  legal
    representation  and  there  had  yet  been  no  confirmation   of   any
    adjournment or the outcome of  the  appeal.   When  he  learnt  of  the
    hearing date he was able to speak to  an  intervention  worker  in  the
    prison from the St Giles Trust who was able to speak to a solicitor  to
    take  advice  on  how  to  respond  to  the  Tribunal  and  request  an
    adjournment.  Having taken legal advice from the solicitor by phone and
    with the St Giles Trust worker prepared notes for a fax to send to  the
    First-tier Tribunal the appellant had returned to his cell and by  this
    time the prison transport had  already  left  without  him.   This,  it
    seems, all took place on 14 January.  He said that he did not refuse to
    attend the hearing but did not know what was happening and  was  trying
    to take advice from within the very constrained environment of  prison.
    Subsequently he prepared the fax which was sent on 15 January.

6.   I do not consider the judge can be criticised for  proceeding,  but  in
    light of the evidence that has now come to light, it seems sufficiently
    clear that these points were not before the  judge  when  he  made  his
    decision to refuse the adjournment request at the hearing.  He was  not
    aware that the appellant saying that he had not received notice of  the
    hearing until two days previously, it  was  not  relevant,  necessarily
    that he had had legal advice previously, and the judge was not aware of
    the circumstances detailed in Mr Stern's statement.  In  the  interests
    of justice, and bearing in mind the potentially complex legal issues in
    place and the implications for the appellant of the  dismissal  of  his
    appeal, I consider that it is in the interests of justice to find  that
    there was an error of law in this case in  that  there  was  procedural
    irregularity and as a consequence the judge's decision is set aside and
    the matter will have to be reheard de novo  by  a  different  judge  in
    Birmingham.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date 28 May 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen








