
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: DA/00500/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2020                    |On 9 September 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             PEGGY BOURT-BOTRAND

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr  J  Greer  of  counsel,  instructed  by  AB  James
Solicitors



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decision, which I now give. The order made is described at the
end of these reasons.


 1. For the purposes of this hearing, I will refer to the parties  as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a French national with date of birth given as 16.4.81.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
    permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated
    7.2.20, allowing on grounds of proportionality the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 25.9.19, to  make
    a deportation order against her,  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016, following notice of liability to  deportation  served
    on 16.7.19.

 4. The deportation order was made in the light of the appellant's criminal
    history and in particular her conviction on 7.7.11 for making  a  false
    representation  to  make  a  gain  for  herself  or  another,  and  her
    subsequent conviction on 30.4.19 for a money  laundering  offence.  For
    the earlier offence the appellant was given a Community Order  with  an
    unpaid work requirement. However, for the most recent offence  she  was
    sentenced to a term of immediate imprisonment of 12 months.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal concluded at [53]  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant had fallen far short of demonstrating that she had  exercised
    Treaty rights for any period of 5 years so as to  acquire  a  right  of
    permanent residence. It follow that, despite her long residence in  the
    UK, she was only entitled to the basic level of protection.  There  has
    been no cross-appeal against that finding, which must stand.

 6. The grounds  submit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  material
    misdirection and provided inadequate reasoning for allowing the appeal.
    In particular, it is argued that in concluding in the  risk  assessment
    that the appellant would not reoffend, the judge failed  to  take  into
    account the lack of evidence of remorse, rehabilitation, or  acceptance
    of responsibility by the appellant for her actions.

 7. It is also argued that in finding the appellant had integrated  in  the
    UK during her 17 years of residence, the judge relied on  an  inference
    of social ties when there was little if  any  evidence  of  integration
    before the First-tier Tribunal, so that the  finding  was  inadequately
    reasoned. It is also submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    prospect of  the  appellant's  rehabilitation  in  France,  relying  on
    Dumliauskas.

 8. Finally, the grounds note that  at  [65]  of  the  decision  the  judge
    considered  the  matter  finely  balanced  and  admitted  having   some
    hesitation before finding the appellant  did  not  present  a  genuine,
    present and serious  threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society. In that  light,  the  respondent  argues  that  the  reasoning
    supporting such a conclusion is inadequate.

 9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 13.3.20,  considering  the  grounds  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the  decision.  However,  when  the  application  was
    renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  granted
    permission  on  30.4.20,  considering  briefly  that  the  grounds  had
    identified arguable points of challenge going beyond mere disagreement.
    No other reasons were provided.

10. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the oral  and  written  submissions  and  the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

11.  For the purposes of the proportionality assessment, between  [55]  and
    [59] of the decision, the judge made an assessment of  the  seriousness
    of the appellant's criminal offending history, concluding at [59], "The
    offence is serious if not the most serious examples of  such  offending
    and  thus  a  woman  with  only  one  previous  minor  conviction   was
    nevertheless given an immediate effective custodial  sentence."  Again,
    there has been no appeal or cross-appeal against these findings.

12. The crucial and contested findings lie between [60]  and  [65]  of  the
    decision. The judge had to decide whether the appellant's  removal  was
    justified on grounds of public policy, the  ground  relied  on  by  the
    respondent pursuant to Regulation 23, assessed on the criteria set  out
    at  Regulation  27(5)  to  (8)  of  the  decision,  as  well  as  those
    considerations contained in Schedule  1.  Inter  alia,  the  judge  was
    required to consider the proportionality of the  decision  and  whether
    she  was  satisfied  that  the  personal  conduct  of   the   appellant
    represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

13. In relation to 'fundamental interests'  and  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending, at [63], the judge was  satisfied  that  "prevention  of  an
    offence that underpins some of the most serious criminal offending such
    as drug  dealing  and  trafficking  and  undermines  the  integrity  of
    financial systems is a fundamental interest of society."  At  [65]  the
    judge repeated that "this was a serious offence committed for  personal
    gain." There is no challenge by either party to these findings and self-
    direction.

14. In his submissions, Mr Bates relied on the absence of cogent  reasoning
    for findings as to integration and rehabilitation.

15. Mr Greer submitted that the grounds were no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the decision and that the decision disclosed lawful reasoning.

Integration

16. In respect of the requirement under Regulation 27(6)  to  consider  the
    appellant's personal circumstances, her social and cultural integration
    into the UK, and the extent of her links with her country of origin, at
    [62] of the decision the judge took account of the  long  residence  in
    the UK, involving some study and  intermittent  work,  and  ability  to
    speak English, so that the judge found she would inevitably have forged
    social ties in the UK. The judge also  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    lived in the UK for as long as she had  in  France  or  anywhere  else.
    However,  the  judge  noted  the   limited   supporting   evidence   of
    integration. Other than a letter from her local  church,  stating  that
    she had attended since 2015, there were  no  letters  of  support  from
    friends, neighbours, or others. No specific conclusion  is  reached  at
    that paragraph but at [65] the judge stated that she took into  account
    her "assessment of the degree of the appellant's integration  after  17
    years." In other words, the judge made an objective assessment  of  the
    evidence after hearing from the appellant.

17. Pointing to the lack of evidence of integration noted by the judge,  Mr
    Bates submitted that the conclusion reached was  inadequately  reasoned
    and argues that an assumption of integration merely because of 17 years
    residence in the UK is insufficient  to  justify  a  finding  that  the
    appellant was integrated in the UK.

18. For his part, Mr Greer submitted that  the  respondent's  argument  was
    really about weight to be attached to  various  factors,  which  was  a
    matter for the judge. It was submitted that adequate reasoning had been
    provided.

19. I accept that the decision does not address the issue of integration in
    any  detail,  which  is  perhaps  unsurprising  given  the  absence  of
    supporting evidence. The letter  from  the  church  confirms  that  the
    appellant has been attending since 2015 and that "she is a nice person,
    kind, friendly and of good character  someone  you  would  trust."  The
    letter  says  little  else  that  assists  in  terms  of   integration.
    Nevertheless, in the appellant's favour  reliance  was  placed  on  her
    integration as part of the proportionality assessment.

20. Some guidance on the level of integration required may be derived  from
    paragraph [2] of Schedule 1, which provides:

         "An EEA national or the family member of  an  EEA  national  having
         extensive familial and societal links  with  persons  of  the  same
         nationality or language does  not  amount  to  integration  in  the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a  person  may  be  regarded  as
         integrated in the United Kingdom."

21. It follows from paragraph [2] of Schedule 1 that mere presence  in  the
    UK  over  a  period  of  time  is  insufficient  alone  to  demonstrate
    integration. On the facts of this case, there was no  evidence  of  any
    family ties in the UK or, indeed,  of  any  societal  links  other  the
    limited evidence of  the  appellant's  church  attendance.  Whilst  the
    appellant did not claim  extensive  familial  or  societal  links  with
    persons of the same nationality or language in the UK, I  accept  there
    was little evidence of any cultural and societal integration that might
    be considered of a 'significant degree of wider' integration than links
    to persons of the same nationality or language.

22. In relation to integration, paragraph [4] of Schedule 1  also  provides
    that little weight is to be attached to integration if the "integrating
    links" were formed at or around the same time as the  commission  of  a
    criminal offence or during the service of any sentence of imprisonment.
    It follows that the degree of integration that may be inferred from  17
    years' residence in the UK may have to be discounted at least  somewhat
    for the appellant's criminal offending behaviour for her  own  personal
    gain between 2011 and 2015, and her term of imprisonment.

23. Mr Bates relied on CI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  2027,  and  the
    factors there set out as to  the  type  of  evidence  to  be  expected.
    However, Mr Greer pointed out that CI  was  a  case  involving  non-EEA
    deportation and s117C rather than  the  regulations.  I  note  that  CI
    confirmed that criminal offending will not necessarily break social and
    cultural integration. Whilst CI was not able to point to  any  specific
    evidence of social and cultural integration, he  had  been  in  the  UK
    since childhood and was educated here. The Court of Appeal  found  that
    the Upper Tribunal had  asked  the  wrong  question  and  assumed  that
    criminal offending  was  inconsistent  with  integration.  Despite  the
    absence of postive evidence, on the facts of that case,  the  Court  of
    Appeal  considered  the  suggestion  that  he  was  not  socially   and
    culturally integrated did not have an "air of reality".

24. Despite the limited evidence of integration, I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge was entitled to infer social and cultural  integration  from  the
    fact of 17 years' residence in  the  UK  and  all  that  must  involve,
    including that the appellant had studied and worked intermittently, and
    the church evidence. It is particularly significant that the  appellant
    had lived in the UK as long as anywhere else and  had  in  fact  little
    time in the country of her nationality. In the premises, I am satisfied
    that it was open to the judge, hearing the appellant in oral  evidence,
    to conclude that she was integrated into the UK.

Risk of Reoffending & Rehabilitation

25. In relation to the risk  of  reoffending  referenced  at  [64]  of  the
    decision, at [65] the judge noted again the seriousness of the  offence
    and that "no OASYS report was provided as part of the bundle to make an
    informed  assessment  of  risk  moving  forward."  However,  the  judge
    considered the strongest argument in the appellant's favour to  suggest
    that she is rehabilitated was that the last offences occurred in  2015,
    although not prosecuted until 2018/19, and there was no evidence of her
    having committed other offences since. In reality, this  was  the  only
    evidence of rehabilitation.

26. I note that the judge  does  not  make  a  specific  finding  that  the
    appellant has successfully rehabilitated or reformed, or make a finding
    as to the risk of reoffending, stating only in the same paragraph  that
    the absence of offending was a factor, together with the degree of  the
    appellant's  integration,  leading  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant did not present a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

27. In  relation  to  criminal  offending,  paragraph  [3]  of  Schedule  1
    provides:

         "Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national  has
         received a custodial sentence, or is  a  persistent  offender,  the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society."

28. In relation to successful rehabilitation, paragraph [5] of  Schedule  1
    provides:

         "The removal from the United Kingdom of  an  EEA  national  or  the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for  example,  through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an  EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate."

29. As stated above, the respondent complains of a lack  of  reasoning  and
    that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the  prospect  of  the
    appellant's rehabilitation in France, which should not be  regarded  as
    any less likely than in the UK. However, Mr Greer  submitted  that  the
    respondent had not raised  rehabilitation  in  France,  it  was  not  a
    relevant consideration and not  addressed  by  the  respondent  at  the
    appeal hearing.

30. However, Mr Greer  pointed  out  that  the  legal  burden  was  on  the
    respondent to demonstrate that the appellant represents a threat to one
    of the fundamental interests of society and pointed to  the  fact  that
    the respondent had adduced no evidence to suggest  that  the  appellant
    was likely to offend. By the date of the appeal hearing, the  appellant
    had not reoffended for almost "half a decade", as Mr Greer put it,  and
    that weight to be  accorded  to  this  factor  was  for  the  judge  to
    determine. He disputed  that  there  was  any  discernible  pattern  of
    criminal behaviour, as there had been a four-year gap between offences.



31. Whilst the judge addressed paragraph [5] of Schedule  1,  it  is  clear
    that, as applied to the circumstances of this appellant, to fall in her
    favour in the proportionality balancing exercise requires  "substantive
    evidence"  that  she  has  "successfully  reformed  or  rehabilitated."
    However, I agree with Mr Greer's submission that whether  an  extensive
    period of not  offending  can  amount  to  such  substantive  evidence,
    described by the judge as  the  strongest  factor  in  the  appellant's
    favour, was a matter for the judge to weigh in the overall balance.

32. In the premises, I am satisfied that it  was  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to conclude that the  appellant  did  not  present  a  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests  of  society.  There  was  no  positive  evidence
    adduced by the respondent to demonstrate that she  represented  such  a
    threat. The judge had to balance the  history  of  criminal  offending,
    together with the seriousness of the index offence, again  the  absence
    of offending over almost  five  years.  To  that  end,  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account the degree of  integration  imputed  from
    the length of residence  and  some  study  in  the  UK.  In  the  final
    analysis, it was for the judge to determine the weight to be  given  to
    all of the factors set out above and as considered in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. I cannot say that the findings were  not  open
    to the judge on the evidence or that they were inadequately reasoned.

33. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside and remade.

Decision

    The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    allowed.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup     Date: 2 September 2020

