
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  DA/00110/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decisions and Reason Promulgated     |
|on 28 July 2021                      |on 16 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             KAROL FILIP ZEMLIK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr B Criggie, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 29 June 1992.

 2. The respondent decided on 16 March 2020 to  make  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 3. FtT Judge Agnew heard the appellant's appeal on 8 February 2021, having
    declined to grant his application for adjournment,  and  dismissed  the
    appeal by a decision promulgated on 12 February 2021.

 4. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  to  the  UT.   His  grounds
    allege error in refusing the adjournment request; error in not  finding
    the appellant to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  Ms
    Reid, by applying too high a standard of proof; consequent flaw in  the
    article 8 assessment; and error  in  taking  the  appellant's  6  month
    sentence to be the maximum available for his offence, when the  maximum
    was 12 months.

 5. FtT Judge Nightingale granted permission by  a  decision  issued  on  8
    March 2021, observing that the judge might have  erred  by  overlooking
    the possibility of taking evidence from the appellant and  Ms  Reid  by
    telephone, and  that  it  would  be  for  the  appellant  to  show  the
    sentencing range available for his offence.

 6. Mrs Aboni was prepared to accept that the  maximum  sentence  available
    had been 12 months, not 6.  She submitted that this did not play such a
    substantial part in the decision as to require it to be set aside.

 7. At [19] the judge attached some significance to the sentence being,  as
    she understood it, the maximum available.  However, the decision  gives
    several strong reasons for finding against the appellant  and,  on  its
    own, I consider the decision must have been the same upon  excision  of
    this error.

 8. Mr Criggie acknowledged that neither representative, nor the judge, had
    mentioned the possibility of taking evidence from the appellant and the
    sponsor by telephone only, without video.  He had spoken to them before
    the hearing, when they were using someone else's phone, and  they  said
    they could not access any device which would let  them  link  into  the
    hearing - as recorded in the decision at [10].

 9. Mr Criggie also, correctly, acknowledged that no  unfairness  could  be
    detected in the judge's reasons for declining to adjourn on the eve  of
    the hearing, as set out in the appendix attached to her decision.

10. The judge was at pains to give the appellant and his witness the chance
    to take  part,  and  it  is  difficult  to  detect  unfairness  in  her
    proceeding, as matters were set out before her.  However, even although
    the suggestion was never made by anyone, the position of the  appellant
    might have been tested further by offering to take  evidence  over  the
    telephone (perhaps by a "conference call").

11. The judge  went  on  to  find  at  [37]  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he had any relationship with Ms Reid.

12. There were written statements from both to that effect, and documentary
    confirmation of a shared address, in the form of a  council  tax  bill,
    which was also the address of the appellant on file with the tribunal.

13. The judge might well have found that the relationship was not  such  as
    to outweigh other considerations.  However, even  if  she  thought  the
    appellant and the witness had made little effort  to  participate,  the
    conclusion that the relationship did not exist went rather far, without
    hearing from them and without any further testing of their evidence.

14. I find that the (i) the  slip  over  the  maximum  sentence,  (ii)  the
    oversight of the possibility of telephone evidence (even although never
    suggested), and (iii) the finding of non-existence of the relationship,
    taken together, are such that the decision cannot safely stand.

15. Ms Aboni advised that the respondent's information is that since 25 May
    2021 the appellant has been on remand on several criminal  charges  and
    that the address on the tribunal file, being the address of his partner
    (or former partner) is no longer available to him.

16. Those matters are irrelevant to whether  the  FtT  erred,  and  pending
    charges are not convictions.  However, it appears  that  the  appellant
    has not observed his duty to keep the tribunal advised of his  address,
    and has not let his representative know his  change  of  circumstances.
    Any further relevance will require to be addressed in the FtT.

17. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and the case is  remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing, not before Judge Agnew.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      29 July 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

