
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00055/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Jonas Lauzikas                                    |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Elliott-Kelly, of Counsel, instructed by
                    Lawrence Lupin Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (the "Secretary of State") against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Blundell (hereafter the "judge") who, following a hearing
    on 24 June 2016, allowed the  appeal  of  Mr  Lauzikas  (hereafter  the
    "claimant"), a national of Lithuania born on 22  July  1988  against  a
    decision of 26 February 2015 to make a deportation  order  against  him
    under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006
    (hereafter the "Regulations"). The Secretary of  State  also  certified
    his human rights claim under regulation 24AA of the  2006  Regulations.
    The  claimant  lodged  an  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make   a
    deportation order and issued judicial review  proceedings  against  the
    certification of his human rights claim under regulation 24AA.

 2. The claimant claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom in  November
    2012. He came to the attention of the authorities on 14 June 2014  when
    he was arrested for possession of an imitation firearm. On  4  December
    2014, he appeared at the Crown Court at Ipswich and pleaded  guilty  to
    one count of possessing an imitation firearm with intent to cause  fear
    of violence. He was subsequently sentenced to 14 months'  imprisonment.
    He had no  previous  convictions.  On  13  August  2015,  the  claimant
    returned voluntarily to Lithuania, whilst his appeal before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  judicial  review  proceedings  were  pending.   He
    subsequently returned to the  United  Kingdom  to  attend  the  hearing
    before the judge.

 3. The circumstances of the claimant's offence were that, on 14 June 2014,
    he  and  three  others  went  to  a  property  with  the  intention  of
    confronting those that  were  occupying  the  property,  including  the
    victim who was the partner of  his  (the  claimant's)  ex-partner.  The
    offence was committed over money owed by the claimant  to  the  victim,
    the return of which the victim had demanded by a text message  sent  by
    the victim to the claimant earlier on  the  day  of  the  offence.  The
    claimant took an imitation firearm  with  him.  After  an  exchange  of
    threats and insults at the property, the claimant broke a pane of glass
    and discharged the imitation BB gun in the house. A fight then occurred
    in the street, during which time the claimant continued to fire his  BB
    gun, hitting one of the occupants.

 4. It was common ground before the  judge  that  the  claimant  could  not
    benefit from the enhanced protections in regulations 21(2) or  (4)  and
    that his expulsion was permitted if it can be justified on  grounds  of
    public  policy  and  is  in  accordance  with  the  considerations   in
    regulation 21(5).

The judge's decision

 5. The judge found that the claimant did not present  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society. He gave his reasons at [38]-[64] of his decision,
    which I will now summarise.

 6. In his analysis of the evidence, the judge considered the case advanced
    by Ms P Ellis, who represented the Secretary of State before him, as to
    the risk posed by the claimant. He also considered  the  documents  and
    reports before him. There were the following documents, amongst others,
    before the judge:

      (i)   The Pre-sentence Report ("PSR") by a Mr Edwin Oguledo  that  was
        before the sentencing judge. This report was written at the end  of
        December 2014.

      (ii)  Two OASys reports issued by  the  National  Offender  Management
        Services, the earlier of which was prepared by  Mr  Oguledo  on  31
        December 2014 and the second of which was  prepared  by  Ms  Rachel
        Stephenson on 18 March 2015.  The second report was issued  shortly
        before the claimant was released from his sentence of imprisonment.
        The authors of the OASys reports had considered  there  to  be  "an
        emerging pattern of violent behaviour". The first  report  assessed
        the claimant as representing a medium risk of re-offending and  the
        second report stated that he  represented  a  higher  risk  of  re-
        offending. The risk of harm to a known adult was raised from medium
        to high.

      (iii) A  report  from  a  Ms  Gemma  Clarke  of  Expert  Psychological
        Services Limited.

 7. The different assessment of risk in the two OASys  reports  prompted  a
    letter from the claimant's solicitors to the author of the second OASys
    report. The judge also considered the  response  of  Ms  Grant-Williams
    dated 28 July 2015 to the letter from  the  claimant's  solicitor.  The
    response stated, inter alia that:

       "... (the) risk at the point of sentence  ...  differs  in  imminence
             from the risk at the point of release. Whilst on remand and  in
             prison, it was perceived that his risk was  controlled  at  the
             time and the assessing officer took the view that the risk  was
             medium as custody was recommended. Concerning his release  from
             prison, the assessor considers the change in circumstances  and
             the fact that there is still a risk of repeat  re-victimisation
             given that the victim's current partner, at that time  was  the
             offender's estranged wife."

 8. At [51], the judge said that a range of documents was  provided  to  Ms
    Clarke. The documents included those set out above.  Ms  Clarke  agreed
    that there was a medium risk of serious harm. However, in her  opinion,
    the risk of re-offending was low. At [51], the  judge  quoted  from  Ms
    Clarke's report, including the following extracts:

      ... At the present time Mr. Lauzikas has stable accommodation,  is  in
             a stable relationship, is employed, there  is  no  evidence  of
             emotional,  behavioural  or  cognitive   instability,   violent
             attitudes or pro-criminal orientation and he is not in conflict
             with anyone. If there were to be a significant  change  in  his
             personal circumstances, his risk and likelihood of him  causing
             serious harm would need to be reviewed.

      ... Identifiable indicators of risk of serious  harm  are  present  in
             that he has committed a past violent offence  as  evidenced  by
             the index offence and the use of a weapon  within  the  offence
             that had the potential to cause serious harm.  However,  whilst
             there  is  evidence  of  a  history  of  violence  [e.g.  index
             offence),  Mr.   Lauzikas   does   not   have   a   significant
             history/pattern  of  violent  behaviour  in  his  history;  the
             offence committed appeared  out  of  character  and  to  be  an
             isolated incident, and the circumstances in which  it  occurred
             are no longer present and unlikely to reoccur and therefore,  I
             consider his risk of reoffending to be low.

      [1.6] Assessment using the Level of Service Case Management  Inventory
             (...) indicates a very low level of risk for general  offending
             at the current time. The LS-CMI  highlights  general  risk/need
             factors  related  to  Mr.  Lauzikas'  criminal  history  (being
             incarcerated upon conviction), lack of  further  education  (A-
             Level equivalent) and absence of participation in an  organised
             [leisure] activity. The presence of these factors results in  a
             risk handing in the very low range with a score of 3 [Very  Low
             risk range is 0-4 with total scores ranging from O-43].

 9. At [52], the judge continued his  summary  of  Ms  Clarke's  report  as
    follows:

      The summary continues, at [1.7], to note that the  appellant  accepted
        responsibility for his offending, that he  had  reasonable  insight
        into it and that he endorsed no attitudes which were supportive  of
        violence or weapons.  She considered that he was motivated  not  to
        reoffend and to live a  'prosocial'  life  in  the  community.   At
        [1.8], she thought that his risk would be raised  initially  if  he
        moved to the UK as he would not  have  accommodation,  a  prosocial
        network and being potentially isolated.  She considered that  those
        risks  would  be  offset  by  relocating  (as  planned)  with   his
        girlfriend and by  the  fact  that  he  could  return  to  his  old
        employment.  At [1.9], she considered that there were a high number
        of 'protective factors' which guarded  against  further  offending.
        Her overall conclusion, having assessed all of  the  evidence,  was
        that the appellant presented  'a  low  level  of  risk  for  future
        violent reoffending and a very low level of risk for future general
        (non-violent) offences': 1.10.  She considered his offending to  be
        an isolated incident which appeared out of character.  She  offered
        the following insight, at [1.13]:

            Whilst not seeking to excuse or minimise Mr.  Lauzikas'  violent
               behaviour;  after   reading   his   file   information   and
               interviewing him his offending behaviour does appear out  of
               character and to  be  an  isolated  incident  that  occurred
               within the context of  his  wife  leaving  him,  his  friend
               entering into a relationship  with  his  wife,  his  friends
               siding with his  wife  and  new  partner  and  him  becoming
               socially isolated. He felt hurt and rejected by  his  friend
               and ruminated on his behaviour, as well as fearing he  would
               not be able to be a father to his son, allegedly being  told
               by his ex-wife's family that he was no longer his father. He
               did not speak to family in Lithuania about the situation  he
               found himself in. He reported fearing being  harmed  by  his
               friend and his [ex] wife's family and bought  the  imitation
               firearm  for  protection.  He  allowed  his   emotions   and
               grievance thinking to flaw his thinking  and  it  is  within
               this context  that  he  committed  the  index  offence.  The
               chances of  Mr.  Lauzikas  experiencing  a  high  number  of
               stressors, as he did during the lead up  to  his  offending,
               simultaneously, is very low and therefore. the likelihood of
               offending occurring in a similar context is very low.

10. At [57], the judge said that he accepted that the offence committed  by
    the claimant was "a clear case of premeditation"  but  he  went  on  to
    consider Ms Clarke's conclusions and the claimant's evidence about  the
    circumstances of, and leading to, the offence. He  concluded  that  the
    claimant's actions in bringing the BB gun  and  in  taking  it  to  the
    house, whilst premeditated, were borne out  of  a  highly  unusual  and
    highly stressful set of circumstances which are highly unlikely to  re-
    occur. I quote [57] (Ms Easty, mentioned in this quote, was Counsel for
    the claimant and [T] was the victim in the  offence  committed  by  the
    claimant):

      Ms Ellis drew my attention, understandably, to the conclusion  in  the
        PSR that this was 'a clear case of premeditation'.   I  agree  that
        this is a significant conclusion and  I  agree  that  it  is  well-
        founded.  The appellant accepts that  he  bought  the  gun  and  he
        accepts that he took it with him to the house.   I  agree  with  Mr
        Oguledo that he clearly intended to use that weapon in the  way  he
        did.  Ms Ellis is entitled to submit, as she did,  that  these  are
        the actions of a man who is predisposed to  violence.   I  note  Ms
        Clarke's conclusions  about  this,  however.   She  felt  that  the
        appellant had been driven to a point of such stress that  he  acted
        in a way which was completely out of character.  This is undeniably
        her field of expertise but it chimed with my own evaluation of  the
        appellant's evidence at the hearing.  He  described  during  cross-
        examination how he had found out  that  his  wife  was  seeing  his
        friend [T] very shortly after [the claimant's son]' birth.  He  had
        come home one day and found them sitting on the sofa, seemingly  in
        an embrace.  Tensions rose and  the  police  were  called  on  that
        occasion but no charges followed.  The appellant was clearly  upset
        when he recalled these events.  His first son had  just  been  born
        and he was settling into the new role of fatherhood when his family
        life fell apart.  He was no longer able to live with his  wife  and
        child and he missed his son desperately.  His actions in buying the
        BB gun and in taking it to the house were premeditated,  therefore,
        but I accept Ms Easty's submission that they were borne  out  of  a
        highly unusual and highly stressful set of circumstances which  are
        highly unlikely to re-occur.

11. For these reasons, the judge said, at [58], that "(there) is no  proper
    basis upon which to conclude that (the claimant's) actions were part of
    'an emerging pattern of violent behaviour'". He drew attention  to  the
    fact that the claimant had one conviction, that he  was  released  from
    custody in March 2015, that he had not re-offended, that there  was  no
    pattern before his conviction, there has  been  no  pattern  afterwards
    and, finally,  that  his  conduct  in  prison  had  been  shown  to  be
    exemplary.

12. At [59], the judge said that he  considered  that  the  fact  that  the
    claimant had not undertaken any courses which addressed  his  offending
    behaviour did not mean that he was likely to commit a  second  offence.
    The judge said that he found the claimant's evidence at the hearing  to
    be truthful, and, in this respect, said as follows:

      He came across as  a  quiet  and  reflective  man  who  had  genuinely
        benefitted from the opportunity to reflect on the  consequences  of
        his actions.  As Ms Easty reminded me, a sentence  of  imprisonment
        is designed to punish and to rehabilitate.  Sadly,  one  frequently
        encounters individuals on whom the second goal is  wasted.   I  was
        quite satisfied that this appellant was sincere in the account that
        he gave of having thought carefully about the consequences  of  his
        actions on his victims and his own family life.   He  had  suffered
        when he was unable to see his son because he had been in prison and
        I accept his evidence  that  he  was  committed  to  avoiding  such
        separation again.  I note that he continues to see [the  claimant's
        son] when he is brought to Lithuania by Santa, as she  confirms  in
        her statement, and I accept that his desire to continue seeing  his
        son serves as a very real incentive for him not to make  a  similar
        mistake in the future.

13. At [60]-[61], the judge considered the fact that the  risk  of  serious
    harm to known adults was raised from medium in the PSR to high  several
    months later. He agreed with Ms Clarke that the raising  of  this  risk
    was nothing more than an exercise in caution and that he did not accept
    that "... it would be remotely appropriate to proceed now on the  basis
    that the appellant poses a high risk of harm to a known adult", drawing
    attention to the following evidence and stating, on the basis  of  such
    evidence,  that:  "Thankfully,  the  understandably  cautious  approach
    adopted by the Probation Service proved unwarranted."

      He was released from immigration detention in March 2015 and  he  left
        the UK five months or so earlier.... The [claimant] did no harm  to
        [T] and has put his differences with  his  ex-wife  behind  him  so
        successfully that the two adults co-operate to enable him to have a
        meaningful relationship with his son.

14. For these reasons, the judge said, at [62] that he rejected Ms  Ellis's
    attempt to undermine the foundations of Ms  Clarke's  report.  He  said
    that he considered  Ms  Clarke's  evaluation  of  the  claimant  to  be
    correct, and preferred it to the previous assessments of the  Probation
    Service. He said that he therefore  accept  her  assessment  which  she
    summarised as follows :

         In my opinion [the appellant] presents a low  risk  of  reoffending
         and a medium risk of serious harm to  a  known  individual  if  his
         personal circumstances  change;  in  that  there  are  identifiable
         indicators of risk of serious harm but [the appellant] is  unlikely
         to do so unless there is a change in circumstances.

15. At [63], the judge said:

      It is clear, as Ms Easty submitted, that the Tribunal's focus must  be
        on the present circumstances.  So much is apparent from  regulation
        21(5)(c).  I accept that the appellant's life  is  currently  in  a
        state of stability.  The difficulties with  his  relationship  with
        Santa are behind him, as they both confirm.  His relationship  with
        his son is rekindled, as they also both confirm.  He is employed in
        Lithuania and his employers in the UK have confirmed that they will
        re-employ him  (Ms Ellis did not pursue in her written  submissions
        a matter which had been canvassed in cross-examination relating  to
        slight differences in the  name  of  the  employer  across  various
        documents).  I accept that the appellant's behaviour in 2014 was an
        aberration and I accept his evidence that he has reflected  on  the
        consequences of his actions.  I do not consider that he presents  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental
        interests of the United Kingdom.

The grounds

16. The grounds contend that the judge materially erred in law in  law  for
    the following reasons:

    (i)     In reaching his finding that the claimant  did  not  present  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
        the fundamental interests of society,  he  simply  relied  upon  Ms
        Clarke's assessment rather than look holistically  at  all  of  the
        evidence, including the nature of the claimant's offence.  Although
        a person's criminal convictions do not alone provide  a  sufficient
        basis for deportation, they should not be  ignored  when  assessing
        the risk posed by the claimant.

    (ii)    Ms Clarke's report was not determinative of  the  issue  as  to
        whether the claimant posed  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
        serious threat. In any event, Ms Clarke had assessed  the  claimant
        as posing a  medium  risk  of  re-offending  of  his  circumstances
        changed. The judge had erred by failing to consider a change of the
        claimant's personal circumstances and the  resulting  risk  to  the
        public from any potential change in circumstances.

    (iii)   The judge failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
        claimant has been outside the United Kingdom since August 2015.

    (iv)    The judge equated the low risk of re-offending in the report of
        Ms Clarke with the absence of a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
        serious threat.

Submissions

17. At the hearing, Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds.  He  submitted  that
    the grounds essentially distil into one argument, that  the  judge  had
    placed too much weight on the report of Ms Clarke and  that,  in  doing
    so, he failed to take into account all of the circumstances.

18. I asked Mr Tarlow to draw my attention to the  particular  evidence  or
    circumstances that was/ were overlooked by the judge. He submitted that
    the judge overlooked the threats of violence made by  the  claimant  to
    his former partner.

19. I then informed Ms Elliott-Kelly that it was not necessary for  her  to
    address me. I announced my decision, that the judge did  not  make  any
    material error of law and that his decision  would  stand  for  reasons
    which I would give subsequently in writing.

Assessment

20. I deal first with the  written  grounds.  The  main  complaint  in  the
    grounds concerns the judge's assessment of Ms Clarke's report. There is
    simply no basis upon  which  his  assessment  of  her  report  and  his
    reliance upon her report can legitimately be criticised. It is not  the
    case, as contended in the grounds, that the judge  simply  relied  upon
    her report and failed to consider the evidence as a whole.  It is self-
    evident, from my  summary  of  the  judge's  assessment,  that  he  did
    consider the evidence as a whole, including the PSR and the  two  OASys
    reports relied upon on behalf of the Secretary of State. It is not  the
    case that he treated the report of Ms Clarke as determinative.  He also
    considered the subjective evidence of the claimant and  his  ex-partner
    besides the evidence in the forms of the  PSR  and  the  OASys  reports
    relied upon on behalf of the Secretary of State.

21. The judge considered, in terms, Ms Clarke's evidence that the  claimant
    presented a medium risk of serious harm to a known  individual  if  his
    circumstances change,  at  [62]-[63],  but  said  (at  [63])  that  the
    Tribunal's focus must be on the present circumstances.  He  found  that
    the  claimant's  life  was  in  a  state  of  stability  and  that  the
    difficulties with his relationship with Santa were behind  him.  It  is
    plain from the judge's decision there was nothing about the  claimant's
    then current circumstances to suggest that his circumstances may change
    materially in a way that could be foreseen. In these circumstances,  it
    would have been an exercise  in  pure  speculation  if  the  judge  had
    embarked upon a consideration of  the  risk  posed  if  the  claimant's
    circumstances were to change materially.

22. Mr Tarlow was correct to submit that the main argument in  the  grounds
    distils into the one short point, that the judge placed too much weight
    on the report of Ms Clarke. However, this as a matter for the judge.

23. Contrary to the grounds, it is not the case that the judge ignored  the
    claimant's conviction. He took it into account in terms.

24. This leaves one remaining point from Mr Tarlow's submissions, i.e. that
    the judge failed to take into account all of the circumstances. When  I
    asked him to draw my attention to  the  particular  evidence  that  the
    judge overlooked, he said that the  judge  overlooked  the  threats  of
    violence made by the claimant to his former partner. The only reference
    to threats by the claimant in the decision is at [29], where the judge,
    in summarising the submissions of Ms  Ellis,  mentioned  that,  on  one
    version  of  the  claimant's  evidence,  he  mentioned  having  sent  a
    threatening text message to [T]. Whilst it is true that  this  was  the
    only reference to the evidence of threats by the claimant, the fact  is
    that judges are not obliged to deal with each and every aspect  of  the
    evidence that is before them. The mere fact that something has not been
    specifically mentioned does not mean that  it  was  overlooked.  In  my
    judgment, given that the judge considered the evidence that was  before
    him in such detail and with such care, it simply cannot be said that he
    overlooked the evidence of the claimant  having  made  threats  to  his
    explain partner. In any event, this is not material to the outcome,  on
    any legitimate view, given the evidence  before  the  judge,  that  the
    claimant's differences with his ex-partner had been  resolved  and  the
    view I have expressed above, that it would have  been  an  exercise  in
    pure speculation if the judge had ventured to consider the risk in  the
    event of an unforeseeable change in his circumstances.

25. My treatment of the Secretary of State's grounds and case is as briefly
    stated as her case was made  before  me.  I  take  the  view  that  the
    decision of the  judge,  which  was  a  full,  fair  and  very  careful
    assessment, speaks for itself.

26. For all of these reasons, I have concluded that the judge did  not  err
    in law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  therefore  dismissed.  The
    decision of the judge stands.



      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]
Signed                                             Date:  26 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
