

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: DA/00766/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields       |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2017             |On 2 May 2017                      |
|                             |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. G.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally  and  claimed  asylum  on  23  December   2001.   That
           application was refused, and an appeal against the  refusal  was
           dismissed by decision of an Adjudicator promulgated on 19 August
           2002 [D1]. On 6 January 2010 he made further  submissions  which
           were treated as a fresh claim, although no decision was made  in
           relation to them until 11 February 2014 [R1]. This  followed  by
           some margin a decision to make a deportation  order  on  3  June
           2013 pursuant to section 3(5)(a)  of  the  1971  Act  [L1],  the
           Respondent having relied upon section 77(4) of the 2002  Act  to
           make a deportation order whilst an asylum claim was pending.
        2. The decision pursuant to section 3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act  was
           made because of the Appellant's convictions for drugs  offences.
           On 4 May 2010 the Appellant was convicted of possession of Class
           B drugs and fined. On 10 December 2010 he was convicted  of  two
           counts of possession of Class B drugs and in relation  to  each,
           sentenced to a term of eight months imprisonment  suspended  for
           two years. On 11 January 2013 he was convicted on his  own  plea
           of a further count of possession of Class B  drugs,  within  the
           term of the  suspension.  The  basis  of  his  plea,  which  was
           accepted by the  Crown,  was  that  he  was  no  more  than  the
           custodian of the drugs, which were the property  of  others  who
           were the true dealers. On 1 February 2013 HHJ Mooncey  sentenced
           him  on  that  basis  to  a  term  of  four   months   immediate
           imprisonment for that offence, and in addition, directed that he
           should serve consecutively  a  period  of  five  months  of  the
           original suspended sentence. Thus, in total, he was sentenced to
           a term of immediate imprisonment of nine months.
        3. There is no dispute over the fact that since his  first  arrival
           in the UK  the  Appellant  has  consistently  claimed  to  be  a
           homosexual. The Adjudicator in 2002 rejected his evidence  about
           his experiences in Iran as not credible, but commented that  "it
           may well be that he is a practising  homosexual".  This  comment
           was identified by the Respondent as the reason  for  her  making
           the concession that the Appellant "was gay"  in  the  course  of
           making her decision to refuse his claim to asylum on 11 February
           2014.
        4. The Appellant pursued an appeal before the First  tier  Tribunal
           ["FtT"] against the decision to deport him.  In  the  course  of
           that appeal the Appellant served a witness statement of 30  June
           2014, and  a  report  dated  28  November  2013  by  Dr  Kaul  a
           Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist. These documents rehearsed  the
           psychiatric issues  which  had  led  to  a  number  of  hospital
           admissions from May 2012 onwards. In the course of the rehearsal
           of what were  understood  by  Dr  Kaul  to  be  the  Appellant's
           instructions it was disclosed that the Appellant had engaged  in
           a heterosexual affair. Dr Kaul's report indicated  that  he  had
           been told the length of that affair had been two years, although
           the Appellant disputed this in his June 2014 witness  statement,
           and said that he had been misunderstood,  and  that  the  affair
           lasted merely three  months.  The  explanation  he  offered  for
           entering into this relationship was his desire to be  a  father,
           and his explanation for its termination  was  his  inability  to
           live a lie in relation to his sexuality.
        5. The appeal was first called on for hearing on 7 July  2014,  but
           it was adjourned at the hearing when the  Respondent  sought  to
           withdraw the concession that the Appellant was gay in the  light
           of the new evidence. Directions were made that required  her  to
           set out her position in writing, with reasons, and the Appellant
           was given an opportunity to respond with further evidence (if so
           advised) before the appeal was to be relisted. By  letter  of  8
           July 2014 the Respondent formally withdrew  the  concession  and
           gave her reasons for doing so.
        6. The appeal was dismissed  by  the  decision  of  an  FtT  panel,
           promulgated on 5 September 2014. No more need be said about that
           because by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  promulgated
           on 4 March 2016 that decision was set aside with no findings  of
           fact preserved.
        7. The appeal was then relisted for a hearing de  novo  before  the
           FtT. It was dismissed by decision  promulgated  on  21  November
           2016. The Judge directed himself that at the core of the  appeal
           lay the Appellant's disputed claim to be a homosexual.  He  went
           on to conclude;
           "(i) The findings of my brother immigration judge in 2002 amount
           to an acceptance that the appellant at the very  least  lived  a
           clandestine life as a gay man in Iran. I note  that  since  2001
           the appellant has consistently claimed that he is a gay man. For
           12 years the respondent accepted that the  appellant  is  a  gay
           man. In 2002 it was judicially determined that the appellant  is
           a gay man.
           (j) The evidence led by the appellant in 2002 was that he  is  a
           gay man. When the appellant made further representations in 2010
           it was on the basis that he is a gay man. When the appellant was
           interviewed on 14 August 2013 he stated that he is  a  gay  man.
           The psychiatric report produced for the appellant disclose  that
           the appellant has told psychiatrists and his CPN that  he  is  a
           gay man.
           (k) Taking my brother immigration judge's decision from 2002  as
           a starting point, and looking at the consistency and duration of
           the appellant's representations that he is a  gay  man,  I  find
           that the appellant is a gay man who has lived in the UK  for  15
           years and now has the expectation  of  being  able  to  lead  an
           openly gay life".
        8. The Respondent's application to the FtT for permission to appeal
           was made on two grounds. First, on the basis no reasons had been
           provided for the finding that the appellant would wish  to  lead
           an openly gay life. It was asserted that the evidence  was  that
           he has always lived discretely even in the UK.  Second,  on  the
           basis that there  had  been  no  consideration  of  whether  the
           appellant would be required to modify his behaviour upon  return
           to Iran, and thus the test in  HJ (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  had  not
           been correctly applied.
        9. Permission was  granted  on  13  December  2016  by  First  tier
           Tribunal Judge EB Grant on the basis it was arguable the FtT had
           failed to follow and apply HJ  (Iran)  when  assessing  risk  on
           return. She opined that although there was a brief reference  to
           that jurisprudence in the decision the conclusion  was  entirely
           unreasoned. Both grounds were said to be arguable.
       10. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 notice in  response  to  that
           grant of permission. Thus the matter comes before me.
       11. The grounds do not in my judgement disclose any  arguable  error
           of law. The central issue of dispute before the FtT was the true
           nature of the Appellant's sexuality. The Judge's reasons for his
           conclusion that the Appellant  had  told  the  truth  about  his
           sexuality are perfectly clear, albeit  brief.  Whilst  it  might
           have been open to the Respondent to challenge the central reason
           offered for that conclusion on the basis that the 2002  decision
           had been misread, that was not the course taken, and  there  has
           been no subsequent attempt to enlarge the grounds.
       12. Once the Appellant was identified as a gay man, then it was  not
           in dispute that it followed that he was at real risk of  serious
           harm in Iran if he were ever identified as such. That conclusion
           followed whether the identification  of  his  sexuality  was  by
           state agents, or non state agents. As identified by the  Supreme
           Court in HJ (Iran) v SSHD, if a person is  required  to  conceal
           their true sexual identity out of a well founded fear that  they
           will otherwise be persecuted, then they continue to have a  well
           founded fear of persecution even if it may be argued  that  they
           might be successful in avoiding that persecution  by  attempting
           such a concealment.
       13. Although the Judge did not rehearse  the  matter  at  any  great
           length it is in my judgement plain from  his  decision  that  he
           directed himself  appropriately  in  relation  to  the  approach
           recommended by the Supreme Court in such  cases.  There  was  no
           issue between the parties that  in  Iran  a  gay  person  living
           openly as such would be liable to persecution. Thus if the Judge
           accepted (as he did) that the Appellant would wish  to  continue
           to live as an openly gay man as he had done in the UK,  then  it
           followed that he had a well founded fear of persecution. It  was
           plainly well open to the Judge on the  evidence  before  him  to
           accept  this  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  case,  once  he  had
           concluded that the Appellant was indeed a gay  man  as  claimed.
           The correct burden  and  standard  of  proof  were  employed  in
           undertaking the  analysis  of  the  evidence,  and  the  Judge's
           findings were briefly, but adequately,  reasoned  and  they  are
           plainly rational.
       14. In the circumstances, the Judge did not make any material  error
           of law in his decision to allow the appeal,  and  that  decision
           must stand.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the FtT which was promulgated on 21 November 2016  did
      not involve the  making  of  any  error  of  law  and  is  accordingly
      affirmed.









Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 April 2017
