
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00253/2015 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by remote       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 21 October 2020                   |On 22 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                      A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, instructed by Irving & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr R Palmer QC and Mr W Hays, instructed by
                    Government Legal Department.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has been remitted to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The directions given by the Court  were  that  the  appeal  be
    reheard  by  the  Tribunal  constituted  differently  from  that  which
    previously heard and decided the appeal in this matter.

 2. The parties appeared before me by  their  representatives  for  a  case
    management hearing on 21 October 2020.  By their consent  that  hearing
    was treated as the hearing of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. By the consent of the parties and in the light of  the  information  in
    the documents on file I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was affected by error of law and I set it aside.

 4. In my judgment this appeal is suitable for remittal to  the  Frist-tier
    Tribunal for a new decision to be made.  My reasons, in short,  are  as
    follows.  First, both of the sub-paragraphs of  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement apply to this appeal.  Secondly, I am not  persuaded
    that the terms of the remittal  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  impose  any
    restriction on the Upper Tribunal's manner of disposal of this appeal.

 5. I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and direct as follows: -



          i) The appeal against the Secretary of State's decision is to  be
             determined afresh.

         ii) No judge who has had any dealings with this appeal in the past
             is to be involved in its redetermination.

        iii) The appeal is to be managed and listed in accordance with such
             directions as may be given by the President of the  First-tier
             Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  or,  if  direction
             (ii) has the effect of excluding him, by a judge  specifically
             appointed by him for this purpose.

         iv) All  anonymity  and  confidentiality  orders  previously  made
             remain in force.

          v) Any further directions are to be sought  from  the  First-tier
             Tribunal in accordance with direction (iii) above.


                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 21 October 2020

