
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00006/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2018                      |On 10 January 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE COCKERILL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                mr ali hafeez
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss F Shaw (Counsel), Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Appellant the decision of FtTJ O'Hagan
    ("the judge" dated 2 October 2018. By that  decision  ("the  decision")
    the judge refused an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 8 December 2017 to make a deportation order  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant.

 2. Permission to appeal against the judge's decision was granted  by  FtTJ
    Froom on 25 October 2018, saying "it is arguable that the [judge] erred
    by failing to explain how he concluded there were imperative grounds of
    public [security] justifying the appellant's deportation in  the  light
    of the need to show the threat posed by the appellant is  exceptionally
    serious."

 3. The Appellant is a German national born in Germany on 21 July 1995.  He
    is now 23 years of age. He is the eldest child of six and had until his
    conviction and subsequent deportation resided with his family in the UK
    since his arrival in 2006. The Appellant  was  granted  a  registration
    certificate as a German National on 14  December  2009,  following  his
    father's application to register his family as EEA nationals.

 4. The present case arises out of the Appellant's conviction at St  Albans
    Crown Court on two counts of rape committed while he was aged seventeen
    in June 2013 for which he received a sentence of six years,  one  count
    of robbery committed against the same victim on the  same  date  (three
    years concurrent); and one count of  dangerous  driving  for  which  he
    received a sentence of 12 months consecutive to the six years  received
    for the index offence. He had an earlier conviction for  theft  from  a
    motor vehicle for which he had received a conditional discharge.

 5. The facts of the principal offences were  (in  brief)  as  follows,  as
    recorded by the sentencing judge. The victim was  a  27  year  old  sex
    worker.  On the night in question she had  consented  to  go  with  the
    Appellant in his car for  paid  sexual  services.  On  arrival  at  the
    destination car  park,  the  Appellant  put  a  knife  to  her  throat,
    described her as "scum" and forced her to  perform  oral  sex  on  him,
    following which he raped her  vaginally.  During  the  course  of  this
    assault he held her by the throat and told her "Move like you want  it,
    bitch". He then stole her money from where she had  hidden  it  in  her
    shoe. The offences were apparently  motivated  both  by  a  desire  for
    sexual gratification and some form of inchoate revenge,  it  being  his
    case that he had been robbed by another sex worker.

 6. The Appellant, who the trial judge noted was a highly  intelligent  and
    articulate young man with ambitions to become a lawyer, constructed  an
    elaborate and dishonest defence, involving calling his father  to  give
    dishonest evidence.  It  was  described  by  the  judge  as  a  cynical
    manipulation of the criminal process "using a degree of  sophistication
    and cunning beyond that of  many  adults,  and  certainly  beyond  your
    chronological age".  The trial judge concluded "that shows the sort  of
    person you are".

 7. The trial judge also noted a "very clear lack of  empathy,  insight  or
    understanding".  The judge decided not to impose an  extended  sentence
    because of the length of  the  sentence  planned  and  the  Appellant's
    chronological age.

 8. The sentencing remarks also deal with the dangerous  driving  incident,
    which was committed while on bail  and  involved  a  high  speed  chase
    trying to evade the police and involving running a number of red lights
    and recording speeds of over 100 miles per hour. Again the  defence  to
    this charge involved a dishonest attempt to evade justice.

 9. On 19 April 2016, following his conviction, the  Appellant  was  served
    with a notice of liability to deport. He responded on 20  January  2017
    setting out why he considered that he should not be deported.

10. On 8 December 2017 the Respondent made  a  decision  under  Regulations
    23(6)(b) and 27 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2016 ("the 2016 Regulations") to remove the Appellant from  the  UK  on
    public policy/public security grounds.  It is this decision  which  was
    appealed against.

11. The decision noted that there was no evidence of his parents exercising
    treaty rights or having comprehensive insurance in place for the period
    that he was a dependent child. The decision therefore  did  not  accept
    that the Appellant had been resident in the UK in accordance  with  the
    2016 Regulations for a continuous period of five years and stated  that
    the Respondent  considered  that  the  Appellant  had  not  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.  It went on to decide:

          a.  That  the  Appellant  represented  a  genuine,  present   and
             sufficiently serious threat  to  the  public  to  justify  his
             deportation on grounds of public policy;

          b. Even had he had permanent residence rights either the  hurdles
             of serious grounds of public policy  or  the  higher  test  of
             imperative grounds of public security would have been met.

12. The Appellant lodged an in time notice of appeal against the  decision.
    He completed his custodial sentence on 4 January 2018.  He was released
    on immigration bail on 31 January 2018. He is on licence until 15  June
    2021. He has not committed  any  further  offences.  He  was  prior  to
    deportation residing with his mother and siblings in the family home.

13. The legal framework was placed before us in some detail by Ms Shaw  who
    appeared for the Appellant here  and  before  the  FTtJ.  We  are  very
    grateful for her full and clear skeleton argument.  The legal framework
    is essentially common ground and we do not need  to  deal  with  it  at
    length.

14. In summary the expulsion of EEA citizens and family members on  grounds
    of public policy or national  security  is  expressly  designed  to  be
    limited. There are three layers of  protection  set  out  in  the  2016
    Regulations which are applicable in  this  case:  residence,  permanent
    residence and Regulation 27(4) which includes continuous residence  for
    at least 10 years.

15. It is this latter provision which primarily  comes  into  play  in  the
    present case since the judge proceeded on the basis that the  Appellant
    had acquired a permanent right of residence and was prepared to  assume
    in his favour that he had acquired the highest level of protection.  We
    do not consider that the judge did decide this point;  he  specifically
    said that this was an assumption.  Taken together with  what  he  later
    said at [49] ("since I have found that the higher  test  of  imperative
    grounds is met, it follows that I am satisfied that the lower tests are
    also met. Whatever way I assess the case, the outcome is the same")  we
    conclude that he proceeded on this basis without  deciding  the  point.
    This is a logical way to proceed given that if he concluded the test of
    "imperative grounds" was in any event met, it was unnecessary to decide
    the question of the level of protection to which the Appellant  was  in
    fact entitled.  An issue remains, at least contingently, as to  whether
    the Appellant did indeed meet the requirements of that highest level of
    protection; but given the basis of the judge's decision and  the  basis
    upon which the appeal is brought the focus is primarily  on  Regulation
    27(4) which provides for removal only on "imperative grounds of  public
    security".

16. That term is not defined.  It is considered in a number of  authorities
    to which we were referred, including MG and VC (Ireland)  [2006]  UKAIT
    00053, LG (Italy) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 190,  LG  and  CC  (EEA  Regs:
    residence, imprisonment removal) Italy v SSHD [2009] UKAIT, VP  (Italy)
    v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 806, Tsakouridis and  PI  v  Oberburgermeisterin
    der Stadt Remscheid (Freedom of movement of Persons) Case C-348/09  and
    SSHD v Eduardo Rui Monteiro Barbusa Semendo  (DA/00096/2015).   However
    it was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that the law  was  correctly
    stated in the following passage from [110] in LG and CC which was cited
    by the judge at [37] of his decision:

         "... we cannot accept the  elevation  of  offences  to  "imperative
         grounds" purely on the basis of a custodial sentence of five  years
         or more being imposed. As was  said  by  Carnwath  LJ  in  LG  (see
         paragraph 32(3)), there is no indication why the  severity  of  the
         offence in itself is enough to make  removal  "imperative"  in  the
         interests of public security. Such an offence may be  the  starting
         point for consideration, but there must be something more, in scale
         or kind, to justify the conclusion that  the  individual  poses  "a
         particularly serious risk to the safety of the public or a  section
         of the public"."

17. On this basis it was not contended that the judge had applied the wrong
    legal test; the contention which was advanced  for  the  Appellant  was
    that the decision was one which was not reasonably open  to  the  judge
    bearing in mind the Appellant's circumstances, in particular given  the
    following factors:

          a. The Appellant's high level of integration, bearing in mind the
             factors listed above and the fact  that  integration  was  not
             broken while in prison, in that he had  frequent  visits  from
             family and undertook and successfully completed  a  number  of
             courses

          b. What is said to be a misevaluation of the facts,  including  a
             failure to give sufficient weight to the absence of a  finding
             of dangerousness, which, being a lower hurdle than  the  27(4)
             hurdle is said to logically  preclude  a  finding  under  that
             head, and a failure to take into account the  evidence  of  an
             independent psychiatric report by Dr Davies.

18. Against this submission the Respondent contends that there is an  error
    of law in the decision of the judge, but it is one  which  favours  the
    Respondent, namely that the judge  erred  in  applying  the  imperative
    grounds test and not a serious grounds test based on the evidence;  and
    that accordingly there was no material error of law in the  Appellant's
    favour because on any analysis the Appellant met the "serious  grounds"
    test.  As to  the  Appellant's  perversity  challenge,  the  Respondent
    contended that given the findings of fact, and the fact that no  single
    finding of fact is said to be perverse, the challenge  cannot  possibly
    succeed.  It  contends  that  the  findings  the  judge  makes  on  the
    appellant's evidence are of great importance.

19. Having carefully considered  these  submissions  and  the  decision  we
    conclude that the decision is one which  was  reasonably  open  to  the
    judge, and is not tainted by irrationality or perversity.

20. The starting point is that it is common ground that the  judge  applied
    the correct test as a matter of law.  He was entitled to  look  at  the
    evidence and consider whether there was something more in the  evidence
    before him, in scale or  kind,  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the
    individual poses "a particularly serious risk  to  the  safety  of  the
    public or a section of the public".

21. That is exactly what the judge scrupulously did. He rightly took as his
    starting point the seriousness of the  offence  and  rightly  concluded
    that that was not sufficient [38].  He then went on to  consider  other
    factors, in particular:

          a. The seriousness of the offence even  within  the  spectrum  of
             rape cases [39];

          b. The disregard/contempt for others evidenced by the  rape,  the
             robbery and the motoring  offence  [39].  Together  these  two
             factors were said to elevate the  offending  into  matters  of
             "the utmost seriousness";

          c. The evidence which the judge had heard which  only  served  to
             heighten his concerns, in particular as regards his failure to
             accept his guilt and his disregard and contempt not  just  for
             the victim but towards  women  and  particularly  sex  workers
             [40];

          d. The evidence as to rehabilitation [41] which  he  assessed  as
             providing a somewhat mixed picture:

               i.  Credit was given for the work done; but at the same  time
                  the judge noted that this has to be  taken  together  with
                  the negative factor of failure to accept  guilt  which  he
                  said "is a potent indicator that he has  not  particularly
                  benefitted from those courses".

              ii.  The  OASys  report  was  briefly  but  clearly  carefully
                  assessed;

             iii.  Issues  as  to  bullying  running  a  shop  fighting  and
                  manipulation of prisoners and staff were noted, as was the
                  Appellant's unconvincing response to these points;

          e. The risk of reoffending was weighed and independently assessed
             concluding  that  there  was   a   "substantial"   "real   and
             significant" and "at best medium" risk of reoffending [42];

          f. His engagement in the limited time post release was considered
             [42];

          g. The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  in  some  detail  the
             Appellant's  age,  state  of  health,  family   and   economic
             situation as well as his length or residence  and  integration
             [45-7] as well as the impact of deportation on the Appellant's
             rehabilitation [48].

22. It was on this basis that the judge  concluded  at  [49]  that  he  was
    "satisfied that the requirements of the regulations are met, that there
    are imperative grounds of public security, and that  deportation  is  a
    proportionate response to the appellant's conduct."

23. We note that it is not contended that the judge erred in  principle  in
    giving weight to any of the factors to which he did give  have  regard;
    it was accepted in argument that these were all matters  to  which  the
    judge could properly bring into the assessment. In  our  judgment  this
    makes the hurdle which the Appellant seeks to surmount extremely  high.
    Clearly and persuasively as the case was put on his behalf, we consider
    that it does not succeed in meeting that hurdle.

24. The points which the judge takes into account and  the  findings  which
    the judge makes on the Appellant's evidence  are  not  simply  relevant
    ones, which it was proper for him to consider - they are conclusions of
    great importance.  The question which it is agreed the judge had to ask
    was whether there was something more in the material before  him  which
    justified the "imperative grounds" conclusion because  of  particularly
    serious risk to the public or a portion of it. It was right for him  to
    ask at which end of the scale  of  seriousness  within  its  type  this
    offence fell and to evaluate the level and the nature of  the  risk  by
    reference to all the material before him.

25. There were plainly extremely disturbing  features  of  the  Appellant's
    behaviour both in the offence, in his defence  and  in  his  subsequent
    behaviour in prison - as well as his evidence before the judge -  which
    made it far from unreasonable for the judge to reach his conclusion  as
    to risk.  We do not consider that it can be said that any one  part  of
    the evidence was given undue weight.  It was  not  the  case  that  the
    judge found issues just with one aspect of the evidence; the judge, who
    was in the best position to evaluate the evidence in the round,  firmly
    rejected the Appellant's case and his evidence, noting in his  evidence
    to the tribunal a continuing serious unaddressed issue as to acceptance
    of guilt and attitude to sex workers and to women generally.

26. We do not consider that the evidence  as  to  the  rehabilitative  work
    undertaken in prison can be said necessarily to provide a strong factor
    against all of this.  It was certainly open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that  in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's  apparent  unwillingness  or
    inability to accept his guilt that this was a potent indicator that  he
    has not in fact benefitted from the courses and had not  in  fact  made
    such progress with his rehabilitation as was  contended.   We  consider
    that  the  judge's  view  on  this  was  properly  supported   by   his
    consideration of  the  issues  which  emerged  as  to  the  Appellant's
    behaviour in prison and the fact that  (as  with  his  defence  to  the
    substantive charges) he was ingenious in attempts to displace blame.

27. As for the argument that more emphasis  should  have  been  put  on  Dr
    Davies' report, this is a question of the weight  to  be  given  to  an
    individual piece of evidence. It cannot be said that a failure to  give
    weight to a report which accepted the Appellant as credible  in  saying
    he understood how to manage his risk was  erroneous,  in  circumstances
    where the judge had heard and evaluated the Appellant's  evidence,  and
    found him not to be credible.

28. Nor do we accept that there is an error or  a  logical  disjunction  as
    regards the lack of a dangerousness finding by the  trial  judge.   The
    tests to be applied are different. Further it is apparent,  as  alluded
    to above, that the absence of a dangerousness finding was based not  on
    a positive view on the part of the trial judge that the  Appellant  was
    not dangerous, but on a conclusion that in the light of the  length  of
    sentence and the Appellant's youth a finding of dangerousness  was  not
    necessary. A conclusion of dangerousness in  relation  to  a  youth  is
    reached only following the application of particular rigour  (Dangerous
    Offenders Guideline paragraph  6.5.1).  That  approach  sits  perfectly
    consistently with the judge's later and more fully informed assessment.

29. As regards integration, while it might well be argued that  integration
    has not been broken, we do not consider the judge's conclusion on  this
    was outside the range of permissible answers,  particularly  given  the
    indubitable physical separation from his family during his imprisonment
    and the correlative need to  rely  on  the  courses,  which  the  judge
    concluded had not been particularly effective.

30. In essence therefore what one sees in  the  decision  is  a  series  of
    findings which were manifestly open to the judge  to  make,  and  which
    plainly reflect a careful and balanced approach to the  exercise  being
    undertaken. These are then considered appropriately. It cannot be  said
    that the conclusion that the requisite test was met was  one  which  on
    the basis of these evidential  findings  was  not  rational.  Different
    tribunals might have reached different conclusions on this point, based
    on this evidence.  Nor do we consider that there  was  any  failure  to
    explain how the test was met: the test was clearly stated  and  applied
    with suitable explanation of each part of the decision and the  overall
    evaluation.

31. Two other questions were raised during the course of argument:

          a. Whether the FtTJ erred in his approach to residence;

          b. Whether any error in the Appellant's favour (ie. an  erroneous
             conclusion  that  he  was  entitled  to  "imperative  grounds"
             protection) would be material in  the  light  of  the  factual
             findings and their consequences for a "serious grounds" test.

32. In the light of our conclusions above that the imperative grounds  test
    is in any event met these do not arise and we make no determinations in
    relation to them.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   S. Cockerill  Date 09 January 2019

The Honourable Mrs Justice Cockerill sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.

