
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00642/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AKOSUA SAKYIWAA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A.  Fijiwala, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Migrant Law Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal from a decision  of  FtT  Judge
    Dineen promulgated on 23 January 2015 allowing the respondent's  appeal
    against a decision that she should be deported from the United  Kingdom
    on public policy grounds.

 2. The respondent is a national of Ghana born in November 1974. She is  40
    years old.

 3. She states that she entered the United Kingdom in June 2005. In January
    2009 she contracted a marriage by proxy to Dutch national  of  Ghanaian
    origins.  Her husband was an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.

 4. On 24 August 2009 she was issued with a residence card as  evidence  of
    her status as a spouse of an EEA national exercising such rights. On 25
    January 2013 she applied for permanent  residence  as  a  spouse  under
    regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations 2006 as amended (the Regulations).



 5. On 20 June 2013, at the Crown Court at Snaresbrook, she  was  convicted
    of four counts of ill-treatment of a person who lacked  capacity.   The
    conduct occurred between  27  February  and  23  April  2012  when  the
    respondent was employed as a Health Care Support Worker at Whipps Cross
    Hospital.  She had worked at the hospital for  two  years.  She  worked
    with elderly bed-ridden patients, some of whom suffered  from  dementia
    or other mental impairment; she supported them in washing, dressing and
    sanitary functions.  Her verbal and physical  interactions  with  these
    patients had  been  observed  by  student  nurses  who  considered  her
    behaviour inappropriate. Her offender manager indicated  that  although
    her conduct did not involve her inflicting serious  physical  harm,  it
    was nevertheless spiteful  and  callous  but  any  further  details  of
    precisely how she ill treated four patients are not  available  on  the
    papers before us.

 6. On 23 August 2013  she  was  sentenced  by  HHJ  Lamb  to  four  months
    imprisonment on each count; one count was to  be  served  concurrently,
    the others consecutively, making a total of twelve months imprisonment.
    She was of previous good character and the judge  noted  that  she  had
    expressed remorse. The  judge  also  sentenced  two  co-defendants  and
    indicated in the sentencing remarks that  between  them  their  conduct
    involved a grave breach of  trust,  had  damaged  the  trust  that  had
    previously existed between patients their families and the hospital and
    undermined the reputation of her colleagues and the hospital.

 7. On 2 April 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision to  deport  the
    respondent with removal directions to Ghana by reason of the threat she
    posed to public policy.  A report from NOMS was obtained. At  the  same
    time two further decisions  were  taken:  to  refuse  the  respondent's
    application for a permanent residence card and to  cancel  her  present
    residence card.   We  understood  from  Ms  Fijiwala  that  both  these
    supplementary decisions were based entirely on the  assessment  of  the
    present threat that the respondent posed to public policy.

 8. The respondent would have completed her criminal sentence  some  around
    February 2014 but was held thereafter in  immigration  detention  until
    released on bail in  August  2014  with  conditions  of  residence  and
    reporting.  Her bail address was not the matrimonial home as she stated
    that she wanted to avoid acrimony resulting from the publicity given to
    her offending behaviour and conviction.

 9. The hearing before Judge Dineen took place  on  26  August  2014.   The
    respondent gave evidence but her husband did not attend as he could not
    secure his employer's consent to his taking leave that day from his job
    as a bus driver. Up to date pay slips confirming  his  employment  were
    placed before the judge.

10. The rival submissions before the judge focused on the extent  to  which
    the respondent continued to represent a threat to the public  generally
    or vulnerable elderly people in particular. This in  turn  depended  on
    the risk assessment  compiled  by  offender  manager  in  May  2014  in
    response to Home Office inquiries, as well as  his  assessment  of  the
    respondent's  evidence  of  remorse  and  insight  not  her   offending
    behaviour. We note that the presenting officer  for  the  Secretary  of
    State observed that  there  was  no  evidence  of  current  matrimonial
    cohabitation.

11. Judge Dineen expressed himself satisfied 'having heard the evidence  of
    (the respondent) that she now realises the sort of conduct  that  would
    be unlawful and inappropriate'. He concluded that  notwithstanding  the
    repugnant  nature  of  the  offences  her  personal  conduct  does  not
    represent a genuine present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society. He went on to  assess  the
    proportionality of the proposed deportation in the light  of  the  fact
    that she has lived for a substantial period in the UK; is  in  a  valid
    and subsisting marriage with a man who would not accompany her to Ghana
    and is integrated fully culturally and socially into the UK.

12. He accordingly concluded she could not  be  deported  and  allowed  the
    appeal  against  deportation.  He  also  allowed  the  appeal   against
    revocation of the respondent's residence permit and the refusal of  her
    application for permanent residence.

13. The Secretary of State appealed against the deportation decision  only.
    The grounds of appeal took issue with the judge's assessment of  future
    risk.

14. At the start of the hearing we raised with Ms Fujiwala,  some  concerns
    about the judge's  decision  in  respect  of  the  permanent  residence
    application. There was no appeal against  that  decision,  and  in  the
    event that we dismissed the appeal against deportation,  the  Secretary
    of State would be bound by the judge's decision. It seemed to  us  that
    this would mean she  would  be  required  to  issue  the  respondent  a
    permanent residence card, rather than merely continue consideration  of
    it. There is a material link between the decision  on  deportation  and
    permanent residence;  if in truth (absent the  deportation  issue)  the
    respondent was entitled to permanent residence on  the  basis  of  more
    than five year's residence in the UK as the wife of an EEA national who
    was exercising Treaty  rights,  then  the  public  policy  grounds  for
    deportation should have been the  higher  level  of  'serious  grounds'
    rather than the basic level in fact  considered  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and applied by the judge.

15. In response, Ms. Fujiwala made two applications in the alternative:

      i) for the proceedings to be adjourned generally for the  Home  Office
         to consider the matter and respond;

     ii) in the event that this was refused, to apply for leave to amend the
         appeal notice and appeal  out  of  time  against  the  decision  in
         respect of the respondent's permanent residence.

16. The respondent opposed the first of these applications:  she  continued
    to be on bail restricting her liberty, she  was  privately  paying  for
    legal representation and would be prejudiced by this  late  application
    for an adjournment. The second application  was  formally  opposed  but
    acknowledged that there would be no real prejudice if we granted it and
    adjourned that part of the appeal for further consideration.

17. We considered there  was  substance  to  the  objection  to  the  first
    application. We refused it for these reasons.  We  granted  the  second
    application and adjourned the appeal against  the  permanent  residence
    entitlement for further  consideration.  Our  reasons  for  the  latter
    decision are as follows:

      i) An entitlement to permanent residence would require satisfaction by
         the relevant decision maker that the  respondent  was  party  to  a
         genuine marital relationship with an EEA husband who had  exercised
         Treaty rights continuously for the five years before  the  decision
         in issue.

     ii) It was common ground that the respondent was not  living  with  her
         husband at the time of the hearing; he did not attend the  hearing;
         there was no evidence as to the nature  of  their  relationship  in
         2014/15 or indeed throughout the  period  of  the  proceeding  five
         years.

    iii) There was evidence that the husband was  working  in  2014  but  no
         evidence that that had been the case for the previous five years.

     iv) There was, therefore, no evidential basis for the judge's  decision
         allowing  the  appeal  against  the  permanent  residence  decision
         outright,  as  opposed  to  declaring  it  to  be  outstanding  and
         requiring reconsideration by the Secretary of State in the light of
         the outcome on the deportation appeal.

      v) There was no prejudice to the respondent in the course proposed. If
         the Secretary of State's appeal succeeded and the  deportation  had
         to be remade, there would need to be clarity as  to  the  basis  on
         which it would be remade. If the  deportation  appeal  were  to  be
         dismissed then the respondent could supply any further  information
         relevant to permanent residence; if  agreed  the  appeal  would  be
         withdrawn and if disputed she would have a chance  to  address  the
         Secretary of State's reasons  in  a  further  hearing  before  this
         Tribunal.

18. We then resumed the hearing of the Secretary of State's appeal  against
    the  judge's  assessment  of  risk  and  present  threat.  There   were
    essentially three points:-

      i) The respondent had indicated that she did not realise at  the  time
         that what she had done was wrong; she showed no  insight  and  must
         therefore be a risk to the elderly and vulnerable.

     ii) She had undertaken no  offending  course  or  other  rehabilitation
         whilst in detention or subsequently.

    iii) The NOMS assessment was that the respondent  was  at  low  risk  of
         offending   generally,   but   a    medium    risk    of    causing
         physical/psychological harm towards vulnerable  people.  The  judge
         had concluded that the fact  that  she  would  be  unable  to  take
         employment or voluntary sector work with the elderly in the  future
         because  enhanced  disclosure  would  be  required.  This  did  not
         sufficiently reduce the risk to the elderly and vulnerable  of  the
         respondent came across them in other circumstances.

19. We are satisfied that the judge was alive to the material issues in the
    appeal on the question of risk. He properly directed himself as to  the
    relevant test and in our view reached a conclusion he was  entitled  to
    reach on the evidence. There was no material error of law or any  other
    basis for us to  reopen  his  conclusions  of  fact.  He  had  had  the
    advantage of hearing from the respondent and seeing her cross  examined
    and his conclusions depended in significant part on his  assessment  of
    the reliability of her evidence to him. We, nevertheless,  address  the
    specific submissions advanced to us below.

20. As far as insight is concerned, we note that the  papers  before  Judge
    Dineen recorded the respondent telling her offender manager (we believe
    in a pre- sentence report) that she did realise what she was doing  was
    wrong was at the time of the time of the behaviour  in  question.  This
    had to be balanced against the subsequent recognition at  the  sentence
    hearing and in the instant appeal that her  conduct  was  inappropriate
    and unlawful, and she had acquired  insight  having  gone  through  the
    trial process. The sentencing judge acknowledged that she had expressed
    remorse before him and there was a written  statement  to  that  effect
    from the respondent. The respondent had had an opportunity  to  reflect
    on her  conduct  whilst  serving  her  sentence  and  subsequently  and
    acknowledged her criminal behaviour before the judge and the judge  had
    accepted that evidence.

21. The absence of any offending programme in custody  was  not  surprising
    given the short sentence actually to be served. Six months is too short
    a period for NOMS to make a formal OASys assessment find an appropriate
    course and allocate the offender to it. An OASys assessment was made in
    May 2015 and showed the low risk of re-offending. The  serious  concern
    raised by the respondent's conduct was reinforced by these  proceedings
    and the restrictive bail conditions. The absence of  positive  evidence
    of rehabilitation  was  at  best  a  neutral  factor  given  the  other
    conclusions.

22.  There  was  nothing  to  contradict  the  OASys  assessment  that  the
    respondent presented a low risk of harm to the public generally.  There
    were no  previous  convictions  or  subsequent  suspect  conduct.  With
    respect to any risks to the elderly and vulnerable, despite the insight
    now shown, the judge was entitled to conclude that the respondent would
    never be in a position to work with them in respect of  their  personal
    care and hygiene.  The NOMS report specifically stated that medium risk
    of harm was 'where she is in a position of such  responsibility'.  This
    refers to her inappropriate behaviour in the specific  context  of  her
    former employment when she had control over the incapacitated patients.
    Such an opportunity and the repetition of the occasion  for  offending,
    would be unlikely to occur  as  the  protective  vetting  regime  would
    prevent the respondent from being employed in such work in the  future.
    Whatever it  was  that  caused  her  to  behave  in  the  way  she  did
    previously, there was no nothing in the evidence to  suggest  would  be
    replicated with ordinary contact with elderly people in public life  or
    that she would seek elderly people out in order to harm them.

23. In our judgment none of the grounds advanced  amounted  to  a  material
    misdirection on the question of risk. The  overall  conclusion  on  the
    absence of a sufficiently serious present threat was one that the judge
    was entitled to reach on the basis of his factual findings.

24. The Secretary of State's appeal against  the  deportation  decision  is
    accordingly dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal from the judge's decision on deportation  is
dismissed.  The  judge's   decision   allowing   the   respondent's   appeal
accordingly stands.

Leave to appeal to the Secretary of State out of time  against  the  judge's
decision on permanent residence is granted

The appeal on permanent residence is  adjourned  without  a  date  with  the
following directions:

      i) the Secretary of State file a notice and grounds of appeal  against
         this decision within 14 days of the promulgation of this decision;

     ii) the respondent shall have 28 days from the filing of that notice to
         supply any information material to the decision on which she  would
         wish to rely ;

    iii) the Secretary of State file a response to any such material  within
         14 days of its service  by the respondent;

     iv) the file be passed to a judge for directions for hearing as soon as
         practicable  after  nine  weeks  from  the  promulgation  of   this
         decision.

The respondent's bail is to continue on the same terms as before until  such
time as this decision becomes final.

No anonymity directions are made.

No fee was payable and no fee award is made.


Signed   Date 23 November 2015

The Hon Mr Justice Blake
