
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00631/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2018                            |On 2 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  PAWEL [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Zalewski, Counsel instructed by Ardens
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of State to  make
    him the subject of a deportation order.   The  case  is  in  some  ways
    complex and in an effort to make our decision easier to  understand  we
    say at this point that we  have  dismissed  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.  We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did err  but  we
    are also satisfied that unchallenged findings of fact made by the First-
    tier Tribunal supported a decision to allow  the  appeal.   It  follows
    therefore that the errors complained of are not material.

 2. The claimant is a  citizen  of  Poland.   He  was  born  in  1990.   At
    paragraph 19 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal said:

         "The parents were, in my view, honest and frank, and  gave  a  full
         account of how they had come to the UK and raised their  son  since
         he arrived in 2005, within the family home.  They explained that he
         had  either  been  in  education  or  effectively   in   continuous
         employment or looking for  employment  since  his  arrival.   That,
         combined with the [claimant]'s own account of his residence in  the
         UK, satisfies me on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  he  has
         clearly been in the country for a period of ten years."

 3. Further, as the judge accepted evidence that the  claimant  had  either
    been in education or continuous employment the judge was satisfied that
    the claimant had been engaged in exercising  treaty  rights  throughout
    that time.

 4. At paragraph 17 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal reminded itself
    of the terms of Regulation 21(5) of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations  2006  and  particularly  Regulation  21(5)(c)  which
    states:

         "The personal conduct of the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society."

 5. The judge was clearly impressed  with  evidence  about  the  claimant's
    future intentions.  The judge noted that there was  evidence  that  the
    claimant was thought to be unlikely to cause serious  harm  unless  his
    circumstances changed in a way  that  triggered  a  reaction  to  their
    decline.  The Judge had received a recent document from the  claimant's
    offender manager  dated  6  October  2017  confirming  that  since  the
    claimant's release in June 2017 there was no evidence to  suggest  that
    he would  return  to  his  previous  behaviour.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 23 that the claimant had been contrite and straightforward in
    his evidence and said:

         "I think that there were circumstances that were  peculiar  to  his
         lifestyle at the time, which he now realises he must leave  behind.
         It was plain  from  the  demeanour  of  his  parents  and  his  own
         embarrassment at describing those things in their presence, that he
         had come a long way from where he was two-three years ago."

 6. The judge then acknowledged that the offence leading to the  claimant's
    imprisonment was "nasty".  The judge said at paragraph 24:

         "I am satisfied that his risk of offending is not  so  high  as  to
         mean that he now continues to present a risk."

 7. It is clear to us that these findings support  a  conclusion  that  the
    claimant has obtained a right of  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that his present behaviour is not a threat to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society and do not support a  finding  to  the
    contrary. It follows that on those findings the appeal should have been
    allowed unless the findings are for some reason overturned.

 8. Mr Melvin had not settled the  grounds  of  appeal.   There  are  three
    points in the ground.  Points 1(a) and (b) complain in  different  ways
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to follow the law as  explained  in
    the decision of the European Court of Justice in Secretary of State for
    the Home Department v MG (judgment of the court) [2014] EUECJ  C-400/12
    (16 January 2014).  We return to these points later.

 9.  Ground  1(c)  complains  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  "incorrectly
    determined  the  threat  posed  by  the  [claimant]  and  has  imported
    requirements of the Immigration  rules  that  application  to  the  EEA
    Regulations".  The ground then explains that criticism.

10. These grounds clearly do not challenge  either  the  finding  that  the
    claimant has resided in the United Kingdom exercising treaty rights for
    more than five years, and has therefore acquired a permanent  right  of
    residence, or the finding that the risk of reoffending is not  so  high
    that the claimant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  constitutes  a
    present a risk.

11. Although the requirement of Regulation 21(5)(c) is correctly identified
    at paragraph 17 the wording of the Regulation is not followed  strictly
    at paragraph 24 of the Decision and Reasons. Even so, we can only  read
    paragraph 24 sensibly in a way that shows that the judge  had  in  mind
    the requirements of 21(5)(c) and found that  the  claimant  was  not  a
    person whose conduct represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    Rather the judge found that the claimant,  having  worked  his  way  up
    through  less  serious  crime  and  having  then   got   himself   into
    sufficiently serious trouble  to  warrant  a  sentence  of  two  years'
    imprisonment,  had  responded  to   that   intentionally   disagreeable
    treatment by reflecting on his behaviour and resolving  to  live  in  a
    more responsible way.

12. It is said that  this  judge  was  particularly  suited  to  make  such
    findings because of experience in another jurisdiction.  The judge  did
    not say that in his reasoning and it is not a point that impresses  us.
    Many judges  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  have  experience  in  other
    jurisdictions and also experience  in  life  that  proves  particularly
    helpful in certain cases.  This decision was not made by reason of  the
    judge's experience elsewhere but on the evidence before him.  It was  a
    rational view made on his impression of the claimant and his parents as
    witnesses and the clear evidence of the reports of those whose  job  it
    was to comment on the claimant's attitude  to  custody  and  offending.
    These findings are unchallenged and unchallengeable.

13. The judge did err when considering if the claimant was entitled to rely
    on the special protection appropriate  to  a  person  with  ten  years'
    uninterrupted lawful residence.  The judge accepted evidence  that  the
    claimant's parents arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004, shortly after
    Poland joined the European Union, and  the  claimant  and  his  brother
    stayed with their maternal grandparents until they joined their parents
    in 2005.  The claimant was then 14 years old.  The claimant left school
    at the age of 16 and obtained work and qualifications that enabled  him
    to work as a chef.  The claimant was sent to prison  on  7  June  2016.
    Before that he had been on bail subject to electronic  monitoring.   It
    is not entirely clear from the papers when he lost his liberty  but  it
    is clear that he had been in the United Kingdom for  ten  years  before
    that  occurred.   The  judge  erroneously  thought  this  entitled  the
    claimant to say that he had established at least ten years'  continuous
    residence before the decision to deport him  and  that  the  ten  years
    continuous residence was not disrupted by imprisonment.   The  decision
    was made on 15 June 2016.  Residence was interrupted  by  prison.   The
    claimant clearly had not established ten  years'  continuous  residence
    immediately before the decision to deport him.

14.  The  correct  approach  to  the  interpretation   of   the   residence
    requirements under Regulation 21(4) has proved vexing and clarification
    in part came from the decision of the European Court of Justice in  MG.
    Precisely for the reasons set out in the grounds, MG is  authority  for
    the understanding that a period of ten years  must  be  calculated  "by
    counting back from the date of  the  decision  ordering  that  person's
    expulsion" and not by counting forward from the time of arrival in  the
    United Kingdom.  However, the decision in MG is more  nuanced  than  is
    suggested by this fact on its own.

15. We set out below the following paragraphs of the decision in MG:

         "33. It follows that periods of imprisonment cannot be  taken  into
         account for  the  purposes  of  granting  the  enhanced  protection
         provided for in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 and that,  in
         principle, such periods interrupt the continuity of the  period  of
         residence for the purposes of that provision.

         34.  As regards the continuity of the period of residence,  it  has
         been stated in paragraph 28 above  that  the  ten  year  period  of
         residence necessary for the  granting  of  enhanced  protection  as
         provided for in Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  must,  in
         principle be continuous.

         35.  As to the question of the extent to which the  non-continuance
         nature and period of residence during the ten years  preceding  the
         decision to expel the person concerned prevents him  from  enjoying
         enhanced protection, an overall assessment must  be  made  of  that
         person's situation  on  each  occasion  at  the  precise  when  the
         question of expulsion arises (see,  to  that  effect,  Tsakouridis,
         paragraph 32).

         36.   In  that  regard,  given  that,  in  principle,  periods   of
         imprisonment interrupts the continuity of the period  of  residence
         for the purposes of Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38,  such
         periods may - together with the other factors going to make up  the
         entirety of relevant considerations in each individual  case  -  be
         taken into account by  the  national  authorities  responsible  for
         applying Article 28(3) of that Directive as  part  of  the  overall
         assessment required for determining whether the  integrating  links
         previously forged with the host Member State had been  broken,  and
         thus for determining whether the enhanced protection  provided  for
         in  that  provision  will  be  granted  (see,   to   that   effect,
         Tsakouridis) paragraph 34).

         37.  Lastly, as regards the implication of the fact that the person
         concerned has resided in the host Member State during the ten years
         prior to imprisonment, it must be borne in mind that even though  -
         as has been stated in paragraphs 24 and 25 above  -  the  ten  year
         period of residence necessary for the grant of enhanced  protection
         provided for in Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be
         calculated by counting back from the date of decision ordered  that
         person's expulsion, the fact of that the  calculation  carried  out
         under that provision is different  from  the  calculation  for  the
         purposes of the grant of right of permanent  residence  means  that
         the fact that a person concerned resided in the host  Member  State
         during the ten years  prior  to  imprisonment  may  be  taken  into
         consideration as part of the  overall  assessment  referred  to  at
         paragraph 36 above."

16. We have read the Secretary of State's "decision to make  a  deportation
    order" and note  the  concerns  there  about  the  claimant's  lack  of
    integration.  They are, frankly, somewhat mean spirited.  It  is  right
    that the claimant has  not  made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the
    community.  He is 27 years old and did not come to the  United  Kingdom
    until he was aged 14.  It is to his detriment that in that time he  has
    appeared before the  courts  on  three  occasions.   On  two  of  those
    occasions he was punished with community orders of some kind.   He  has
    also taken advantages of the education system and  his  time  has  been
    spent  in  education  or  employment  or  education  related   to   his
    employment.  This is not to his discredit.  It is typical  of  a  young
    person of his  age  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  papers  do  include
    supporting references from members of the community.  Whilst he has not
    made a strong contribution, his home is in the United  Kingdom.   There
    is no evidence that he has any links with any other  country.   Neither
    can his criminal behaviour be characterised as so  antisocial  that  he
    has severed his links  with  the  United  Kingdom  or  not  established
    himself there.   Whilst  we  accept,  as  we  clearly  must,  that  his
    imprisonment in  principal  interrupts  his  period  of  continuity  of
    residence we are not satisfied that "the integrating  links  previously
    forged with the host Member State have been broken" by  the  period  of
    imprisonment.

17.  Mr  Melvin  made  much  about  the  appellant's  escalating   criminal
    behaviour.  That has been considered and was  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's rational view, clearly open to him, that his offending has  not
    only escalated but it has peaked.  Only time will tell if that  finding
    is right but it is certainly a conclusion the Tribunal was entitled  to
    reach and we do not intend to depart from it even if we could.

18. It follows therefore that we are persuaded that in fact this man should
    be treated as someone whose residence  has  not  been  interrupted  and
    should only be removed on imperative  grounds  which  patently  do  not
    exist here.

19. However that is not our primary finding.  Our primary finding  is  that
    even if that is wrong  the  claimant  is  someone  who  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  concluded  was  entitled  to  the  protection  of  Regulation
    21(5)(c) and who is not a person whose conduct represents  "a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".

20. We agree with the Secretary of State that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    did misdirect himself.  He should not have  been  concerned  about  the
    "very compelling circumstances".  He should have been  looking  at  the
    Regulations and MG.

21. However as indicated at the start of the decision the errors,  although
    significant, are not material in this case.

22. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal for proper reasons  as  well
    as an improper one.  We do not interfere with the decision.

Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




|Signed                                 |                                    |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal Judge |Dated: 28 February 2018             |

