
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: da/00775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 June 2015                      |On 10 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     Gn
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Leskin, Solicitor, Birnberg Peirce & Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of  Ghana,  born  on  31  May  1970.   She
arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 March 1976, aged 5, as the  dependant  of
her father and was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in 1979.  On 11  April
2014, the Secretary of State decided to make  a  deportation  order  against
her under the provisions of section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.   This
was following her conviction at Harrow Crown Court on 13 August 2010 of  one
count of theft and on the same day at Blackfriars Crown Court of  one  count
of theft, one count of battery  and  breach  of  a  suspended  sentence,  in
respect of which the Appellant  was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  21  months
imprisonment. The sentencing Judge noted that the offences "seem  to  me  to
have a common  matter,  stealing  from  a  person  in  order  to  fuel  your
addiction to drugs."  The Appellant did not appeal  against  her  conviction
or sentence.

2.    She was then served  with  an  ICD  0350AD  liability  to  deportation
letter to which she responded by stating that she had lived  in  the  United
Kingdom since the age  of  6,  her  parents  were  British  and  she  had  a
daughter, A, born on 30 January 1998 who was being cared for  by  her  step-
grandmother, CN. On  5  December  2011,  after  her  release  on  bail,  the
Appellant was convicted of theft, possession  of  an  offensive  weapon  and
making false representations to make gain, in respect of which she  received
a community order for 12 months and a drug rehabilitation requirement,  with
immediate effect. The Appellant  entered  residential  rehabilitation  on  5
December 2011 and completed this on 10 September 2012. It was accepted  that
she has not used drugs or committed any further offences since.

3.    The Appellant appealed against the  decision  to  make  a  deportation
order and her appeal  came  before  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brown  for
hearing  on  13  November  2014,  when  he  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules  and  with  reference  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The
Secretary of State sought and obtained permission  to  appeal  against  this
decision and following a hearing on 30 January 2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Kopieczek found that the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  made  a  material
error  of  law  in  concluding  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
Appellant's daughter either to live in Ghana or  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom were the Appellant to be deported [30] and that he further erred  in
law in failing to apply  the  correct  test  viz  whether  there  were  very
significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into  Ghana,  the  word
"very" being more than mere surplusage [32]. A full  copy  of  the  decision
dated 17 March 2015 is appended to this determination. The  appeal  was  re-
listed for hearing by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the  findings  of
fact by the First Tier Tribunal were  to  stand,  except  insofar  as  those
findings are infected by errors of law.

4.    The adjourned hearing came before the Upper Tribunal  for  hearing  on
18 June 2015. Mr Jarvis provided us with copies of the decisions  in  AM  (s
117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC); AR  (Pakistan)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  816;
Bakaray  Danso  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596;  Joseph  Grant  v   United   Kingdom
(Application no. 10606/07) and a copy of  the  Appellant's  PNC  record.  Mr
Leskin provided us with copies of the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
"Chapter 13: criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases" and judgments  of
the Court of Appeal in AQ (Nigeria), TH (Bangladesh),  CD  (Jamaica)  [2015]
EWCA Civ 250 and AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.

5.    In respect of the findings of the First Tier Tribunal that were to  be
preserved as not infected by error of  law,  Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that  the
finding that the Appellant is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK
is to stand [39] and the finding that the Appellant  enjoys  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with her daughter [20]. Mr Leskin  in  his  skeleton
argument at  [63]  agreed  but  further  drew  attention  to  the  following
findings: that the Appellant has lived lawfully in the UK for over half  her
life (now 39 years out of 45) [30] and noted that the  evidence  before  the
First Tier Tribunal was not disputed to any extent.

The oral evidence

6.    The Appellant's statement was considered to stand as her evidence  and
she was then cross-examined  by  Mr  Jarvis.  The  Appellant  confirmed  her
address.  She confirmed that  she  still  has  involvement  with  Westcliffe
House (where she was in residential rehabilitation) in that  she  speaks  to
the therapist, PB.  She  confirmed  that  her  accommodation  was  supported
housing for those mainly who are homeless; that there was not much  room  at
her mother's house and  she  felt  that  she  needed  more  support  in  her
recovery.  She  confirmed  that  she  sees  a  counsellor  every   week   at
Westminster Drugs Project.

7.    She said that her accommodation  assists  in  budgeting  and  her  key
worker assists her with her degree, student finance and her wellbeing.  They
signpost her to various organizations and Westminster Drugs project  is  one
of those. Mr Jarvis asked the Appellant  how  often  she  was  subjected  to
drugs testing and she replied that this was random and the last test was  at
Christmas. The Appellant added that she had chosen  that  because  it  keeps
her on her toes; that sometimes it is once a month but it is random.

8.    She said that since her release from prison in July 2011 she had  been
living in accommodation where she has support. She said that she has  family
in London and that her mother lives 10 minutes away from her. She  confirmed
that  her  mother  and  father  were  originally  from  Ghana.   Mr   Jarvis
acknowledged that there have been difficulties with the  Appellant's  father
but asked whether her mother  had  contact  with  members  of  the  Ghanaian
community in London. The Appellant responded that her mother  had  relatives
in London - aunties and uncles but she had  no  idea  whether  or  not  they
visited Ghana. She said that her mother had  last  visited  Ghana  when  her
niece O was 1 - she is 4 now and that O lives here -  she  is  her  sister's
child.

9.    In answer to a question by Mr Jarvis, the Appellant  stated  that  her
mother had gone to Ghana on holiday for 3 weeks and had stayed in  a  hotel.
She said that she did not know whether or not her mother had visited  family
members or friends. She denied that her mother talked about Ghana  when  she
was growing up and said that her family is  not  like  that.  The  Appellant
stated that she did not even know she was not her real mother  for  a  while
and that there are things they do not say to her.  She  confirmed  that  her
mother speaks Twi but that she did not speak or understand any Twi. She  did
not think that her brothers and sisters had any contacts in Ghana.

10.   In respect of  questions  from  Mr  Jarvis  as  to  how  she  supports
herself, the Appellant stated that she works at McDonalds  part  time  while
she does her degree. She said that her family did not supply  her  with  any
money and that she had not asked them for money as they would  not  be  able
to afford it. She said she had not asked them. Mr Jarvis made  reference  to
the letter from AK at page 12 and asked the Appellant whether she knew  what
he meant by her hard road and difficulties  in  her  relationship  with  her
daughter. She said that she did not know what he  meant  by  that  -  if  he
meant the difficulties in  getting  to  where  she  is  now  she  understood
because of the immigration issue but there was no issue  with  her  and  her
child. She stated that she sees her  daughter,  "A",  every  day;  that  she
lives just around the corner but they did not live together as there is  not
enough room.

11.   Upon re- examination by Mr Leskin, the Appellant stated that  she  had
no sense what Ghana is like as she had not been there since she was  5.  Her
mother does not really talk about stuff like that with her so  she  did  not
know about it. She said that she hardly  saw  relatives  from  Ghana  -  the
relatives she sees are from England and live in different parts  of  London:
this was mainly  her  cousins.  Other  relatives  would  come  over  to  her
mother's house from their house but she was not told about this and was  not
there when they came. She was not  aware  of  people  from  Ghana  who  have
visited.  In respect of relatives in London and whether there were  Ghanaian
aspects to their life she stated that they go to work, come home  and  watch
TV like everyone else. She did not recall how many times her mother went  to
Ghana on holiday. She did not recall her going to  Ghana  on  holidays  when
she was growing up and she was always there in  the  house  with  them.  She
said that she had loads of friends who are Ghanaian  because  she  was  from
Ghana and when asked to describe their way of life she said that they  would
go to work, go home and watch Eastenders.

12.   She said that her immediate family would not be able to  support  her;
that her mother did  not  work;  her  two  brothers  worked  but  they  have
children and they have to pay rent. She has one sister  and  she  works  but
she has two children and has to pay her rent. She was asked about Mr  K  and
difficulties with her daughter and she denied that they had difficulties  in
their current relationship. The Appellant was then asked to explain what  it
was like to come off drugs. She said  that  she  had  worked  very  hard  to
change  her  offending  behaviour.  The  programme  she  had  undertook  was
therapeutic. She had had a good look at herself at Weston-super-Mare for  18
months. She said that coming back to London she had to  establish  with  old
acquaintances that she was not in that  lifestyle  anymore.  She  then  said
that coming off benefits and budgeting and financing her  University  was  a
challenge and that it was difficult to get work. She said  that  she  had  a
National Insurance number but she always had to prove that  she  could  work
and employers do not want to get into trouble.

13.   She said that she chose to go into supported housing because the  rent
was pretty low and the staff were helpful. She  said  that  her  immigration
status remained a hurdle that she  had  to  overcome.  When  asked  how  she
intended to use the progress she had made so far she said that she could  do
volunteer work with ex-offenders so she could show it can be done  and  that
it was possible to break the cycle of offending. She said that  she  planned
on working with ex-offenders when she finished her degree and that  she  was
waiting for her DBS (disclosure and barring service) check to come  back  so
that she could volunteer. She said that SOVA (a charity  that  helps  people
steer clear of crime) were aware that  she  had  previous  convictions.  She
concluded by saying that her relationship with A was very good.

14.   In response to our questions, the Appellant stated that  she  did  not
know if her mother had had visits from relatives from Ghana. She  said  that
she did not see NA, the recovery outreach worker at North Westminster  Drugs
Project, any longer but now had someone called DM who she sees  every  week.
She continues to speak to NA on the phone although she does not see  her.  A
letter from a Volunteer Coordinator at SOVA dated  15.6.15  was  handed  up,
which stated that it is a charity working in  partnership  with  the  London
Probation Trust,  HMP  Belmarsh  and  London  NHS  Trusts  supporting  adult
offenders with lifelong  psychological  needs  to  reintegrate  successfully
into the community. The letter confirmed that the  Appellant  has  completed
24 hours of training with them over 4 days and has 1 day left to  go  on  23
June before completion and that she is  currently  awaiting  her  DBS  check
before being matched with a client.

15.   AK, a supported housing worker at the Appellant's  accommodation,  was
then called to give evidence. He adopted his letter of 15 October 2014  [11-
12]. He was asked about a comment in his original letter:  "Ms  N  has  also
worked  hard  to  address  the  consequences  of  her   behaviour   on   her
relationship with her daughter. This continues to be a hard road  to  travel
and not without its emotional blows" and whether he  was  referring  to  her
current relationship with her daughter and if not,  what  he  was  referring
to. He responded that he was commenting on the  whole  of  her  past  -  the
Appellant's drug and alcohol problems and periods  of  time  away.  He  said
that his experience of the Appellant over the last 23  months  had  been  up
and down and this was the same with all  addicts  and  ex-addicts.  He  said
that she had not gone back to her previous  behaviour.  When  asked  whether
this meant that continuous support is needed he agreed, stating that it  was
a matter of knowing where to find it. He agreed that this applied  generally
as well as to her daughter and he was not aware  of  any  specific  problems
with her daughter.

16.   Upon cross-examination, when asked if he ever saw A  himself  he  said
that he may encounter her in the hallway  or  see  her  in  the  Appellant's
room. When asked whether he knew how often the Appellant  sees  A  currently
he said that she says the contact is frequent. In respect of whether or  not
there a finite period that the Appellant could stay  in  her  accommodation,
given that she has been there for 23 months he said that she is  doing  a  3
year degree and that they would not push for re-housing whilst she is  doing
a full time degree. He said that typically people move  after  2  years.  In
respect of where people move on to next, the witness stated that  demand  on
accommodation was so high that most people have to leave the  Borough;  that
there was a clearing house system but this was for rough  sleepers  and  the
Appellant is not in that category. He said that she would be  likely  to  go
into private residential accommodation  and  there  are  organizations  that
could assist.

17.   He was asked to confirm whether the accommodation  was  strictly  drug
and alcohol free and the support that was offered in  this  respect  and  he
responded that it was  and  whilst  they  were  not  specifically  drug  and
alcohol workers they refer to the North Westminster drug  project.  He  said
that the Appellant came directly from rehabilitation and so she was  engaged
with them already. He said that he  may  provide  liaison  with  workers  at
Westminster at a case  conference.  He  stated  that  the  Appellant  is  at
University but she does  not  come  from  a  background  that  equipped  and
prepared her for that and he supports her with that. He was asked if he  was
helping her to  adapt  and  the  witness  agreed.  Upon  re-examination,  AK
confirmed that the Appellant pays her own rent  and  that  she  receives  an
educational grant as a student. She pays �126.50 a week in rent.

18.   AN was then called to give evidence. She adopted her statement  [6-7],
which confirmed that she is the Appellant's daughter,  born  on  30  January
1998. In cross-examination she said that she and her mother were  close  and
that she could tell her everything and anything and  that  she  guides  her.
She confirmed that she lived with her grandmother and that  her  grandmother
has been there for her since her mother went to prison, that  she  is  there
to help and provide for her.

19.   She stated that she saw her uncles and aunts every day at  the  house.
She said that she knew that they did not have contact with anyone in  Ghana.
In respect of her mother's cousins she said that everyone  in  their  family
is based here and not in  contact  with  Ghana.  She  was  asked  about  her
grandmother's visit fairly recently and  whether  she  knew  if  she  visits
anyone in Ghana, to which she responded that she does not visit anyone,  she
just goes for a holiday. She did not know where her grandmother  stays.  She
confirmed that she does not have contact with anyone in  Ghana  herself  and
that she had been living with her grandmother since the age of  9  and  that
she was now 17. She also confirmed that she visited her mother.

20.   Upon re-examination, she said that her mother always come  to  her  if
something is bothering her and that she reassures her and tries to  get  her
in a positive instead of a negative state  of  mind.  She  agreed  that  she
gives her mother emotional support. In answer to  our  questions  about  the
impact on her if her mother was not here she responded that her  mother  has
been in prison and that she has turned her life  around  and  that  for  her
mother to be somewhere and have no support, she did  not  consider  that  it
would be right. The question was repeated and the witness responded that  it
would have a big effect on her emotionally and in terms of her college  work
and she did not think she would be able to cope with things. She  said  that
they would spend hours together after  college.  She  would  stay  with  her
mother up until 10pm. They talk and watch TV. Sometimes they go out to  eat.


Submissions

21.   Mr Jarvis relied on his  skeleton  argument.  He  submitted  that  the
Appellant has 30 convictions  for  56  offences  and  so  has  an  extensive
criminal history. He acknowledged that this  may  be  relatively  low  level
compared to some cases but  that  there  had  been  significant  periods  in
prison spread fairly evenly over those years:  from  1992  up  to  2010.  In
respect  of  the   Appellant's   circumstances   today,   he   accepted   on
consideration of the effect on her child that this would be significant  but
submitted when one looked at the  bigger  picture  the  public  interest  is
significantly  weighted  against  the  Appellant,  whether  it  be   through
contextual assessment of "unduly harsh" or outside the Rules. In respect  of
the private life aspect at paragraph 399 of  the  Rules  there  are  various
factors that require consideration. Mr Jarvis submitted that it may well  be
the case that the family do not obviously have contact with Ghana  but  that
it was unlikely that  the  family  have  no  connection  with  Ghana  as  is
suggested. He submitted that it  was  not  unreasonable  to  ask  the  Upper
Tribunal to accept that it is usual  human  behaviour  to  maintain  contact
with the home country and that this was important to the diaspora.

22.   He noted that there was no evidence from the  Appellant's  mother  (we
reminded Mr Jarvis that there was written evidence from CN at page 8 of  the
first bundle) but this was not supported by oral evidence and does  not  say
anything about her visit to Ghana. It was further submitted that the  burden
of proof was on the Appellant and  it  was  reasonable  to  consider  it  is
likely to be the case that the family has contact with Ghana. There  was  no
evidence  from  the  family  about  financial  support.  Even  if  this  was
temporary it was relevant to the practicalities  on  return  to  Ghana.  The
threshold was a demanding one, as set out in the Home Office guidance.

23.   In respect of the question  as  to  whether  a  person  could  have  a
private life on return to her country of origin, he submitted that, even  if
we find the Appellant does not by her family have any  connection  to  Ghana
this was not enough to  answer  the  question  of  whether  there  are  very
significant obstacles to integration. He noted that there was  new  evidence
in the bundle regarding education in Ghana, but submitted that this was  not
particularly material as the issue of whether she can  pursue  an  education
in Ghana is not really a question of integration but  personal  life  rather
than the essence of private life.

24.   In respect of page 87, a Guardian article from 2013 which referred  to
difficulties in urban areas in  Ghana  and  the  need  for  more  affordable
housing to be built, he noted that this was just a  news  report  and  there
was nothing up to date as to what has occurred since then. Whilst there  may
be slum dwellers there was insufficient information and it does  not  amount
to a material impact on return. In respect of page 89 and  the  brief  email
from Mr Lawrence, which gives links relating to  unemployment  benefits,  Mr
Jarvis submitted that it does not deal with whether  the  Appellant  herself
could have access to benefits in Ghana and that no weight should  be  placed
on the selective series of links contained in the email which showed a  lack
of neutrality. He submitted that difficulty in finding work was not  a  very
significant obstacle to integration.

25.   In respect of the Appellant's relationship with her  daughter,  A,  he
stated that it was not the Secretary of State's case that it  would  not  be
unduly harsh for A to go to Ghana,  thus  conceding  paragraph  399(a).  The
question is whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to go  and  A
to remain in the United Kingdom - paragraph 399(b). He noted that there  was
now a good relationship between them but also between A and her  grandmother
and that, unusually, it was not  her  mother  but  another  person  who  has
played a significant role and was a mother figure for support and  guidance.
No doubt it would be upsetting for A but in the context  overall  given  the
Appellant's history in the United Kingdom it would not be  unduly  harsh  in
the full context of that picture.

26.   With respect to the issues of  deterrence  and  public  revulsion,  Mr
Jarvis reminded us of the cost of offending and imprisonment and noted  that
the cost of  rehabilitation  is  considerable.  He  made  reference  to  the
judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Joseph Grant  (Application
no. 10606/07) and the Court of Appeal judgment in  SS  Nigeria  [2013]  EWCA
Civ 550 and reminded us that special weight needs to be given to the  public
interest. He further reminded us that, following  AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT
0260 (IAC) no positive benefit can be taken from the fact that  someone  can
speak English.

27.   He further submitted that the Appellant was a drug addict  whether  in
the United Kingdom or in Ghana. It  may  be  said  that  there  are  support
mechanisms in the United Kingdom not present in  Ghana,  but  there  was  no
evidence that the Appellant could not seek therapy or assistance  in  Ghana.
He submitted that it sets the legal question in the wrong place  and  whilst
relevant in a case like this it is not the most important factor  and  that,
set into that legal construction, however impressed we  are  with  what  the
Appellant has done since 2011, it was not enough  to  outweigh  deportation.
With regard to paragraph 398(c) of  the  Rules  that  there  were  not  very
compelling circumstances over and above the Rules. We asked  Mr  Jarvis,  in
respect of the judgment in Danso (op cit)  upon  which  he  relied,  whether
there was  a  material  difference  between  the  rehabilitation  of  a  sex
offender and a drug addict and he submitted that there  was  not,  that  the
Court of Appeal had held that no more  weight  should  be  given  and  that,
whilst admirable  it  was  not  uncommon  and  so  not  compelling.  It  was
necessary to look at the question of re-offending in  the  context  of  what
was done rather than what will happen again. We do know that people  recover
and stop taking drugs and that is an ongoing task, but it is not so rare  or
unusual it could be compelling for the test under the Rules.

28.   Mr Leskin relied upon his skeleton argument  [both  before  the  First
Tier Tribunal [66-72]  and  at  pages  64-65  of  the  updated  bundle].  He
submitted that it would be unduly harsh  for  A  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom without her mother. He accepted that she is now 17 and  a  half  and
the question was whether the effect of her mother  being  removed  would  be
unduly harsh now. He acknowledged that it was necessary to look not just  at
the effect on her but also the serious public interest  in  deportation.  He
submitted that the issues when put in context are that the Appellant is  A's
blood relative and her "grandmother" is not a  blood  relative,  given  that
she is the Appellant's stepmother. Three or four years ago it may  not  have
been unduly harsh as her mother was a drug addict and  was  unable  to  look
after her.

29.   Mr Leskin submitted that the residence order for A was nothing  beyond
that and that it had expired at the age of 16 as a matter of law. He  relied
upon the issue of the  four  year  delay  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  He
submitted that this was relevant to the proportionality of the  decision  to
deport. In respect of A, he submitted that this was a two  way  relationship
as they rely on and support each other. In respect  of  the  effect  on  her
daughter and how hard it would be for her mother to be  able  to  cope,  the
effect of how the mother would be able to live and what is happening to  her
mother would be important for A to know. When one looks at the effect  on  A
one has to look at what is likely to happen to the mother in Ghana.

30.   Mr Leskin acknowledged the public  interest  in  deportation  and  the
fact that the Appellant has committed a  serious  criminal  offence  but  he
submitted that she has turned her life around, that she was contributing  to
public life and intending to do so in the  future.  He  submitted  that  the
fact that she  provided  a  positive  benefit  to  the  United  Kingdom  was
relevant to the public interest. She was able to work with people as a  peer
mentor to help people mend their ways and there are  not  that  many  people
who can do this and work in that capacity and in  that  role.  He  submitted
that this was really important as a factor and that Danso and AR  (Pakistan)
were distinguishable as money had been  spent,  whereas  the  Appellant  was
putting back.

31.   Mr Leskin submitted that there were very significant obstacles to  the
Appellant's integration in Ghana. Mr Jarvis indicated that he accepted  that
the finding at [31] of the  First  Tier  Tribunal's  determination  was  not
infected by error of law and thus  it  was  accepted  that  the  First  Tier
Tribunal  Judge  had  found  there  were  significant   obstacles   to   the
Appellant's integration into Ghana. However, the question was whether  there
were very significant obstacles to her integration.

32.   Mr Leskin placed reliance on the Home  Office  guidance  "Chapter  13:
criminality  guidance  in  Article  8  ECHR  cases"  at  section  5.4.3  and
submitted that the Appellant not only has all the problems referred  to  but
is a drug addict and would not have the support upon which  she  relies  not
to re-offend. He further relied upon  the  list  of  factors  at  5.4.6.  He
submitted that English was spoken in Ghana in addition to 9 other  languages
so, for example, if the Appellant could only  speak  English  working  in  a
shop and was not familiar with the other languages she would not get  a  job
in retail and could not get a job in a shop. In respect of culture, even  if
the Appellant goes to Ghanaian parties in the United Kingdom it is  not  the
same as in Ghana. She knows absolutely nothing of Ghana. The  Appellant  has
not even travelled out of the United Kingdom since the age  of  7  and  that
was on a school trip within Europe. She knows  nothing  of  other  countries
let alone Africa.

33.   In respect of her ability to use her education or skills developed  in
the United Kingdom to integrate, she did a  nursery  nurse  course  over  20
years ago but could not  now  work  with  children  given  her  convictions,
probably in any country. In respect of her training course as a peer  mentor
there was no evidence she would be  able  to  obtain  employment  in  Ghana,
there was nothing to show those sorts of  organizations  were  available  in
Ghana that did that kind of work. She currently works as a  sales  assistant
in McDonalds which requires certain skill but she does not speak  the  local
languages common in Ghana. Mr Leskin submitted that  all  of  the  paragraph
5.4.6. factors are in the Appellant's favour. In respect of paragraph  5.4.9
she has no friends or family members in Ghana. The  Home  Office  have  said
she can get �750. She has no savings  and  no  one  else  to  help  her.  He
acknowledged that the email from Mr Lawrence was not an expert report.

34.   The Appellant would always be an ex  addict  and  the  fact  that  she
would not have any support must  be  taken  into  account  as  showing  very
significant obstacles to her integration. He submitted that  she  still  has
considerable support in UK -  weekly  counselling,  supported  housing,  the
support of her family  and  her  daughter  gives  her  emotional  and  moral
support. She would have none of that in Ghana. Mr Leskin referred  to  pages
117, 122 and 123 of the  bundle,  an  NHS  report  "Road  to  Recovery."  He
further  referred  to   the   Patel   report   at   125-129,   the   summary
recommendations at 12; 131 at [26]  and  page  140  at  4.58  and  4.61.  He
submitted that it was extremely likely  that  the  Appellant  would  relapse
into drug use because she would not have support and she would not  be  able
to integrate into that country. He noted that drugs were available in  Ghana
and drug use was increasing: 2014 United States State Department  report  at
pages 150 - 152. He further referred to the Guardian article about  housing:
86-88 at 87; employment at page 94-97 and page 110 at paragraph 67 and  page
111 in respect of corruption; education at page 83  regarding  studying  and
fees. It was necessary to take account of the length of time  the  Appellant
has lived in the United Kingdom.

35.   Mr Leskin further submitted that there were exceptional  circumstances
meriting consideration outside the Immigration Rules. He referred us to  the
decisions in AJ Angola and AQ (Nigeria), TH (Bangladesh), CD  (Jamaica).  It
was exceptional where somebody has lived here for 39 years out of  45  years
having come here at the age of  5  years  of  age.  Responsibility  for  the
Appellant must to some extent be in the United  Kingdom  as  it  is  in  the
United Kingdom where she has grown up and has come to use drugs  and  commit
offences. This was not to condone it in any  way  but  there  must  be  some
responsibility and also in terms of spending the money to rehabilitate  her.
The Appellant has come an incredibly long way since  coming  out  of  prison
and since going into rehabilitation and is now going to University.

36.   He referred to [22] of AR Pakistan where the Appellant came to  United
Kingdom in his mid 20's. In the Appellant's case  most  of  the  money  that
needed to be spent has been spent already and now she is trying to pay  that
back by doing voluntary work. Danso [is distinguishable not just because  he
was a sex offender [at 20] which is not the case here but he  was  still  in
prison. In terms of future risk this is low as  opposed  to  medium  in  the
Appellant's case. Although there  is  no  report  on  re-offending,  it  was
submitted that time has shown itself and everyone says that  she  is  making
great progress: University report at 73 and the report of NA at  74-75.  All
of this distinguishes her case from the  other  cases  that  turn  on  their
particular facts eg Joseph Grant.

37.   In respect of the section 117 factors, Mr Leskin  submitted  that  the
Appellant speaks English and is financially independent. In respect  of  the
impact of the delay it should be noted that the Appellant was in the  United
Kingdom lawfully and the judgment in EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL  41  applied.  Mr
Leskin took us to page 34 of the Appellant's  bundle  which  is  an  extract
from the GCID case notes starting on 14.1.11. He drew our attention  to  the
fact that the Secretary of State had the gone  to  the  Children's  Champion
three times and first two times decided not to deport the Appellant  on  the
recommendation of the Children's Champion. It was not until 2014  that  they
made the decision to deport her. They accept  the  Appellant  is  integrated
into the United Kingdom. Mr Leskin submitted that if the  Appellant  were  a
threat and the public revulsion was such that she should  be  deported,  why
has she been allowed to remain for an additional 3 years?

38.   Mr Jarvis addressed the role of delay and  submitted  that  there  had
been no delay in EB Kosovo terms, which was concerned with  dysfunctionality
and systemic collapse. He submitted that the GCID case  record  sheets  show
what happens  behind  the  scenes  and  this  is  an  organic  process.  The
Secretary of  State  wanted  to  be  clearer  and  conducted  a  nationality
interview. There had been repeated contacts with  the  Children's  Champion.
The Secretary of State understood her legal duty  and  wanted  to  establish
facts and make sure an action affecting a child is reviewed  regularly.  The
reason it happened on a number of occasions is by June/July 2012 at  43  the
law changed. There was a process of attempting to make the  right  decision.
He did not  deny  that  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her
daughter had strengthened  but  the  legal  landscape  had  changed  in  the
interim, which  is  relevant  to  context  as  is  the  strengthened  public
interest.

39.   Mr Leskin submitted  that  the  law  changed  in  July  2012  and  the
caseworker concluded in October 2012 not to  pursue  deportation:  page  54.
There were no further changes in the law before the decision to  deport  was
subsequently taken. Neither party was aware of  whether  or  not  there  had
been any further response from the Children's Champion. Mr Leskin  requested
that if minded to allow the  appeal  that  the  Appellant  should  again  be
granted ILR otherwise it would seriously effect her  education  and  studies
and part of the reasons why she should be here. He  drew  our  attention  to
Schedule 4 of the Immigration & Asylum Act 1999 at paragraph 21(5)  and  the
power to give directions to  give  effect  to  a  determination.  Mr  Jarvis
submitted that in light of the decision in IT  (Sierra  Leone)  [2010]  EWCA
Civ 787 we could only make a direction to give effect to  our  decision,  so
this would not apply.

The issues

40.   We note that the evidence was  not  disputed  before  the  First  Tier
Tribunal and Mr Jarvis did not seek to dispute any of the oral evidence  put
forward at the hearing before us, therefore, we proceed on  the  basis  that
the evidence put forward by the Appellant, her daughter, A and  her  support
worker, AK is credible. We note the findings preserved from the  First  Tier
Tribunal determination viz that the Appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
integrated in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  she  enjoys  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with her daughter. The issues  we  are  required  to
determine are therefore:

    (i)    whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    deported to Ghana and for her daughter, A,  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Respondent has accepted that it would be unduly harsh  for
    A to live in Ghana [paragraph 399(ii)(a)(b)];

    (ii)   whether  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration into Ghana [paragraph 399A];

    (iii)  if neither (i) and (ii) apply, whether there are very compelling
    circumstances that outweigh the public interest in deportation.

The relevant legal provisions

41.   The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules are as follows:

    "A398. These rules apply where:

    (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
    deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

    (b)    a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
    him to be revoked.

    398.   Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
    to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,
    and

    (a)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of at least 4 years;

    (b)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

    (c)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
    Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
    a persistent       offender who shows a particular disregard for the
    law,

    the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very compelling circumstances over and above those described in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    399.   This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if
    -

    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

         (i)      the child is a British Citizen; or

         (ii)     the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
         the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
         decision; and in either case

             (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and

             (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is to be deported

    399A   This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if
    -

    (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
    life; and

    (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
    into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

42.   Sections 117A-D of the  Nationality  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002
provide as follows:

    "PART 5A

    ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS

    117A Application of this Part

    (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)      breaches a person's right to respect for private and
         family life under Article 8, and

         (b)      as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.

    (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
    tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

         (a)      in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
         117B, and

         (b)      in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
         to the considerations listed in section 117C.

    (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
    question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect
    for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.

    (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
    of the       economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons
    who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
    English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
    of the       economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons
    who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
    independent, because such persons-

         (a)      are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)    Little weight should be given to-

         (a)      a private life, or

         (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at    a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, and

         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
         the United Kingdom.

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
    criminals

    (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

    (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
    the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

    (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public
    interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
    applies.

    (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)      C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
         most of C's life,

         (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
         Kingdom, and

         (c)      there would be very significant obstacles to C's
         integration into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

    (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

    (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
    period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
    requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

    (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
    into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
    deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the
    decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been
    convicted.

    117D Interpretation of this Part

    (1)    In this Part-

    "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;

    "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-

         (a)      is a British citizen, or

         (b)      has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
         seven years or more;

    "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

         (a)      is a British citizen, or

         (b)      who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning
         of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

    (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)      who is not a British citizen,

         (b)      who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
         offence, and

         (c)      who-

             (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
             12 months..."

43.   The  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  Chapter  13:  criminality
guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases, Version 5.0 28.7.14 provides at 3.5:

    3.5  Unduly harsh

    3.5.1  For general guidance on considering whether the effect of
    deportation would be unduly harsh, see section 2.5.

    3.5(a)  The public interest

    3.5.2  When considering whether the effect on a child of deporting a
    foreign criminal is unduly harsh, the strength of the family life
    claim, including the best interests of the child, must be balanced
    against the public interest in deportation. As a general principle, the
    greater the public interest in deporting the foreign criminal, the more
    harsh the effect of deportation must be on the child before it is
    considered unduly harsh.

    3.5.3  See sections 2.3 and 2.5 for guidance on how to consider the
    public interest in the context of the unduly harsh assessment...

    3.5(c)  Would it be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
    without the foreign criminal?

    3.5.10  To answer this question, it is first necessary to establish
    whether the child would be able to remain in the UK when the foreign
    criminal is deported.

    3.5.11  The following is a non-exhaustive list of relevant factors to
    consider in order to determine whether a child could remain in the UK
    in the care of another person or whether the child would have no choice
    but to leave the UK with the foreign criminal:

         (  whether the child has a legal guardian, a family member who has
         a legal obligation to care for the child (for example,
         responsibility or a residence order) or an existing relationship
         with a family member;

         (  whether someone other than the foreign criminal is the child's
         primary or joint- primary carer and whether that person normally
         has day-to-day care and wider welfare and developmental
         responsibility for the child;

         (  whether the person who cared for the child while the foreign
         criminal was in prison would be able to care for the child when the
         foreign criminal is deported;

         (  whether it is reasonable to expect the other person to fulfil
         the role of primary carer (e.g. whether he has fulfilled that role
         in the past, whether he is able to care for the child, whether he
         cares for any other children or has done so before);

         (  whether there are any factors which undermine the ability of
         that person to act as the primary carer of the child or would
         suggest he is unsuitable (e.g. criminal convictions, concerns
         expressed by social services, etc.).

    3.5.12  Whether or not another person would have to make a choice about
    working full-time or part-time or not at all and might need to arrange
    suitable childcare is not likely to be a determinative factor in his
    ability to care for the child, particularly in the case of someone with
    a legal responsibility towards the child, and particularly where family
    life was formed in full knowledge that the foreign criminal may not be
    able to remain in the UK (because his immigration status was unlawful
    or precarious, or because he was liable to deportation). All parents
    and guardians have to make difficult choices about how to balance their
    working lives and their parental responsibilities.

    3.5.13  It is not appropriate to conclude that a child can remain in
    the UK in the care of another person who is himself liable to removal
    or deportation. If there is someone who would be able to care for the
    child in the UK but for having no immigration status then that person's
    status should be resolved before it can be determined whether it would
    be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the foreign
    criminal. Decision- makers must check whether the person has an
    outstanding application for leave to remain in his own right. If he
    does, decision-makers should liaise with the other caseworking unit to
    ensure that the application is decided before the foreign criminal's
    claim is considered. If the person is granted leave to remain then this
    will factor into the consideration of the unduly harsh question.

    3.5.14  If the only way a child could remain in the UK if a foreign
    criminal is deported would be in the care of social services or foster
    care that is not already in place (excluding care provided by a family
    member or a private fostering arrangement), it will usually be unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be
    deported, unless there is evidence that the child's best interests
    would be better served in such care than in the care of the foreign
    criminal. However, consideration must be given to the age of the child
    and how long he is likely to remain in care.

    3.5.15  If it is established that the child is able to remain in the UK
    when the foreign criminal is deported, the following is a non-
    exhaustive list of relevant factors to consider when assessing whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the child to continue living in the UK
    without the presence of the foreign criminal:

         (  whether there are any reasons (related to the foreign criminal's
         offending history, or other reasons) why it would be in the child's
         best interests to be separated from the foreign criminal;

         (  the age of the child;

         (  how in practice the child would be affected by the foreign
         criminal's absence;

         (  whether there is credible evidence that the foreign criminal's
         presence is needed to prevent the child from being ill treated, his
         health or development being significantly impaired, or his care
         being other than safe and effective;

         (  the extent of any practical difficulties the remaining parent or
         guardian would face in caring for the child alone (if he is not
         already effectively caring for the child alone);

         (  whether there is credible evidence that the child would lose all
         contact with the foreign criminal, e.g. because telephone and
         internet contact would not be possible and there would be no
         possibility of visits either to the country of return or a third
         country. If so, whether this is unduly harsh will depend on the
         severity of the foreign criminal's conduct, the nature of the
         relationship the foreign criminal has with the child, and the
         impact on the child of the loss of contact.

    3.5.16  Where a child's parents or guardians have a choice about
    whether the child leaves or remains in the UK, it will not be
    appropriate for the decision to deport to prescribe any particular
    outcome for the child. It is the responsibility of the family to decide
    for themselves whether the child will accompany the foreign criminal
    overseas or whether to make suitable arrangements for the child to
    remain in the UK based on where they think the child's best interests
    lie. The decision to deport requires the child's parents or guardians
    to make this decision.

    And inter alia at 5.4:

    "5.4  Would there be very significant obstacles to the foreign
    criminal's integration into the country to which he is proposed to be
    deported?

    5.4.6  Decision-makers will need to consider the specific obstacles
    raised by    the foreign criminal. They will also need to set these
    against other factors in order to make an assessment in the individual
    case. Relevant considerations include:

         (  familiarity with language and culture in the country to which
         the foreign criminal is to be deported;

         (  whether the foreign criminal has lived in the country to which
         he is to be   deported, how long for, and how old he was when he
         left or last visited;

         (  whether the foreign criminal has family or friends in the
         country to which he will be deported to whom he should be able to
         turn for support to help him integrate into society on return;

         (  whether the foreign criminal or his family has hosted visits in
         the UK by family and friends from the country of return, or whether
         the foreign criminal has visited family or friends there;

         (  whether the foreign criminal has ties which could be
         strengthened on return even if they are not very strong ties at the
         date of decision;

         (  whether the foreign criminal received education or worked in the
            country to which he will be deported, or whether he has received
         education or developed skills in the UK which he could use to
         integrate into society on return;

         (  whether the foreign criminal has previously demonstrated an
         ability to integrate in a new place, e.g. if he came to the UK as
         an adult.

    5.4.7  The degree of private life a foreign criminal has established in
    the UK is not relevant to the consideration of whether there are very
    serious obstacles to integration into the country to which he is to be
    deported."

Our findings

Undue harshness

44.   It is accepted that the Appellant falls  within  paragraph  398(b)  of
the Rules given her sentence of 21 months. The starting point  is  that  the
public interest requires the deportation of the Appellant unless it  can  be
shown that paragraph 399 or 399A applies.

45.   It is accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship with her British daughter, A, who was born on 30  January  1998
and is thus over 17 years of age. The evidence is  that  A  lived  with  her
mother until she was 9 years of age. During that time the Appellant went  to
prison once or twice for short periods of time, when A would stay  with  her
maternal step-grandmother, CN. In 2010, the Appellant agreed that CN  should
obtain a residence order in respect of A because of her  drugs  use.  During
the 18 months the Appellant spent in  rehabilitation  in  Weston-super-Mare,
from 5 December 2011 until 10 September 2012, they did not  see  each  other
but spoke daily on the telephone. Since  the  Appellant  was  released  back
into the community they  have  seen  each  other  regularly  and  Mr  Leskin
described their relationship as "two way" as they rely on and  support  each
other and we accept this. However, we note that  this  is  distinct  from  a
relationship of dependency by a daughter on her mother.

46.   We note the Home Office guidance as set out in  the  IDIs  at  Chapter
13. Whilst we do not consider that we are  bound  by  the  guidance  in  the
IDIs, we do consider that they contain useful guidance as  to  how,  in  the
generality of cases, the question of "undue harshness"  should  be  assessed
and the IDIs inform our assessment in this  appeal.  Paragraph  3.5.2  notes
that the strength of the family life claim including the best  interests  of
the child, must be balanced against the public interest in  deportation.  It
also sets out a general principle, that the greater the public  interest  in
deporting the foreign criminal, the more harsh  the  effect  of  deportation
must be on the child before it is considered  unduly  harsh.  This  involves
the conduct of a proportionality exercise, weighing on  the  one  hand,  the
severity of the offence(s) and length of sentence  as  part  of  the  public
interest consideration against the best interests of the child  affected  by
the decision.

47.   Paragraph 3.5(c) at 3.5.11 sets out a non-exhaustive list of  relevant
factors to consider in order to determine whether a child  could  remain  in
the UK and these include consideration of alternative carers. We  note  that
A's step grandmother, CN, had a residence order in place  to  care  for  her
since the age of 9  and  that  A  continues  to  live  with  CN.  Therefore,
alternative care arrangements are already in place for A's care. We  further
note that A's father, RO, has been diagnosed with schizophrenia  and  whilst
she is in contact with him regularly, he has never been  able  to  care  for
her.

48.   Paragraph 3.5.15 sets out relevant factors to consider in  respect  of
assessing undue harshness and these include: the age of the  child;  whether
the foreign criminal's presence is needed to prevent the  child  from  being
ill-treated or her health or development being impaired; the extent  of  any
practical difficulties the remaining guardian would face in caring  for  the
child alone; whether there is credible evidence that the  child  would  lose
all contact with the foreign criminal  eg  because  telephone  and  internet
contact would not be possible and there would be no possibility of visits.

49.   We have had regard  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  &
Immigration Act 2009  and  the  statutory  guidance  "Every  Child  Matters"
published in November 2009 and the need to safeguard and  promote  A's  best
interests as a child in the United Kingdom. In light of the fact that  A  is
now over 17 years of age, together with our finding that she does  not  have
a relationship of dependency upon her mother, having  lived  with  and  been
dependent upon her step-grandmother since the age of 9 years  of  age,  that
whilst removal of the Appellant  would,  of  course,  be  harsh  we  do  not
consider it would be unduly harsh for A to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
whilst her mother is deported to Ghana. We  make  this  finding  having  had
regard to all the evidence and circumstances before us and bearing  in  mind
the public interest.

Very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Ghana

50.   We now turn to consider the issue of  whether  the  exception  to  the
public interest in deportation as set out at paragraph  399A  of  the  Rules
applies. This is a three part test. It is not disputed  that  the  Appellant
has been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for  most  of  her  life,
having arrived at the age of 5 as  the  dependent  of  her  father  who  had
Indefinite Leave to Remain. The First Tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
Appellant was socially and culturally integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom
and this finding  is  preserved.  The  Judge  also  found  that  there  were
significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Ghana but  he  did
not consider whether there were very significant obstacles.

51.    We  were  taken  by  Mr  Leskin  to   the   Immigration   Directorate
Instructions at [5.4.6.] [set out in full at [43] above]. These set out  the
Respondent's view of considerations relevant  to  consideration  of  whether
there would be very significant obstacles to integration in the  country  of
proposed deportation and comprise: familiarity with  language  and  culture;
whether the foreign criminal has lived in the country to which she is to  be
deported, how long for, and how old he was when she left  or  last  visited;
whether the foreign criminal has family or friends to  whom  she  should  be
able to turn for support to help  her  integrate  into  society  on  return;
whether the foreign criminal or her family has hosted visits in  the  UK  by
family and friends from the  country  of  return,  or  whether  the  foreign
criminal has visited family or friends there; whether the  foreign  criminal
has ties which could be strengthened on      return even  if  they  are  not
very strong ties at the date  of  decision;  whether  the  foreign  criminal
received education or worked in that country or  whether  she  has  received
education or developed skills in the UK which she  could  use  to  integrate
into  society  on  return;  whether  the  foreign  criminal  has  previously
demonstrated an ability to integrate in a new place, e.g.  if  she  came  to
the UK as an adult.

52.   We find, on the basis of the evidence before us  that  whilst  English
is spoken in Ghana,  the  Appellant  is  unfamiliar  with  the  other  local
languages and her knowledge of  Ghanaian  culture  is  limited;  whilst  she
lived in Ghana for the first five years of her life she has not lived  there
nor visited for the last 39 years;  she  does  not  appear  to  have  either
friends or family in Ghana. There are extended family members there  but  we
do not consider that she could turn to them for support in assisting her  to
integrate into society given that they are her  stepmother's  relatives  and
she has had no contact with them at all. There  is  no  evidence  before  us
that the Appellant's relatives in the United Kingdom  would  be  willing  or
able to provide her with financial  support  if  she  were  to  be  deported
because they are unable to do so given their  own  financial  circumstances.
Given the Appellant's age when she left Ghana and  the  fact  that  all  her
immediate family members are long term residents of the United  Kingdom  and
now British citizens we do not consider that she has retained any ties  with
Ghana. The Appellant was neither  educated  in  Ghana  nor  has  she  worked
there, given her young age on departure. Whilst she is at  the  end  of  the
second year of an MSc in Criminology she has limited  skills  and  education
she could use to integrate, given she has not yet completed her  degree  and
has very limited employment experience.

53.   We note from the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  at  [5.4.1.]
that when assessing whether there would be "very  significant  obstacles  to
the foreign criminal's integration into the country to which he is  proposed
to be deported", the starting point is to assume that the  foreign  criminal
will be able to  integrate  into  his  country  of  return,  unless  he  can
demonstrate why that is not the case. The onus is on  the  foreign  criminal
to show that there would be very significant obstacles to that  integration,
not on the Secretary of State to show that there are not.  This  is  a  fact
specific consideration. We took a careful note of Mr Jarvis' submissions  on
this issue and  of  the  evidence  in  respect  of  education,  housing  and
employment within the Appellant's bundle. We have also  considered  all  the
factors put forward on the Appellant's behalf by Mr Leskin individually  and
cumulatively and we consider that the Appellant has shown, for  the  reasons
set  out  at  [52]  above,  in  line  with   the   Immigration   Directorate
Instructions at [5.4.6], that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
her integration in Ghana, particularly given her very long lawful  residence
with Indefinite Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom of 35  years  and  the
very young age of 5 at which she arrived.

54.   We also consider that she would endure significant hardship in  trying
to establish herself in Ghana if she were to be  deported.  Whilst  she  has
made serious progress  in  respect  of  her  rehabilitation,  we  note  AK's
evidence that  she  would  require  ongoing  support,  which  she  currently
receives. Her deportation to Ghana would also  remove  her  support  network
and render her vulnerable to falling  back  on  her  drug  addiction,  which
would also materially interfere with her ability to integrate  into  society
there.  For  these  reasons  we  conclude  that  there  would  not  just  be
significant obstacles but very significant obstacles to her integration.

55.    We  have  also  considered  sections  117A-D  of   the   Nationality,
Immigration & Asylum Act 2002. In respect of  section  117B(2)  and  (3)  we
note that the Appellant speaks English and is able to  support  herself  and
pay the  rent  on  her  supported  housing  through  part  time  working  in
McDonalds whilst she continues with  her  degree.  In  respect  of  sections
117B(4) and (5) we note that the Appellant entered lawfully and was  granted
Indefinite Leave to Remain in 1979, a status she retained until  deportation
action was commenced against her  and  consequently  her  private  life  was
developed in that context. Having  regard  to  the  decision  of  the  Vice-
President in  AM  (S117B)  Malawi  however,  the  Appellant  can  obtain  no
positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B  (2)  or  (3)
and her private life is considered precarious  under  section  117B(5)  from
the time she commenced on a course of  criminal  conduct  secondary  to  her
drug addiction. However, on the  facts  of  this  case  the  Appellant  also
established family life with her stepmother from the  age  of  5  years  and
with her daughter over the past 17 years. We find that the  same  conclusion
results from an analysis of section 117(C) of the  NIAA  2002:  Exception  1
set out at section 117C(4) applies. On the facts of this  case  the  outcome
under the Immigration Rules and upon consideration of section 117(C) is  the
same

56.   We have also considered the case law submitted by both parties and  we
note that in AQ (Nigeria), TH  (Bangladesh),  CD  (Jamaica)  (25.3.15)  Lord
Justice Pitchford reiterated that MF (Nigeria held that  the  amended  Rules
represent a complete code  and  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment
takes place within it and not outside or  separate  from  it.  Lord  Justice
Sales in AJ (Angola) held  at  40  that  the  requirement  that  deportation
appeals be assessed under the new Rules and through their lens is  important
as it seeks to ensure uniformity  of  approach  and  a  safeguard  to  equal
treatment within the scope of Article  8  but  also  seeks  to  ensure  that
decisions are properly informed by the considerable weight to  be  given  to
the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  so  as  to
promote public confidence in this sensitive  area.  Having  found  that  the
exception contained in paragraph 399A of the Rules  applies,  no  additional
proportionality assessment is, therefore, required within the Rules.

57.   In light of our findings at [53] and [54] above, it is  not  necessary
for us to go on to consider whether there are very compelling  circumstances
that outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation  cf.  MF  (Nigeria)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department. We find that paragraph  399A  of
the Rules applies.

58.   Mr Leskin requested that if we were minded  to  allow  the  appeal  we
recommend that the Appellant  retains  her  previous  status  of  Indefinite
Leave to Remain. However, as Mr Jarvis pointed out, in light of  IT  (Sierra
Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department,  this  is  outside  our
jurisdiction as the issue of the length of leave to be granted is  a  matter
for the Secretary of State.

59.    The  appeal  is  allowed  because  an  exception  to  the   automatic
deportation  provisions  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  applies  ie.   the
Appellant's deportation would involve a breach of  her  human  rights  under
Article 8 of the ECHR, applying the  Immigration  Rules  with  reference  to
paragraph 399A.

Decision

60.   The decision of the First Tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law. That decision is set aside and the decision is  re-
made, allowing the appeal.

Anonymity

61.   Given that these  proceedings  involve  a  child, we  make  an  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Consequently, this determination identifies  the  Appellant's  daughter and
those associated with her  by  initials  only,  in  order  to  preserve  her
anonymity.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
                                                   24 July 2015



  Appendix: decision and reasons of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek dated 17
                                 March 2015:

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00775/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Promulgated                         |
|On 30 January 2015                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Leskin, Solicitor instructed by Birnberg Peirce
& Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State.   It  is
    convenient however, to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 31 May 1970.   A  decision
    was made on 11 April 2014 to make a deportation order against her under
    the provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Her appeal
    against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge K  W  Brown
    on 13 November 2014 whereby he allowed the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The decision to make  a  deportation  order  followed  the  appellant's
    convictions for two offences of theft and an offence  of  battery.   In
    respect of those offences she received a total sentence of nine months'
    imprisonment.  A suspended  sentence  of  twelve  months'  imprisonment
    imposed on 24 July 2008 was activated to run  consecutively,  making  a
    total sentence of 21 months' imprisonment.

    Submissions

 4. Mr Leskin  raised  a  preliminary  issue  in  terms  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He submitted that because of the paucity of detail in the grant, it was
    not in fact a valid  grant  of  permission.   I  was  referred  to  the
    decision in MR  (permission  to  appeal:  Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil
    [2015] UKUT 00029 (IAC). It was submitted that the  appropriate  course
    is for the application for permission to appeal to be considered  again
    by the First-tier Tribunal so that a valid decision can be made.

 5. So far as that preliminary issue  is  concerned,  I  indicated  at  the
    hearing that in my judgement permission  to  appeal  had  validly  been
    granted.  My reasons for having come to that view are set out below.

 6.  So  far  as  the  substantive  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Judge's
    determination is concerned Mr Jarvis, in summary, submitted  that  with
    regard  to  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge's
    assessment at [30] to the effect that the appellant  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK was flawed.   I  was  referred  to  the
    IDI's entitled "Chapter 13: criminality  guidance  in  Article  8  ECHR
    cases" version 5.0 dated 28 July 2014 ("the IDI's"), in  particular  at
    paragraph 5.3.6.  There it states that  criminal  offending  will  also
    often be an indication of lack of integration.  Reference is also  made
    in that paragraph to the relevance of the nature of the offending.   It
    was submitted that the First-tier Judge had failed to engage  with  the
    fact that for 20 years the appellant had been involved  in  criminality
    and her offending had been associated with  her  addiction  to  illicit
    drugs.   Although  it  appeared  that  the  appellant's  behaviour  had
    improved since 2011, the rules required something more than that.

 7. It was also argued that a further error of law  is  evident  from  [31]
    where the judge said that there were  "significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Ghana when the appropriate  test  is  that
    there should be "very significant obstacles".  The matters referred  to
    by  the  judge  did  not  reveal  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration into Ghana.  In the last sentence of  [31]  it  is  evident
    that the judge had no basis for concluding that the appellant's removal
    could 'challenge' the appellant's current attitude of mind to  overcome
    "the significant problems of the past".

 8. Similarly, the conclusion at [33] that the appellant has a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her daughter, 'A', aged 16 years, was  not
    one that was sustainable on  the  evidence.   The  consequence  of  the
    appellant's criminality and her drug-taking had been that her  daughter
    was being cared for by her 'grandmother', albeit that  the  grandmother
    'C' is not in fact a blood relative of A. The relationship between  the
    appellant and A was not  a  typical  relationship  between  parent  and
    child.  Considerations such as who was caring for the child and  making
    important decisions in her  life  should  have  been  considered.   The
    child's grandmother was providing day-to-day care for her.

 9. Furthermore, the conclusion that it would be 'unduly harsh'  for  A  to
    remain in the UK without the appellant failed to take into account  the
    appellant's offending.

10. Mr Leskin submitted that the judge was entitled to find that there  was
    a genuine and subsisting relationship between  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter.  It was not necessary for her to live with her  daughter  and
    the rules do not require that no other person could be caring  for  the
    child for there to be a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship.
    I was referred to the appellant's and her daughter's witness statements
    in terms of the nature and extent of  their  relationship.   Mr  Leskin
    submitted that it was not necessary for the judge to set  out  all  the
    evidence which he had taken into account.

11. In relation to whether the appellant's removal would be 'unduly  harsh'
    on the appellant's daughter, at [33] the judge did consider the  matter
    more widely, including with reference to her daughter's carer not being
    an actual blood relative and with reference to what  was  said  by  the
    Children's Champion about the effect on her daughter  of  her  removal.
    Furthermore, there is no basis for the proposition that in  considering
    the phrase "unduly harsh" the judge had  to  consider  the  appellant's
    criminality. Otherwise, proportionality would  have  to  be  considered
    twice.

12. I was referred to the decision in AH (Sudan)  [2007]  UKHL  49  on  the
    meaning of the expression 'unduly harsh'.  Although  that  was  a  case
    about internal relocation, it was submitted that there  was  no  reason
    why the phrase 'unduly harsh' should mean anything more in relation  to
    deportation.

13. On the question of whether the appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the UK, notwithstanding  her  convictions,  the  European
    cases are relevant but the fact is that the appellant was  nevertheless
    integrated into that part of society that she was involved in when  she
    was offending.  She had now in any event given up the  use  of  illicit
    drugs, had undertaken a course and  was  a  mentor.   She  was  now  of
    benefit to the country and it  could  not  be  said  that  she  is  not
    socially and culturally integrated.

14. Mr Leskin made reference to the IDI's and to the several  factors  that
    are set out at 5.4.6.  The decision in Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC)
    was also referred to with reference to the expression "no ties".

15. In reply, Mr Jarvis submitted that the expression 'unduly harsh' had to
    be considered  within  the  context  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    decision in AH (Sudan) does not assist, because  in  deportation  cases
    there are additional factors to be considered over and above  those  in
    refugee cases.

16. So far as integration is concerned, the European  cases  on  the  point
    talk about 'core values' of society and that is no different  from  the
    situation in the case of this appellant.  It could not be said that she
    had integrated where she was associating  with  people  committing  the
    same sorts of crimes as she had committed.  The  Home  Office  guidance
    was further referred to.

    My assessment

17. In considering paragraph 399 of the Immigration  Rules  the  First-tier
    Judge was required to  consider  under  paragraph  399(a)  whether  the
    appellant has a "genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
    child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK".  In the Secretary of
    State's grounds it is argued that the  appellant  had  not  established
    such a parental relationship with her daughter.  It is noted  that  the
    appellant's stepmother has a residence order in respect of A and  takes
    care of her daily needs.  It is said that there is nothing to establish
    that the day-to-day management of A's  needs  has  transferred  to  the
    appellant or that she is now acting in the capacity of  a  parent.   It
    was  further  submitted  at  the  hearing  before  me  that  it  was  a
    consequence of the appellant's criminality and  drug  taking  that  her
    daughter has been cared for by C, the appellant's stepmother.

18. In the first place, I note that the decision letter  of  page  5,  with
    reference to paragraph 399(a) states that "It is accepted that you  are
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with [A] a child who is  under
    the age of 18 for reasons given  below...".   Furthermore,  it  is  not
    apparent in the record of the submissions made to the First-tier  Judge
    on behalf of the respondent that that  position  was  resiled  from  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.

19. In addition, whilst it is true that the appellant's offending and  drug
    taking has caused the separation from her  daughter,  and  a  residence
    order having been made in favour of the appellant's stepmother, it goes
    without saying that parental relationships vary in their nature.  There
    was nothing in  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    indicated that the appellant had lost contact with  her  daughter.   On
    the contrary, at [20] of the determination  it  is  recorded  that  the
    evidence was that the appellant sees her daughter most days.   At  [22]
    the appellant's daughter's evidence is recorded as being to the  effect
    that she has a close relationship with her mother.

20. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that Judge Brown was entitled to
    conclude as he did at [33] that the appellant does have a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her daughter.

21. It is worth stating that it was conceded on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that the First-tier Tribunal was required to determine  the  appeal  in
    accordance with Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), being an amendment introduced by Section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014.  It  was  also  accepted  that  the  "new"
    Immigration  Rules  which  came  into  force  on  28  July  2014   were
    applicable.  So much is clear from the skeleton argument  at  [5]  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

22. In consequence, the judge was required to make an assessment of whether
    it would be 'unduly harsh' for the  appellant's  daughter  to  live  in
    Ghana, that is to say going there with  the  appellant,  or  to  remain
    without the appellant in the UK.

23. At [33] Judge Brown concluded that it would be unduly harsh  for  A  to
    live in Ghana with the appellant and that it would also be unduly harsh
    for her to remain in the UK without the appellant.  The judge's reasons
    for coming to that view were that the appellant's stepmother is  not  a
    blood relative of A, albeit  that  there  is  a  residence  order.   In
    addition,  the  advice  of  the  Children's  Champion  was   that   the
    appellant's deportation would have a profound and  negative  impact  on
    her daughter's  long-term  development  and  is  likely  to  cause  her
    daughter distress in the short-term.  Judge Brown went on  to  conclude
    that it was not in the public interest that  the  appellant  should  be
    separated from her daughter "by reason of  the  implementation  of  the
    Deportation Order".

24. However, in my judgement there is merit in the submissions made  by  Mr
    Jarvis to the effect that the assessment of whether it would be  unduly
    harsh requires, in effect, a contextual analysis.  That is in the sense
    that the appellant's criminal offending  and  the  public  interest  in
    deportation need to be considered when assessing  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness.

25. Mr Leskin sought to resist that submission, for example  by  submitting
    that there was nothing in  the  Immigration  Rules  which  stated  that
    "unduly harsh" must be given that contextual  analysis.   He  submitted
    that if a proportionality assessment was required in this respect  then
    proportionality would be looked at twice, in effect.

26. I am satisfied however, that whether an appellant's  deportation  could
    be considered to be unduly harsh within the meaning of the  Immigration
    Rules and under  Section  117C(5)  of  the  2002  Act  does  require  a
    contextual analysis.  It is not simply a question of making a judgement
    about the harshness of the deportation to the child, on its own  terms,
    in a  self-contained  way.   The  qualifying  adjective  "unduly"  does
    involve an assessment of the 'harshness' of the effect  of  deportation
    on the child with reference to the criminality in question.

27. It is useful to set out s.117C in full. It provides as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

            (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
            most of C's life,

            (b)  C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
            Kingdom, and

            (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
            integration into the country to  which  C  is  proposed  to  be
            deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted."

28. Although Exception 2 under s.117C(5) relates to cases  of  imprisonment
    for terms of under four years, the range  of  criminality  within  that
    bracket could be considerable. Thus, on the analysis contended  for  on
    the appellant's behalf, it would make no  difference  if  an  appellant
    were sentenced, say, to a term  of  imprisonment  of  12  months  after
    having pleaded not guilty to an offence,  or  whether  the  person  was
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of four years after a  guilty  plea
    at the earliest possible opportunity, with the  consequent  significant
    discount  in  sentence  from  what  would  otherwise  have   been   the
    appropriate term.   The  fundamental  underlying  public  interest,  in
    relative terms, would have no part to play in the assessment  of  undue
    harshness  unless  it  was  permissible  to  take  into   account   the
    criminality of the parent. It could not viably be contended  therefore,
    that because the 'undue harshness' test only applies within a specified
    bracket of offending in any  event,  the  public  interest  is  already
    inherent within the assessment.

29. Whilst I do not conclude that a  wholesale  repetition  of  the  public
    interest considerations needs to take place at the stage of considering
    undue harshness, an assessment of that  issue  does  at  least  require
    recognition that the public interest has a significant  part  to  play,
    and that that public interest is to be judged in part by the offending.



30. That being the case, I am satisfied that Judge Brown erred  in  law  in
    concluding that it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's  daughter
    either to live in Ghana or to remain in the UK were the appellant to be
    removed.  There is no recognition in the judge's  conclusions  in  this
    context of the public interest  taking  into  account  the  appellant's
    offending.  That error of law is such as to require the decision to  be
    set aside.

31. At [29] the judge referred to paragraph 399A and the requirement  under
    399A(c) that there  should  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Ghana.  At [31] he stated that in his view
    "there are significant obstacles" to the appellant's  integration.   He
    noted that she had not lived there since the age of 5  and  that  there
    was no evidence of any familial connections there.  He  concluded  that
    she had no knowledge of Ghanaian culture and that she is unaware of her
    ability to continue with her education, concluding that the  likelihood
    is that in the short term she would be unable  to  do  so  because  she
    would need to find some form of employment to enable  her  to  survive.
    He also found that there was a strong possibility that "the appellant's
    current attitude of mind to overcome the significant  problems  of  the
    past could  be  challenged",  although  accepting  that  there  was  no
    specialist evidence before him in relation to that issue.

32. Whilst undoubtedly some of the  matters  identified  are  issues  which
    could potentially have a bearing on the  question  of  the  appellant's
    integration into Ghana, I am satisfied that Judge Brown erred in law in
    failing to focus on the threshold that the appellant has to meet,  i.e.
    very significant obstacles to her integration into Ghana.  Put  simply,
    he  did  not  apply  the  correct  test,  concluding  that  there  were
    "significant obstacles" but not referring in  his  conclusions  to  the
    requirement that there be "very" significant obstacles.  It  cannot  be
    said that the word "very" is mere  surplusage.  The  appellant  has  to
    establish firstly, that there are obstacles  to  her  integration  into
    Ghana; and that those obstacles  are  not  only  significant  but  very
    significant. That involves a conclusion that something more  than  mere
    hardship must be established.

33. The judge's earlier correct identification of the requirement of  "very
    significant obstacles" is not sufficient to reveal that  he  was  aware
    that the appellant had to establish more than "significant  obstacles".



34. I do not consider that it could be said that the matters identified  by
    Judge Brown at [31], or indeed elsewhere in the determination, are such
    as would indicate that any error of law in this respect was immaterial.
     There will be the need for an assessment of whether it could  be  said
    that  there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the   appellant's
    integration into Ghana.

35. In relation to the question of whether it would be unduly harsh for the
    appellant's daughter to be separated from her, or for her to remain  in
    the UK without the appellant, as I indicated at the hearing  I  do  not
    find the decision in AH (Sudan) of much  assistance,  that  case  being
    concerned with the question of internal relocation in  the  context  of
    asylum.  It may well be that some factual considerations in both  types
    of case may overlap,  but  as  a  guide  to  the  assessment  of  undue
    harshness within the context of deportation, the decision in AH (Sudan)
    does not assist.

36. In terms of Judge Brown's conclusion that under the  Immigration  Rules
    and under Section 117C  the  appellant  has  established  that  she  is
    "socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom", I  bear  in
    mind the submissions made on behalf of the respondent,  in  summary  to
    the effect that the extent of the appellant's  offending  reveals  that
    she is not integrated in that way.  There is some  parallel  here  with
    the European cases on removal of EEA nationals  convicted  of  criminal
    offences, albeit that I was not referred specifically to any of them.

37. Mr Leskin argued that although the appellant had been committing crimes
    up to 2011, she was "integrated" into that  part  of  society  or  that
    culture in which she was involved in  her  offending.   I  reject  that
    argument.  The question of integration in these circumstances  requires
    an assessment of the extent to which a person subscribes, adheres to or
    accepts, the norms and values of the society in which  they  live.   By
    its very nature, committing criminal offences is indicative of a person
    who does not subscribe to those norms or values.

38. Nevertheless, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in  the
    judge's assessment in this regard.   Whilst  it  is  true  that  for  a
    considerable period of time the  appellant  was  involved  in  repeated
    offending, on the basis of the evidence that was before Judge Brown her
    offending started in  1989,  according  to  the  decision  letter.   No
    complete record of her offending history has been  provided,  as  Judge
    Brown pointed out at [3].  On the assumption that her offending started
    in 1989, it is important to bear in mind that she arrived in the UK  in
    1976, aged 5.  There would at least have been some integration  between
    her arrival and her becoming involved in offending when aged about  18.
    Furthermore, the evidence before Judge Brown was that there has been no
    offending since December 2011, a period of three  years  prior  to  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   Perhaps  more  significantly,
    the evidence is to the effect that the appellant has started  a  degree
    course and at the time of the hearing was in her second year of  study.
    She is said to then have been free from drugs, and in  employment.   At
    [19] there is reference to her having spent several weeks working  with
    North  Westminster  Drug  and  Alcohol  Service  as  a   peer   mentor.
    Furthermore, she has a daughter born in the UK,  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing aged 16.

39. In my judgement all that evidence was a sufficient foundation  for  the
    judge to have concluded that the appellant is socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom.

40. However, for the reasons I have given, the judge  did  err  in  law  in
    other respects, those errors of  law  being  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.  I indicated to the parties that if that  was
    my conclusion I was of the view that there would need to be  a  further
    hearing for the decision to be re-made.  This is not a case in which it
    is appropriate  for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

41. The appeal will therefore be re-listed for further hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The parties are to note the directions given below.

                                 DIRECTIONS

        1.  If  either  party  wishes  to  adduce  further  evidence,   the
           requirements of rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 must be complied with.

        2. In relation to any witness whom it is proposed to call  to  give
           evidence, a witness statement must be filed and served no  later
           than 14 days before  the  next  date  of  hearing,  the  witness
           statement to stand as evidence-in-chief such that  there  is  no
           need for further examination-in-chief.

        3. In relation to any other evidence relied on by either party,  it
           must be filed and served no later than 14 days before  the  next
           date of hearing.

        4. The respondent is to use her  best  endeavours  to  furnish  the
           Tribunal  with  a  full  record  of  the  appellant's   criminal
           offences.

        5. The findings of fact made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  to
           stand, except insofar as those  findings  are  infected  by  the
           errors of law.  The parties will be expected to be in a position
           at the next hearing to make submissions as to what  findings  of
           fact can be preserved.

Anonymity

Given that these proceedings involve a child, I make an  order  pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008.
Consequently, this determination  identifies  the  appellant's  daughter  by
initials only, in order to preserve her anonymity.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek    17/03/15

