

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/00237/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                           |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On    15.01.2018                             |On 22. 01.2018                |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                            Robert Arthur RUTTEN
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Andrew Jones, solicitor, Thompson & Co
For the respondent: Mr T Lindsay

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge MJ Gillespie), sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  15  August
    2017, to  a deportation appeal by a citizen of  the  Netherlands,  born
    there in 1964.

 2. The appellant's mother was British, but married to a Dutchman, who  may
    or may not have been his real father. In 1972, his  mother  had  fallen
    out with her husband, and brought the appellant, after about four years
    in the Netherlands as a small child, and his two younger brothers  back
    to this country, where they have  lived  ever  since.  The  appellant's
    mother is no longer alive, but he also has a half-sister and two grown-
    up children in this country,  though  he  says  he  doesn't  have  much
    contact with his children. Besides immediate family, the appellant  has
    an uncle and aunt and cousins over here. He hasn't been in  touch  with
    his father since he was 8, and has  no  friends  or  relations  in  the
    Netherlands.



 3. The appellant's history in this country has  been  somewhat  chequered:
    the serious convictions recorded  against  him  are  as  follows,  only
    noting for now those resulting in imprisonment.

    1992      house-burglary (x2)       18 months' imprisonment

    1996      driving whilst disqualified        3 months' imprisonment

    2005       possession  of   cocaine   with   intent          2   years'
    imprisonment

    2014      sexual assault by penetration    32 months' imprisonment
              sexual assault (no penetration)  24 months, consecutive
              possession of indecent images      8 months, concurrent
                                  total 4 years 8 months

 4. The 2005 sentence had led to a notice of intention to deport,  but  the
    appellant's appeal against that  was  allowed  in  2006.  This  time  a
    deportation order was served on 3 April 2017, and once again the  judge
    allowed this  appeal.  The  relevant  legislation  is  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  [the  EEA  Regulations],
    setting conditions for the exercise of  the  power  to  deport  an  EEA
    citizen found guilty of a criminal offence.

       27.-(1) In this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
       decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
       public health.

       (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

       (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person  with
       a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on  serious
       grounds of public policy and public security.

       (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative grounds
       of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)     has resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                 period  of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                 decision; or

             (b)     is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is
                 in the best interests of the person concerned, as  provided
                 for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by
                 the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November
                 1989.

       (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the  United
       Kingdom include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by  these
       Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of society,
       and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy or
       public security  it  must  also  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
       following principles-

             (a)      the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
                 proportionality;
             (b)     the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;
             (c)     the personal conduct of the  person  must  represent  a
                 genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
                 one of the fundamental interests of  society,  taking  into
                 account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
                 not need to be imminent;
             (d)     matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;
             (e)     a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision;
             (f)     the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
                 in the absence of a previous criminal conviction,  provided
                 the grounds are specific to the person.

       (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
       and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is resident  in
       the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take  account   of
       considerations such as the age, state of health, family and  economic
       situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's
       social and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
       extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

 5. The judge rightly concluded, at 15, that the  appellant's  imprisonment
    had broken the continuity of his residence, counting back from the date
    of the decision under appeal, so that he could not claim the additional
    protection given by reg. 27 (4). Also rightly, he held, at 10, that the
    appellant's established time at large, and in full employment,  between
    1999 and 2005 entitled him to  a  permanent  right  of  residence.  The
    result, under reg. 27 (3), was that there had to be serious grounds  of
    public policy or security for deporting him. This decision  had  to  be
    made in terms of the considerations set out at reg. 27 (5) and (6).

 6. The judge concluded, at 18, that this appellant did  pose  a  'genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat' (see reg. 5  (c))  to  justify
    deportation, subject to the remaining proportionality considerations at
    (5) and (6). So far, neither side  has  challenged  his  decision.  The
    question is  on  the  way  in  which  he  reached  his  conclusions  on
    proportionality, at 20 - 22. Paragraphs 20 and 21  are  concerned  with
    the appellant's  family  history  in  this  country,  and  the  judge's
    assessment of that is not challenged; nor is there any challenge to his
    conclusions on the appellant's lack  of  Dutch  language  or  effective
    connexions in the Netherlands.

 7. Permission was given on the basis that the judge had failed properly to
    assess  the  interests  of  society   in   making   his   decision   on
    proportionality. While it may reasonably be assumed that,  having  just
    found at 18 that the appellant  represented  a  'genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat', the judge had not lost sight of  that  in
    reaching the decision he did at 22,  the  result  he  reached  is  also
    challenged on his approach to  the  appellant's  'social  and  cultural
    integration' into this country.

 8. So far as can be seen from the judge's 22, he looked at the question of
    integration without going into the appellant's criminal history. If the
    appellant had been convicted of a single  serious  offence  after  many
    years with a good character, then that might not  have  been  decisive.
    However, this was not the case: besides the four occasions (see 3) when
    the appellant had been sent to prison, his record showed  that  he  had
    been convicted, since 1992,  of offences punishable  with  imprisonment
    in 1996, 1999, 2001, 2011  and  2014.  This  was  something  the  judge
    clearly needed to take into account in  assessing  the  degree  of  the
    appellant's integration into this country, before reaching his decision
    on the proportionality of his deportation,  and  not  doing  so  was  a
    material error of law on his part.





 9. Having announced that conclusion, I invited both parties first to  make
    submissions as to whether I could go on at once to re-decide  the  case
    for myself. Bearing in mind that many of the judge's  conclusions  were
    not challenged by either party, neither suggested otherwise, and  so  I
    invited submissions on the merits of the case.

10. Both sides accepted  that  the  law,  especially  on  the  question  of
    rehabilitation,  which  formed  a  considerable  part  of  the  judge's
    reasons, is as set out in MC (Essa principles recast) [2015]  UKUT  520
    (IAC). The relevant parts of the judicial head-note follow, leaving out
    the frequent references to Dumliauskas & others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145,
    and to the original decision in Essa (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)
    [2013] UKUT (IAC) 316:

    3.       There is no specific reference in the expulsion provisions  of
         either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations   to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6).
    4.       Rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed .
    5.       Reference to prospects of rehabilitation  concerns  reasonable
         prospects of a person ceasing  to  commit  crime  ,  not  the  mere
         possibility of rehabilitation. Mere capability of rehabilitation is
         not to be equated with reasonable prospect of rehabilitation.
    6.       Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a factor  to
         be taken into account in the proportionality assessment required by
         regulation 21(5) and (6) .
    7.       Such prospects are to be taken into account even if not raised
         by the offender .
    8.        Gauging  such  prospects  requires  assessing  the   relative
         prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member  State  as  compared
         with those in the Member State of origin, but, in  the  absence  of
         evidence, it is not to be assumed  that  prospects  are  materially
         different in that other Member State .
    9.       Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects of  the
         rehabilitation   of   offenders    include    family    ties    and
         responsibilities, accommodation, education,  training,  employment,
         active membership of a community and the like .  However,  lack  of
         access to a Probation Officer or equivalent  in  the  other  Member
         State should not, in general, preclude deportation
    10.      In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
         residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be a  weighty
         factor. Even when such prospects have significant weight  they  are
         not  a  trump  card,  as  what  the  Directive  and  the  2006  EEA
         Regulations require is a  wide-ranging  holistic  assessment.  Both
         recognise that the more serious the risk of  reoffending,  and  the
         offences that a  person  may  commit,  the  greater  the  right  to
         interfere with the right of residence.

11. As already seen, the  judge  had  fallen  short  of  the  'wide-ranging
    holistic assessment'  required  by  failing  to  take  account  of  the
    appellant's previous record.  Bearing  in  mind  the  judge's  entirely
    justifiable conclusion on  the  threat  posed  by  the  appellant,  his
    overall proportionality assessment would be hard to justify, unless his
    approach to rehabilitation was correct. Otherwise I am content to  take
    the judge's findings of fact as the basis for  my  decision,  with  one
    reservation, which follows: I shall come to the other in due course.



12. The judge found, at 22, that the appellant would have "...  no  visible
    prospects of employment or accommodation  in  the  Netherlands".  While
    this is no doubt correct, so far as it  goes,  Mr  Jones  realistically
    accepted that the Netherlands has to be treated as a civilized European
    country, where the appellant would  be  entitled  to  whatever  welfare
    provision other citizens receive. He also accepted that,  although  the
    appellant has no Dutch, the general standard of English is  well  known
    to be very high in the Netherlands. On the question of the  appellant's
    prospects of  rehabilitation,  Mr  Jones  accepted  that  the  relevant
    material is in the reports referred to at 16 -  17.  Otherwise  I  have
    taken account of both sides' submissions in reaching my conclusions.

13. On the question of rehabilitation, this is what the judge said:

       He would have no visible access to continued  rehabilitation  and  in
       particular to ... supervision on licence by probation  officers  with
       whom he shares a common national, cultural and social  identity,  not
       to mention a common language. ... So integrated is he in all  aspects
       of life and society in the United Kingdom, and so alien is he to  the
       country of his nominal nationality, that I hold his only prospects of
       continued rehabilitation, and of elimination of  such  threat  as  he
       does pose to the public, lie in this country, rather than in what  is
       in all respects other than accident of history, a foreign country.

14. One would not have guessed from this passage that the judge was talking
    about a country so close, and so  closely  akin  to  this  one  as  the
    Netherlands, though that is perhaps a matter of opinion. It is  however
    clear from paragraphs 8 - 10 of the guidance in MC  that  the  lack  of
    'visible access to continued rehabilitation' cannot form the basis of a
    decision on this point, and that, without evidence, of which  there  is
    none, it  cannot  be  assumed  that  prospects  of  it  are  materially
    different in the Netherlands. Nor is lack of any access to a  probation
    officer, let alone a culturally attuned one, to preclude deportation in
    general. Finally the degree of the appellant's integration, as well  as
    his right to permanent right of residence, has to be fully  taken  into
    account, and the more serious the relevant risk of  repeated  offences,
    the more heavily that weighs in the proportionality decision.

15. At this point I need to  consider  the  available  evidence  about  the
    continued risk posed by the appellant. The sentencing  judge  described
    his most serious offences in these terms:

       This lady was a friend. On two  separate  dates  you  abused  her  by
       sexually  assaulting  her  when  she  was  asleep  in  bed  and  then
       humiliating her by taking photographs on your phone showing what  you
       were doing. The photographs were  of  her  private  parts.  This  was
       dirty, perverted behaviour.

16. The author of the current OASys report (22 February  2017)  noted  that
    this was the appellant's first conviction for sexual offences, but also
    that this part of his offending was not, in view of the other offences,
    an isolated incident, and re-assessed the risk as 'imminent and  high'.
    Access either to female house-mates  or  partners  would  increase  it,
    while  successful  completion  of  a  SOTP  [sex   offender   treatment
    programme], or lack of access to them would reduce it.





17. There was also a very detailed report (December 2016)  by  Dr  Danielle
    Sturgess, who  is  a  forensic  psychologist  employed  by  the  Prison
    Service, and treatment manager of the appellant's core SOTP. While this
    report could not take account of the February 2017 OASys re-assessment,
    it does represents a more detailed  view  of  the  risk  posed  by  the
    appellant than that does, and by someone even more  qualified  to  make
    it.

18. Dr Sturgess does  note  (at  1.4.3)  the  further  offences,  involving
    indecent images of children and animals, which would lead to the  OASys
    re-assessment; but the rest of her report is concerned almost  entirely
    with the risk the appellant posed to female house-mates or partners. He
    seemed to have been fairly honest with Dr  Sturgess  about  the  events
    which had led to his convictions on this score, and  she  assessed  his
    risk as follows (8.4)

       [The  appellant]  would  appear  to  be  managing  his  risk  factors
       effectively and so he is not considered to  pose  an  imminent  risk;
       however it is likely that his ability to do so is in  part  supported
       by being in custody. With regards to a community setting, his risk of
       causing serious harm, as assessed by OASys (02.01.15) is reported  to
       be high to children and the public, medium to a known adult  and  low
       to staff. With regards to children, [the appellant]  denies  actively
       seeking out and making indecent images of children.  He  also  denies
       any sexual interest in children and  there was no evidence gained  on
       Core SOTP to support such an interest. In reference to known  adults,
       he has previously behaved violently towards intimate partners,  often
       under the influence of alcohol. Should he engage in excessive alcohol
       consumption, then the imminence of  risk  he  poses  to  an  intimate
       partner is likely to increases,  as  is  the  potential  for  serious
       physical harm. Regarding his sexual offending, should [the appellant]
       (a) not be involved in an intimate relationship., (b) be engaging  in
       excessive alcohol consumption and  (c)  fail  to  seek  support  from
       others, then his risk of recidivism is likely to increase.

19. At 10.1 Dr Sturgess says this:

       Overall [the appellant] has engaged well in SOTP. He appears to  have
       developed good insight into his risk  and  the  skills  he  needs  to
       manage this effectively in future. The skills  he  has  learnt  would
       appear transferable  to  managing  other  areas  of  potential  risk,
       including Intimate Partner Violence and general antisocial behaviour.



20. The trouble with Dr Sturgess's assessment, and the reason for my second
    reservation about  the  judge's  findings,  lies  in  their  relatively
    uncritical assessment of the appellant's  explanation  for  the  images
    found in his possession. The one described by the  judge  (11)  as  the
    photograph of a woman "in carnal connexion with a dog" he said  he  had
    found as a child and kept. This seems improbable, since  mobile  phones
    and other electronic devices were not  in  common  use  till  the  late
    1980s, by which time this appellant was well grown-up; but  it  is  not
    the main problem. This is that both the judge and Dr  Sturgess  (1.4.3)
    noted the appellant's explanation for possession of indecent images  of
    children as having received them by accident on phones given to him  in
    the past as payment for drugs.

21. The judge said this

       The explanation in  respect  of  the  images  of  children  has  been
       consistently given  since  the  time  of  assessment  for  sentencing
       purposes. Although it is not consistent with a plea of guilty, it has
       some weight as an explanation persisted in for a considerable time. I
       nevertheless can find no cause to treat the matter on any basis other
       than that forming part of the conviction and  sentence,  namely  that
       the appellant admitted and was convicted  for  making  [my  emphasis]
       images of children.

22. This was an entirely correct approach,  since  the  Crown  Court  trial
    record shows, on two out  of  the  three  counts  concerned,  that  the
    appellant was convicted of making an  indecent  photograph  or  pseudo-
    photograph of a child on a specific date, 22 March 2013. However,  what
    the judge did not go on to do was to consider the effect of this on the
    appellant's rehabilitation prospects. Contrary to the position  on  the
    appellant's offending against a grown-up woman, on which  I  should  be
    prepared to accept Dr Sturgess's assessment, if it stood alone, and  to
    his own plea before the Crown Court, he has not  been  prepared  to  be
    frank about his possession of child pornography with either  the  judge
    or Dr Sturgess.

23. Frankness must be a prerequisite of  rehabilitation,  especially  where
    behaviour  of  this  kind  is  concerned.  The  OASys  assessor  (2.10)
    described the appellant as  being  in  "...  a  high  level  of  denial
    regarding these offences", and went on to give reasons for saying  that
    he was minimizing his actions, where those  against  a  grown-up  woman
    were concerned. This led to reservations about his motivation, set  out
    at 12.8, and to re-assessment of his risk, at R10.3, as  'imminent  and
    high'.

CONCLUSIONS

24. While I accept from Mr Jones, who represented the appellant before  the
    judge,  that  he  appears  English  in  all  respects,  his  degree  of
    integration must be limited by his repeated  criminal  convictions  and
    periods of imprisonment. So far  as  the  appellant's  work  record  is
    concerned, he was only in consistent full-time work, as  shown  by  his
    contribution records (noted by the judge at 10) from 1999 to 2005, with
    variable records from then till 2016.

25. I also accept that the appellant would be without friends or family  to
    turn to in the Netherlands; but the corollary of that,  as  Mr  Lindsay
    pointed out, is that his having such advantages here has not  prevented
    him  committing  serious  offences  over  the  years.  There  might  be
    difficulties in the way of his getting  back  to  work  at  nearly  54,
    following his latest convictions, in either country; but  there  is  no
    evidence of his having any health problems. He has been here for a very
    long time; but never out of serious trouble for longer than the end  of
    his 2005 sentence and his 2011 conviction.

26. If rehabilitation were a serious prospect for the appellant, then there
    might be clear advantages in terms of the specific availability of  the
    core SOTP[1], operated by people with  direct  access  to  his  record.
    However, the current OASys assessment gives  the  appellant's  risk  as
    high and imminent, and, for the reasons I have given, I am not prepared
    to accept


    that he has been frank enough about what he has done for rehabilitation
    to be a decisive factor in his  case.  That  means  the  judge's  fully
    justifiable  assessment  of  the  'genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat' he poses, taking into account all the  factors  at  25,
    also justifies his deportation.

Home Office appeal allowed: decision re-made
Appeal against deportation
                               18 January 2018 [pic]         (a judge of
                                   the Upper Tribunal)
-----------------------
[1]    subject to the conclusion reached in the  2017  Ministry  of  Justice
    evaluation (not known to me at the date of the hearing, so not  brought
    to the attention of the parties): "The results suggest that while  Core
    SOTP in prisons is generally associated with little or  no  changes  in
    reoffending, there were some statistically significant differences.  In
    particular, there were small increases in the sexual  and  child  image
    reoffending rates."

