
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00575/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 24 October 2014                         |On 30 October 2014             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SHARMARKEH MOHAMED SHARIF
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lay, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  an
    appeal by the present respondent,  who  I  identify  as  the  claimant,
    against the decision of the Secretary of  State  that  he  be  deported
    under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. Deportation is a matter which often attracts a  great  deal  of  public
    concern. This case is unusual because there seems  to  have  been  very
    considerable understanding and support offered to this claimant by  the
    sentencing judge.   He did send  the  claimant  to  prison  for  twelve
    months because he had possessed a false identity document  but,  as  is
    recorded in the determination, the judge said:

         "This is a very sad situation.  No one has anything against you  as
         a person at all.  On the contrary, you are,  as  has  been  pointed
         out, a person who has not offended whilst in this country. You have
         been separated from you wife and  children  for  a  long  time  and
         everyone understands that you must be desperate to get back and see
         them."

 3. I have not fallen into the error of thinking this somehow excused  that
    claimant's behaviour.  His offending means  that  the  public  interest
    lies  in  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  because  that  is  what
    Parliament has said.  However he cannot be deported if he is a  refugee
    or if removing him would contravene the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. Anyone with any relevant experience knows that many thousands of people
    across the world have established themselves as refugees from  Somalia.
    This is a reflection of the appalling conditions that have  existed  in
    the country as the institution of the state  have  failed  and  various
    tribal groups have organised themselves to control different  areas  at
    different times. Some people seem to have prospered as a consequence. A
    very large number of people have not.

 5. This claimant's core case is very simple.  He says that he is unable to
    go to his home because the home area in Somalia is under the control of
    Al-Shabab and he risks persecution there.  As far as I can see there is
    nothing controversial in that finding.  Certainly this was accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal and that has not been challenged.

 6. This does not mean that  the  claimant  is  entitled  to  international
    protection. The Tribunal had to go on  decide  if  the  claimant  could
    reasonably be expected to relocate in a different part of Somalia.  The
    Secretary of State insists that the claimant could go to Mogadishu  and
    he be safe there.  The First-tier Tribunal did not agree.  The  grounds
    supporting the application for permission to appeal  are  appropriately
    short and they make the point that when country guidance was  given  by
    the  Tribunal  in  AMM  and  Others  (Conflict;  humanitarian   crisis;
    returnees; FGM) (Somalia) CG [2011] UKUT 00445, there  was  an  express
    reference at paragraph 363 to indicate that the  situation  in  Somalia
    remained in a state of flux and the Tribunal were at least open to  the
    possibility that the guidance it was giving then could be overtaken  by
    events quite quickly.

 7. In a sense this is almost immaterial.  It is  trite  law  that  country
    guidance is a necessary starting point and should be followed but it is
    also trite law that it is only a starting  point  and  where  there  is
    sufficiently compelling evidence the Tribunal should  not  hesitate  to
    reach a conclusion other than that indicated by country guidance.

 8. The grounds refer particularly to a report  described  conveniently  as
    the 2013 Danish Report and a decision of the European  Court  of  Human
    Rights KAB v Sweden Application number  17299/12.  Both  of  these  are
    sources of evidence that the situation in Mogadishu  has  improved  and
    the influence of Al-Shabab has diminished.

 9. However neither of these documents is evidence that  the  situation  in
    Mogadishu is now safe for everyone.  The  Tribunal  in  this  case,  at
    paragraph 16, acknowledges the evidence that the situation has improved
    but also says how in some districts of Mogadishu Al-Shabab continues to
    be influential. It was the Tribunal's view that, because of the absence
    of government soldiers, some  people  in  Mogadishu  risk  serious  ill
    treatment.

10. The Tribunal makes the point that  the  claimant  has  never  lived  in
    Mogadishu.  It says again at paragraph 16 that the claimant  "does  not
    have a network of social support that he could rely  on.  He  has  been
    absent from Somalia for a  considerable  period  of  time".   In  other
    words, this is not a man who knows how to get around in  Mogadishu.  He
    is not a man who has anyone there to help him or support  him  and  the
    Tribunal formed the view that he was someone for whom there was a  real
    risk he would not be able to keep himself safe in a part of  the  world
    that still remains very difficult.

11. I think this may be a position where a differently constituted Tribunal
    could have reached a different conclusion on  the  available  evidence.
    There is a subjective element in working out what it is  reasonable  to
    expect somebody to do and, unlike the First-tier Tribunal, I  have  not
    seen the claimant give evidence and have  not  been  able  to  form  an
    impression of him by hearing him answer  questions.  The  determination
    does not read as if the  Tribunal  made  a  careless  decision  but  my
    decision goes no further than saying that, in my judgement, the  First-
    tier Tribunal reached a permissible decision on  the  totality  of  the
    evidence. Other than confirming that each case should be considered  on
    its own facts this decision has no general application.

12. I do not agree with the Secretary of State's criticisms.  It  seems  to
    me that the necessary points raised perfectly properly in  the  refusal
    letter have been considered and resolved in a way that the Secretary of
    State does not like.  That is not an error of law.

13. I am persuaded that the appropriate documents  were  considered  and  a
    conclusion reached that was rationally open  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
    question of refugee status. The claimant's criminal conviction  is  not
    of kind that disqualifies him from international protection.

14. It follows therefore that  I  dismiss  the  appeal  in  as  far  as  it
    challenges the decision to allow the appeal on refugee grounds.

15. There was a very secondary finding that the claimant was also  entitled
    to remain on Article 8 grounds because he hoped to be reunited with his
    family in Sweden and that would be impossible to achieve or  much  more
    difficult to achieve if he had to present  himself  from  Mogadishu  to
    reach that end.  I see nothing  wrong  in  the  Tribunal's  conclusions
    there. It is a most unusual set of circumstances and certainly not  the
    kind of thing that is going to be worked out  by  meticulously  pouring
    over  the  Rules  that  are  alleged  to  encapsulate  or  codify   the
    requirements of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. I
    cannot see any error of law in that part of the decision but  the  main
    point here is that the Tribunal found the claimant to be a refugee  and
    although there was a grey area in its decision it was  one  that  I  am
    satisfied was legally permissible and so I  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 October 2014                |


