
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00311/2014
                                                AA/07940/2014, AA/07938/2014
                                                AA/11211/2014, AA/11213/2014
                                                AA/11214/2014, AA/11216/2014
                                                               AA/11218/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|on 19 December 2016                  |On 07 February 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 ALI ALENZI
                             FAWZIA HASAN MANEA
                               MOHAMMED ALENZI
                                 OMAR ALENZI
                               ABDULLA ALENZI
                               FATIMA ALLENZI
                                OTHMAN ALENZI
                                ABDUL ALENZI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms  K  Mclarthy  instructed  by  Powell  Spencer  and
                    Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Mayall promulgated on the 13 July 2016 in which the Judge dismissed
        the appeals of this family unit  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the
        necessarily lengthy and detailed judgment.
     2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed  application  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Lindsey on the 9 November 2016 in the following terms:

        1. The appellants are related as father, mother and five  children.
        The father, and first  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Australia  of
        Kuwaiti origins  and  faces  deportation  proceedings  after  being
        sentenced to 8 months imprisonment for obtaining leave to remain in
        the UK by deception; he had claimed asylum and  obtained  leave  to
        remain on the basis he was a Kuwaiti Bidoun without disclosing  his
        Australian citizenship.  His  wife  and  children  state  they  are
        Kuwaiti Bidouns and are entitled to asylum in the UK and all  argue
        that they should be allowed to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


        2. This is a renewed application for permission to  appeal  against
        the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  at  Hatton  Cross
        dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


        3. The grounds of appeal contend that there are three errors in the
        decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


        4.In relation to errors said to exist in the determination  of  the
        asylum appeal, there clearly can be no material errors in  relation
        to the first appellant (the father) and the three youngest children
        (the fifth, sixth and seventh appellants) as these people  are  all
        Australian citizens.  This leaves the second appellant (the mother)
        and the children born in 1997 (third appellant)  and  2000  (fourth
        appellant). It is argued that the evidence of  Nasser  Al-Anezy  of
        the Harrow Community Association is that  the  family  are  Kuwaiti
        Bidoons and that  documentation  was  not  issued  by  the  Kuwaiti
        authorities after 1990 to Kuwaiti Bidoons.   It  is  arguable  that
        this evidence, from an expert  who  was  found  to  be  honest,  is
        material and has not been considered in finding whether  the  third
        and fourth appellants are in fact undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoons.  It
        is arguable that this could materially have affected the outcome of
        their appeals.  The other challenges to the asylum decision are not
        as clearly arguable but permission is granted to argue all  of  the
        asylum grounds at the error of law hearing.


        5.It is secondly argued that the best  interests  of  the  children
        have not been properly considered, and that  this  is  particularly
        the case with the 16 year old  sixth  appellant  who  has  multiple
        health and educational needs.  It is  arguable  that  the  analysis
        that the sixth appellant would access  health  care  and  education
        which is adequate is not compatible with the  evidence  before  the
        First-tier Tribunal from the health and education documents,  which
        is arguably that this did not take place when she lived in  Kuwait,
        and that as a result the best interests of the sixth  appellant  is
        flawed for failure to consider relevant material, and in  turn  the
        Article 8 ECHR private life analysis  both  under  the  Immigration
        Rules and outside those Rules is arguably flawed as this would be a
        key factor in this decision making.


Error of Law

     3. This matter had been previously considered by another judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal who was found to have made material  errors  of
        law in failing to consider the members of the family  individually.
        The appeal was remitted as a consequence. Judge  Mayall  considered
        the parties individually and in relation to the second,  third  and
        fourth appellants made a number of findings which can be summarised
        as follows:
     4. The Judge considered the claim by the  second  appellant  to  be  a
        Kuwaiti Bidoon at [21 to 23] initially where it is stated:

        21. Your claim that your husband made four  attempts  at  obtaining
        family reunion visas in Australia but all the attempts  failed  and
        that the Australian authorities did not provide a  reason  why  the
        applicants  were  unsuccessful  (AIR  Qs.  82-84).     Your   legal
        representatives  have,  twice,  failed  to   provide   the   signed
        authorisation that the Australian government  needed  in  order  to
        release details of the reunion application under their  Freedom  of
        Information Laws.  You have also failed to provide the  information
        regarding your husband's Australian citizenship and the basis  upon
        which he was granted asylum.  You claim that he was granted refugee
        status in Australia on the basis of being a  Bidoun,  however,  you
        have adduced no evidence to suggest this.  It  is  also  considered
        that Australia would honour any genuine family reunion  application
        under the Convention.


        22. It is also noted that a Certificate of  Australian  Citizenship
        in the name of Ali Matar Alefan dated 26 January 2011 was found  in
        your husband's possession. This is a different family name from the
        surname that your  husband  and  children  are  using  in  the  UK.
        'Alenzi'. 'Alenzi' is a common surname among Kuwaitis (COI Requests
        12/11-064 &06/10-098).  Given that you husband has  used  different
        surnames and not explained the reason why, your children's  surname
        of 'Alenzi 'is found to be unsubstantiated and  is  not  considered
        evidence of membership of the said tribe.


        23. In light of the above, your claim to  be  a  Bidoun  cannot  be
        verified either way and is found uncertain, consideration  will  be
        given to whether to apply the benefit of the doubt to  this  aspect
        of your claim at paragraph 25.

     5. The Judge considered the evidence in some detail before setting out
        the findings made at [105-158].   At  [105]  the  Judge  states  "I
        regret that I cannot find the first  or  second  appellants  to  be
        credible or honest witnesses. I cannot rely upon their evidence  in
        any material particular".
     6. The finding by the Judge in relation to the use of a  surname  that
        differs from  that  appearing  on  the  Certificate  of  Australian
        Citizenship was fully open to the Judge on the evidence. The  Judge
        also records a number of other relevant findings  at  [106-118]  in
        relation to the evidence of the first appellant  in  the  following
        terms:

        106. The first appellants has  shown  himself  to  be  a  man  very
        willing to use deception in order to further his own  interests  or
        the interests of his family. This is  demonstrated  graphically  by
        his failure to disclose that he had obtained Australian citizenship
        when  applying  for  asylum.  He  was  sentenced  to  a   term   of
        imprisonment in respect of this.


        107. Notwithstanding this he was fully  aware  that  three  of  his
        children  were  also  Australian  citizens.   Despite  his  earlier
        deception and punishment he failed to disclose this fact.  Although
        he may not have been responsible for  the  details  of  the  asylum
        applications in respect of those children he was fully  aware  that
        they were  Australian  citizens  and  that  this  could  have  been
        disclosed.  At no stage did he seek to correct this until his  oral
        evidence before me now.


        108. Given his claim that his wife or the  second  appellant,  need
        guidance in all matters relating to the  children  I  am  satisfied
        that he must have played at least a part in the decision to conceal
        the fact that the children had Australian passports.


        109. There were discrepancies between him and his wife in  relation
        to those passports. He said that he had sent then back to Kuwait by
        post although it is somewhat unclear why he would have  done  that.
        His wife  claimed  that  she  had  destroyed  the  passports.   Her
        evidence   on   this   was,   however,   extremely   confused   and
        contradictory.  I gained the impression that she was simply  making
        up her answers on the spot in relation to this. I cannot  know  for
        sure whether either or neither of them is telling the  truth  about
        the passports.  I consider it, on balance, more likely  that  those
        passports have not been destroyed and that the appellants have kept
        hold of the passports in case they should be required at  a  future
        date.


        110. Similarly there was a discrepancy as to how  the  family  left
        Kuwait.  Both the first and second appellants claim that  they  did
        so by plane. This was flatly contradicted by the evidence of  their
        son.  He gave details  of  a  road  journey  made  by  minibus.   I
        consider that this a more likely version of events  than  that  put
        forward by the first or second claimant


        110. The first and second claimant claims that the second  claimant
        and the  elder  children  were  provided  with,  presumably,  false
        passports in order to make the  journey.  They  claim  to  have  no
        knowledge of the nature of these passports or even to have enquired
        about the nature of those passports. I find this implausible.


        112. The first appellant claimed to have only had minor problems in
        Kuwait before going to Australia as a result  of  his  undocumented
        Bidoon status.  He claims to have been detained  on  two  occasions
        for not having documents.  Each detention was for only one day.


        113. His wife, in contrast, claimed that he had been  detailed  for
        two months or so as a result  of  taking  part  in  demonstrations.
        Again her evidence on this was confused.  She claimed that she  had
        been told that he had been arrested but never knew why he had  been
        released and had not asked.  I find this implausible.


        114. The first appellant  claims  that,  having  gained  Australian
        citizenship, he made numerous applications for his family  to  join
        him.  He has claimed that he was never given any written reason for
        the failure of these applications. In his oral  evidence  that  was
        his initial evidence.  He then accepted that he had been given some
        written reasons but that he no longer had them.


        115. He claimed asylum in Australia in a different  name.  I  found
        his explanation for this to be  unconvincing.  He  claims  that  he
        wanted to be able to use his Australian identity in order  to  come
        back to Kuwait without it being realised that he was a Kuwaiti.  He
        claimed that the name he uses now is a common Kuwait name. That may
        well  be  the  case  but  the  name  he  used  for  the  Australian
        application was also a name which he  says  was  the  name  of  his
        forebears. It would be unlikely that, if he were claiming asylum in
        Australia on the basis he was a Bidoon,  he  would  choose  a  name
        which was not a name which would be associated with being a Bidoon.


        116. He claimed that as an undocumented Bidoon, his  children  were
        not entitled to any medical care.  In his witness statement he said
        that his daughter was born in 2000 and as he was  in  Australia  he
        did not see her until he returned to Kuwait in 2002.  His wife  had
        not realised that there was anything wrong with her.  It  was  only
        when he went back to Kuwait that he noticed that something was  not
        right. As they were not entitled to free medical treatment his wife
        had not taken her to the doctors.  He then took her  to  a  private
        hospital but the doctors could not do anything. He said she  needed
        a very expensive operation.


        117. This, however, is in striking contrast to  what  he  told  the
        social worker in 2011. Firstly he told her that she had  been  born
        by emergency caesarean at term because of concerns about the health
        of mother and baby. She had been kept  in  the  hospital  with  her
        mother for one week.  This, itself, does not sit at all easily with
        the claim that neither  mother  nor  child  were  entitled  to  any
        medical treatment.  He then told the social worker that Fatima  had
        been admitted to hospital many times in the first two years of  her
        life. I consider it much more likely that the  information  he  was
        giving to the social worker was correct.


        118. In addition it is clear that Abdul had had significant medical
        treatment in the shape of a complete blood  transfusion  whilst  he
        was in Kuwait.  The appellant  claimed  that  this  was  a  one-off
        funded by a friend. I find this to be extremely unlikely.   It  had
        not been mentioned and indeed it  was  curious  that  the  relevant
        document did not appear in the bundle although it had  appeared  in
        the previous bundle.  Abdul undoubtedly had an Australian passport.
         His father applied for that when he was born as he told me.  As an
        Australian  citizen  in  Kuwait  he,  the  first   appellant,   was
        apparently entitled to access all services.  It would seem unlikely
        that Abdul would not have been able to access those services.

     7. The credibility of the second applicant was also doubted. At  [119-
        120] the Judge found:

        119. In respect  of  the  second  appellant  she  undoubtedly  used
        deception in respect of the children's  asylum  applications.   She
        admitted she knew full and well that three of them were  Australian
        citizens but did not declare that fact.  I have already referred to
        the discrepancies between her and  her  husband's  account  of  his
        difficulties in Kuwait and all the circumstances in which  she  and
        her children left Kuwait.  As stated above I gained the  impression
        during parts of her evidence that she  was  simply  making  up  her
        answers on the spot.


        120. She also claimed that she was unable to access any  healthcare
        in Kuwait. She did not disclose that she had had at  least  one  of
        her children, Fatima, in a hospital for a week.  She also  did  not
        disclose that Fatima had had many hospital admissions in her  first
        two years.

     8. The Judge refers to the  county  information  relating  to  Kuwaiti
        Bedoon and the three categories of that  ethnic  group.  The  first
        category is those who hold security cards and who are  entitled  to
        all the benefits that flow from the same [121]. The third  category
        is described at [122] as those not holding  a  security  card.  The
        Judge noted that these are unable to obtain  a  passport,  are  not
        provided with any educational funding  and  are  denied  access  to
        government clinics and hospitals altogether. The only recourse  for
        such individuals being to seek recourse for medical treatment  from
        private hospitals.
     9. At [123] the judge noted that it is only this  third  category  who
        are at risk of persecution in Kuwait and that the burden  was  upon
        the applicants to  substantiate  their  claim  to  be  undocumented
        Bidoon, i.e. in the third category.
    10. The Judge, having heard the  appellants  give  evidence  found  the
        accounts given to be internally inconsistent.  This  is  a  finding
        that has not been shown to  be  outside  the  range  of  reasonable
        findings the Judge was permitted to make on the evidence  in  light
        of the matters recorded above.
    11.  The  Judge  also  considered  the  external  consistency  of   the
        appellants' case and found at [124] that the claim was inconsistent
        with the  country  information  regarding  the  reality  for  those
        falling within the third category. The Judge specifically finds:

        "....It seems to be simply totally implausible that, if the  second
        appellant  were not entitled to any  healthcare  at  all  that  she
        would have been receiving maternity treatment in hospital  for  the
        birth of her daughter or that she would have been  kept  in  for  a
        week or that Fatima would have  had  many  admissions  to  hospital
        during the first two years of her life.   That  seems  inconsistent
        with the picture painted for the life of undocumented Bidoon".

    12. At [125] the Judge finds that this impression  is  strengthened  by
        the fact one of the other children also received medical treatment.
    13. Ground 1 asserts  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
        evidence that supported the appellants case such as that  from  the
        Chairperson  of  the  Harrow  Kuwait  Community  Association.  This
        evidence was considered by the Judge who makes  specific  reference
        to it at [126] as well as the evidence from other  family  members.
        Indeed, the Judge notes at [127] that it  was  claimed  that  other
        family members have been granted status  as  undocumented  Bidoons.
        The country guidance case law was also considered  which  does  not
        conclude that all Bidoon are undocumented or entitled to asylum.
    14. In relation to the witness from the Harrow Kuwaiti community,  that
        evidence is not determinative and especially not so in relation  to
        the question of credibility which is a matter for the Judge.  There
        has been no artificial separation in the way in which the  evidence
        was considered by the Judge. The evidence  was  clearly  considered
        'in the round' and the Judge has given adequate reasons for why  it
        was not accepted that the appellants' had discharged the burden  of
        proof upon them to show that what they were claiming is true.
    15. In relation to the fact other family members have  been  recognised
        as refugees, this was noted by  the  Judge  as  was  the  fact  the
        credibility of the account given in those cases had not been tested
        in court. This is accepted in paragraph 18 of the grounds where  it
        is also suggested that notwithstanding this  fact  the  authorities
        were satisfied that the family members were undocumented Bidoon. In
        IA (Appellant) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 6  Lord Kerr said "All  of  these
        factors require of the national decision-maker close  attention  to
        the UNHCR decision and considerable  pause  before  arriving  at  a
        different  conclusion.  The  approach  cannot   be   more   closely
        prescribed than this,  in  my  opinion.  The  UNHCR  conclusion  on
        refugee status provides a substantial backdrop to the  decision  to
        be made by the national authority. A claimant for  asylum  who  has
        been accorded refugee status by UNHCR  starts  in  a  significantly
        better position than one who does not have that status. But I would
        be reluctant to subscribe to the notion  that  this  represents  "a
        starting point" in the inquiry because that also hints at the  idea
        of a presumption. Recognition of refugee status by UNHCR  does  not
        create a presumption, does not shift the burden of proof and is not
        a starting point (if by that one implies that it  is  presumptively
        assumed to be conclusive) but  substantial  countervailing  reasons
        are required to justify a different conclusion". It was  also  said
        that a claimant's credibility was an accepted  basis  on  which  to
        depart from an earlier UNHCR decision. Where a claimant's story was
        so riddled  with  inconsistency  and  implausibility  that  it  was
        rendered unbelievable then a national authority was not obliged  to
        accept it simply because it was accompanied by a  favourable  UNHCR
        decision.
    16. Such principle is equally relevant to this case in  which  accounts
        previously given by others have been accepted but  not  tested  and
        when the core element is tested, it is found to lack credibility.
    17. It was submitted that  the  finding  Fatima  had  received  medical
        treatment in the past was not open to the Judge on the evidence  as
        the child had had no surgery and no education. The source for  this
        claim is said to be the content of  the  letter  dated  24  October
        2011, at pages E12-13 and the document at E20  of  the  appellant's
        bundle, the former from Northwest London Hospitals NHS,  Children's
        Services Directorate.  Such a submission is difficult to  reconcile
        with that letter which contains the following statement referred to
        by the Judge:

        Birth History


        Mr Alenzei describes Fatima's mother was "weak"  during  pregnancy.
        He said that she had low weight and was anaemic.  Fatima  was  born
        by emergency, lower caesarean section at term due to concerns about
        the health of both mother and baby.  He is unsure  what  her  birth
        weight was but says that she was small when she was born.  She  was
        born in  good  condition  and  did  not  require  resuscitation  or
        admissions to a baby unit.  She  was,  however,  kept  in  hospital
        along with her mother for 1 week as she was small and "weak" but Mr
        Alenzei  was  unable  to  be  clearer  about  the  nature  of   her
        difficulties.


        Past Medical History


        Mr Alenzei describes that Fatima  was  admitted  to  hospital  many
        times in the first  2  years  of  life  due  to  difficulties  with
        weakness, poor hearing and concerns about poor vision.  He was  not
        able, however, to be more specific about any illness she  may  have
        had.  Fatima has never had any surgical procedures.  Fatima has not
        had  any  previous  investigations  as  to  the   nature   of   her
        difficulties according to Mr Alenzai.

    18. The above content is referred to in the letter at page E20. At  E46
        is a passage in the Statement  of  Special  Educational  Needs  for
        Fatima that the child had no accessed therapy services or  attended
        a school placement prior to arriving in the UK.  This  may  be  the
        case, but the Judge  did  not  say  that  the  child  had  received
        therapy. The Judge  found  that  the  child  had  received  medical
        treatment which is in accordance with the evidence  the  First-tier
        Tribunal were asked to consider.
    19. In relation to the lack of schooling Ms Mclarthy  made  a  forceful
        submission that if there was access to schooling, the  only  reason
        Fatima had been denied he same was as a result of a deliberate  act
        by her parents. This is not a matter advanced before the First-tier
        Tribunal and there was insufficient evidence before  the  Judge  in
        relation to his issue, and what was available, when  compared  with
        the other matters raised, was considered  but  did  not  prove  the
        applicants case on this point.
    20. No arguably legal error is made out in relation to ground 1.
    21. Ground  2  asserts  the  Judge  erred  when  considering  the  best
        interests of the children. The appellants assert the  Judge  failed
        to consider the needs of the children and in particular  of  Fatima
        who, it is said, has "serious health needs".
    22. The Judge clearly considered the best interests of the children. At
        [137] it was found that all members of the family could  return  to
        live lawfully in Kuwait and that their status on return  would  not
        be as undocumented Bidoon.
    23. The Judge  considered  whether  there  were  any  very  significant
        obstacles  to  integration  of  the  appellants  into  Kuwait   and
        concluded there were not. The position of Fatima is  considered  at
        [140] in the following terms:

        140. I realise that Fatima has health problems.   It  is,  however,
        entirely unclear what ongoing medical treatment she requires or  is
        receiving in the UK. There is no evidence before me to suggest that
        such medical treatment as she may need will  not  be  available  in
        Kuwait.  Nor, in the light of my findings set out above,  is  there
        any evidence that the family would  not  be  able  to  afford  such
        treatment.  The  same  applies  in  relation  to  ongoing   medical
        treatment by the other children.

    24. At [141] the Judge finds:

        141. As set out above I have not been given a true picture  of  the
        real situation of this family whilst they were  living  in  Kuwait.
        As I cannot rely  upon  the  evidence  given  to  me  I  cannot  be
        satisfied that, for example,  the  children  did  not  receive  any
        schooling or that their economic situation was as it is claimed  to
        be.  In these circumstances I cannot be satisfied that  there  will
        be very significant obstacles to the reintegration of  this  family
        into Kuwait.  I am not satisfied that any of  the  appellants  meet
        the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    25. The finding of lack of a full and frank disclose of  the  situation
        of the family is one fully open to the Judge who notes, in addition
        to the maters raised in the adverse credibility  findings  recorded
        above, the failure of the  appellant's  representative,  twice,  to
        provide the signed authorisation  that  the  Australian  Government
        require in order to release  details  of  the  reunion  application
        under their Freedom of Information Laws.  Information  setting  out
        the basis on which  the  first  appellant  was  granted  asylum  in
        Australia or in relation to his grant of Australian citizenship was
        not disclosed either. There is  a  consonant  pattern  of  lack  of
        candour in relation to the  material  provided  and  truth  in  the
        evidence given to the Judge.
    26. Section E of the appellants' appeal bundle  contains  a  number  of
        documents relating to Fatima. These were considered  by  the  Judge
        and the finding at [140] reflects  the  lack  of  any  up  to  date
        information of the child's needs. The documents are  historical  in
        nature  coving  the  period  2009-2013  with   letters   confirming
        appointments in 2014 and, for Abdulla, in  2015.  The  hearing  was
        listed for April 2016 yet no up to date evidence was obtained.
    27. In 2012 an Educational Psychologist found that:

        Fatima has severe bilateral sensorineural hearing  loss  for  which
        she is wearing hearing aids and a visual impairment for  which  she
        is wearing glasses.  Fatima has  significant  speech  and  language
        difficulties and some delay in her gross motor skills according  to
        paediatric overall development. Fatima has recently started at Penn
        school having had no proper experience of an educational placement.
         The Letter-R assessments would suggest that Fatima is experiencing
        significant learning difficulties, although it would be appropriate
        to renew her learning progress over time.

    28. This issue was addressed in the  respondents  reasons  for  refusal
        letter at [52 - 61] outside the  Immigration  Rules.  Reference  is
        made to the availability of medical care in Kuwait and at [55]  the
        author of the letter wrote:

        55. You not adduced any evidence to suggest your daughter could not
        access treatment in Kuwait and the evidence that you have  provided
        does not indicate that  your  daughters  condition  is  at  such  a
        critical  stage  that  it  would  be  inhumane   to   remove   you.
        Consequently, it is not accepted that your removal from the  United
        Kingdom reaches the high threshold of severity to breach Article  3
        of the European Convention on Human Rights  on  the  basis  of  the
        medical condition.

    29. At [62-63] of the refusal letter it is written:

        62. It is noted that your  daughter,  Fatima  has  medical  problem
        which have been examined in detail at paragraph 52.  Given the fact
        that it is not accepted that you are Bidouns, it is considered that
        essential healthcare is available to you and your family,  although
        it is acknowledged that the healthcare services in Kuwait  may  not
        be of an equal standard to that available in the United Kingdom.


        63. It is also considered that your  children's  social  well-being
        will be protected in their family unit.  There has been no evidence
        put forward  to  suggest  that  your  children's  health  would  be
        affected in  Kuwait.  The  children  would  be  living  with  their
        parents, and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it  is
        presumed that they would therefore be safe and well cared for.

    30. This is a clear indication that the appellants were  being  put  to
        proof of their claims in relation to the health needs of Fatima and
        other members of this family. Despite this the Judge noted the lack
        of up to date evidence of Fatima needs, which was  accepted  by  Ms
        Mclarthy. It was also conceded before the Upper Tribunal that there
        was no evidence  showing  that  medical  services  in  Kuwait  were
        insufficient to meet the needs of any members of the family.
    31. It is accepted that the Judge did not say that  the  children  were
        being punished for the actions of their parents and any such  claim
        is not made out on the evidence or from a reading of the decision.
    32. It is not made out that the Judge set the test  for  medical  cases
        too high. The issue is whether there is a breach of Article 3  ECHR
        and the same was not proved. This is arguably the only decision the
        Judge could  make  on  the  basis  of  the  limited  evidence  made
        available.
    33. The Judge did consider the impact upon Fatima of her  removal  from
        the UK at [151] where it is written:

        151. In the case of Fatima she is receiving holistic  treatment  in
        the UK, so far as I can tell in  the  absence  of  updated  medical
        reports, which is likely to continue if she remains in the UK.   It
        seems likely that it would be advantageous to her to remain in  the
        UK where the various professionals are aware of her  problems  and,
        indeed, of her.  Thus, from a medical point of view I  consider  it
        likely to be advantageous for her to remain in the UK.  That  said,
        however, I am satisfied that she will be able to access  healthcare
        in Kuwait.  As stated there is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the
        standard will not be adequate. Thus  the  relative  merits  of  her
        staying in the UK for that purpose and returning to Kuwait  may  be
        small.  I also bear in mind that in medical cases the threshold for
        Article 8 to be engaged, is extremely high, as it is in respect  of
        Article 3 (see, e.g. GS India v secretary of  state  for  the  Home
        Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and NA  Pakistan  and  Others  [2016]
        EWCA Civ 662).

    34. It was also conceded that the impact of  removing  Fatima  was  not
        spelt out in the evidence but it was submitted that as a result the
        Judge should have looked at the same. A  reading  of  the  decision
        shows this is what the Judge did and it has not been made out  that
        it is legal error for the Judge not to embark upon an investigative
        process of his own. Proceedings in the Tribunal are by their nature
        adversarial and the appellants'  are  represented.  The  Judge  was
        entitled to assume  that  all  the  evidence  the  appellants  were
        seeking to rely upon  will  have  been  disclosed  and  to  make  a
        decision based upon such material. It has not been  made  out  that
        this is one of the rare cases in which it may have been appropriate
        for the Judge to have investigated the matter  further,  especially
        when the appellants appear to have been withholding  facts/evidence
        themselves.
    35. The submission the Judge failed to consider the merits of the  case
        outside the Rules is not made out. The appeals were dismissed under
        the Immigration Rules and on protection and human  rights  grounds,
        see Notice of Decision section. In [157] the Judge finds:

        157. In these circumstances I am entirely satisfied that there  are
        no such compelling circumstances or  exceptional  circumstances  as
        would require me to undertake a freestanding Article  8  assessment
        outside the Rules. Had I done so, however,  I  would  have  had  no
        hesitation  whatsoever  in  concluding  that,  balancing  all   the
        factors, the  decision  to  deport  and/or  removal  all  of  these
        appellants was  entirely  proportionate.  The  public  interest  in
        maintaining effective  immigration  control  vastly  outweighs  any
        factors there may be in favour of these appellants.

    36. The assertion the Judge failed to appreciate that the  family  will
        be separated/split has no arguable merit as the  Judge  found  that
        the family can all return lawfully to Kuwait  [137].  The  evidence
        did not show otherwise.
    37. Ms Mclarthy was not the advocate before the First-tier Tribunal  or
        the person responsible for the  preparation  of  the  case.  It  is
        arguable that her  submissions  were  made  on  the  basis  of  the
        evidence that she considered should have been made available rather
        than that which was. On the basis of the evidence provided  to  the
        Judge, from all sources, no arguable legal error  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal has been made out.

Decision

    38. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    39. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 February 2017

