
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2015                  |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RKA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hart of Terence Ray Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rothwell promulgated on 25 June 2015.  The determination  allowed
    the appeal  against  deportation  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.    The
    decision found that the appellant had shown, in line with paragraph 398
    of the Immigration Rules, "very compelling circumstances over and above
    those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A" of the Rules.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant's children from  the  contents
    of these proceedings.

 3. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to RKA as the appellant, reflecting their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Ghana and he was born  on  6  May  1974.
    He came to the UK on 16 April 1987 at the age of 12 with his mother and
    sister. The family  made  an  asylum  claim  which  was  rejected.  The
    appellant was issued with  a  deportation  order  on  23  January  1996
    because he was an overstayer under the Immigration Act 1971. An  appeal
    against that decision to deport failed on 8 January 1999.

 5. Notwithstanding that immigration history,  the  appellant  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 7 July 1999 as a dependent of his mother.



 6. The grant of  indefinite  leave  also  followed  some  time  after  the
    appellant's extensive criminal history had  begun.  The  appellant  has
    over 30 convictions for a variety of offences, the first  occurring  on
    12 December 1990. That first offence  was  an  indecent  assault  on  a
    female. Other offences include  public  order  offences,  assaults  and
    numerous drugs offences.

 7. The appellant was most recently convicted on 25 April 2012 for  failing
    to comply with notification requirements under the Sexual Offences  Act
    2003 and received a suspended sentence of  twelve  weeks'  imprisonment
    suspended over two years with a curfew requirement of three months.  It
    also appears that he failed to surrender to  custody  at  an  appointed
    time and received a suspended sentence of four weeks'  imprisonment  to
    run concurrently and a curfew requirement of three months.

 8. Over ten  of  the  appellant's  convictions  have  led  to  periods  of
    imprisonment. The notable periods of imprisonment are a conviction  for
    nine months in November 2000 for offering to  supply  controlled  drugs
    Class A cocaine and a conviction for eight months on 15 June  2007  for
    attempted theft.

 9. The main index offence here, however, is  a  conviction  for  rape  for
    which on 4 November 2003 he was sentenced to four  years'  imprisonment
    and inclusion on the Sex Offenders Register for life.

10. It is also of note that  during  this  prolific  criminal  history  the
    appellant employed fourteen aliases and four different dates of  birth.



11. The respondent issued the appellant with a notice of his  liability  to
    deportation on 17 December 2009.  A deportation order was  made  on  19
    March 2010.  Various convoluted proceedings followed on  which  nothing
    turns here other than leading to a further deportation order being made
    on 2 June 2014.   The proceedings before me arise from that decision.

Error of Law

12. In order to properly address the  challenge  on  error  of  law  it  is
    expedient  to  set  out  here  the  relevant  legislation.   The  first
    important  part  of  the  legislation  is  Sections   117A-C   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which are as follows:-

         '117A    Application of this Part

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts-

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under Section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        Section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  Section
                        117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  'the  public  interest  question'
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English-

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons-

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
                        that is established by a person at a time when  the
                        person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where-

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
                foreign criminals

                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who  has  not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
                    years, the public interest requires  deportation  unless
                    there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above
                    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                    be taken into account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision  was  the
                    offence or offences for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                    convicted.'

13. The other relevant legislation for these purposes are the provisions at
    paragraphs 398 to 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   These  state  as
    follows:

          '398. Where a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
          contrary to the UK's obligations under  Article  8  of  the  Human
          Rights Convention, and

          (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
          public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

          (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
          public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
          months;

          (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
          public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
          Secretary of State, their offending has  caused  serious  harm  or
          they are a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard
          for the law,

          the Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
          whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,  the
          public interest in deportation will only be  outweighed  by  other
          factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
          above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

          399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
          if -

          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
          with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

          (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

          (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
             years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

          (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
          partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled  in
          the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,
                  because of compelling circumstances over and above  those
                  described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

          399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
          if -

          (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
          his life; and

          (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
          into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.'

14. The respondent's first challenge  is  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rothwell did not apply the correct test in substance to the appellant's
    claim.  It is  not  disputed  that  he  falls  outwith  any  protection
    provided by sections 117C (3)-(5) and paragraphs 399  and  399A.  As  a
    result of his four years' sentence for rape he must show that there are
     "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A" sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in
    his deportation.

15. There is no doubt in my mind that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rothwell
    was aware that that was the case.  She refers to  the  need  for  "very
    compelling circumstances" at [100] and [107]  and  concludes  at  [115]
    that there  are  such  circumstances  present,  overriding  the  public
    interest in deportation.

16. Judge Rothwell appears to have reached this conclusion on the basis  of
    the appellant's relationship with his  partner,  LC,  and  two  of  his
    children from other relationships, R,  aged  17  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, and S, aged 14 at the  date  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

17. The reason why I find that the First-tier Tribunal made an error  on  a
    point of law, however, is that it is not merely  that  very  compelling
    circumstances must be found but that they must be found to be "over and
    above" those provided for already in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

18. In the case of Chege (Section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015]  UKUT
    00165 the Tribunal states in the head note:

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:

             (i)  is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined  by  s117D
             (2) (a), (b) or (c);

             (ii) if so, does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

             (iii)    if not are there very compelling  circumstances  over
             and beyond those falling within 399 and 399A relied upon, such
             identification to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness  of  the
             criminality and taking into account the  factors  set  out  in
             s117B.

         Compelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a powerful and
         irresistible effect; convincing.

         The purpose of paragraph 398 is to recognize circumstances that are
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.

         It follows from this that if an appeal does not  succeed  on  human
         rights grounds,  paragraph  397  provides  the  respondent  with  a
         residual  discretion  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  exceptional
         circumstances where an appellant cannot succeed by invoking  rights
         protected by Article 8 of the ECHR."

19. The guidance in Chege is entirely in line  with  the  learning  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.  That  case
    indicates in paragraph 39 the correct  approach  to  the  role  of  the
    Immigration Rules - that is paragraphs 399 and  399A  -  in  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" assessment:

         "39. The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
             comprehensive code is significant, because it  means  that  an
             official or a tribunal should seek  to  take  account  of  any
             Convention rights of an appellant through the lens of the  new
             rules themselves, rather  than  looking  to  apply  Convention
             rights for themselves in a free-standing way outside  the  new
             rules. This feature of the new rules makes the decision-making
             framework in relation to foreign criminals different from that
             in relation to other parts of the Immigration Rules, where the
             Secretary of State retains a general  discretion  outside  the
             Rules in exercise of which, in some  circumstances,  decisions
             may need to be made in order to accommodate certain claims for
             leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  Convention  rights,  as
             explained in Huang and R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

         40.  The requirement that claims  by  appellants  who  are  foreign
             criminals for leave to remain, based on the Convention  rights
             of themselves or their partners, relations or children, should
             be assessed under the new rules  and  through  their  lens  is
             important,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  has
             emphasised. It seeks to ensure uniformity of approach  between
             different officials, tribunals and courts who have  to  assess
             such claims, in the interests of fair and equal  treatment  of
             different appellants with similar cases on the facts. In  this
             regard, the new rules also serve as a safeguard in relation to
             rights of appellants  under  Article  14  to  equal  treatment
             within the scope of Article 8. The requirement  of  assessment
             through the lens of the new rules also seeks  to  ensure  that
             decisions are made in a way that is properly informed  by  the
             considerable weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by Parliament in
             the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State (as  the
             relevant Minister with responsibility  for  operation  of  the
             immigration system), so as to  promote  public  confidence  in
             that system in this sensitive area."

20. SSHD v AJ (Angola) and Chege confirm that in order to  show  compelling
    circumstances,  which  must  be  "powerful  and  irresistible",   those
    circumstances must be relating to matters  that  "do  not  fall  within
    paragraphs  399  and  399A".  This  aspect  of  the  "very   compelling
    circumstances" is simply not addressed at all  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rothwell.

21. Further, not only is the correct test not addressed, but  the  decision
    states at [115] that it was "especially his  children's  circumstances"
    that led to the appeal being allowed.

22. Further, the First-tier Tribunal found at [110]  that  the  appellant's
    son, R, would be forced to leave the UK if the appellant was  deported.
    However, the Upper Tribunal has indicated in MA and  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 380 that the EEA citizen must  be
    "compelled" to leave the EEA state. Such compulsion will not  arise  if
    the qualify of life of the EU citizen is diminished by the  absence  of
    the non-EU national.

23. The evidence here was that R did not live for most of the week with the
    appellant but with his partner, LC, so that R could attend college.   R
    is also supported by his paternal grandmother, the  appellant's  mother
    with whom he stays from time to time.

24. There is an assumption at [110] of the determination that  R  would  be
    unable to live with  his  maternal  grandmother  "as  this  would  have
    occurred when his mother left".  That appeared to me to be  speculation
    as none of the witnesses gave evidence to that  effect.  There  is  the
    additional matter, as indicated at [89]  and  [91],  that  it  was  not
    accepted that R has lost touch with his mother who is in the USA. There
    was no exploration of her position regarding R if the appellant were to
    be deported.

25. There is the further factor that the  First-tier  Tribunal   states  at
    [98] that "I also find that R will not accompany the appellant to Ghana
    as he had decided to remain in west London and not move  to  Beckenham,
    so I do not find he would go to Ghana".  This appears to be  a  finding
    of fact that the reality is that R would not be forced or compelled  to
    leave the EEA if the appellant were deported, further  undermining  the
    statement at [110] that Regulation 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 was engaged. The finding at [98] is not
    consistent with the statement at [110] that "I find it is  likely  that
    [R] will be forced  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  go  with  the
    appellant".

26. I also found merit in the respondent's argument at [29] of the  grounds
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  materially  mischaracterises  the
    appellant's offending history  at  [112]  when  assessing  whether  the
    public interest could be outweighed by very  compelling  circumstances.
    The judge refers to the index offence  being  very  serious  but  being
    committed in 2003 and no further sexual or violent  offences  occurring
    since then and no offences occurring since 2012. The offending here  is
    prolific, from 1990 to 2012, continuing well after the index offence in
    2003 and after instigation of  deportation  proceedings.  The  criminal
    history before and after the index offence includes a number  of  drugs
    offences and significant period of imprisonment for attempted theft  in
    2007.

27. For all of these reasons, I found that the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained an error on a point of law such that it had  to
    be set aside and remade.  I heard submissions from the parties  on  the
    correct procedure for remaking the appeal where that was  so.   It  was
    submitted for the appellant that the appeal would have to  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal in line with the provisions  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement dated 25 September  2012  at  paragraphs
    17.2(b) and Ms Savage did not seek to argue against that outcome. It is
    my view that there are sufficient findings that fall to be made here in
    line with the error of law findings above that  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and the assessment of "very  compelling  circumstances"  is  set
    aside.

The appeal will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]    Date 18 September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

