
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00095/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2014                             |On 30 January 2014           |
|Prepared 6 January 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BURAK SAGMAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, of Counsel, of Temple Court Chamber


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach  and  Dr  P  L
    Ravenscroft (non-legal member)) who, in a determination promulgated  on
    30 September 2013,  allowed  the  appeal  of  Burak  Sagman  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 18 December 2012  to  deport
    the appellant.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in the  appeal  before
    me, I will for ease of reference refer to her as the respondent as  she
    was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly,  I  will
    refer to Burak Sagman as the appellant, as he was the appellant in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant entered Britain in November 1988 and,  having  married  a
    British national on 26 August 1989, was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in October 1990.  His marriage has now ended.

4.   In 1989 the appellant was convicted in Turkey, in his absence, for  the
    offence of organised export smuggling and sentenced,  in  absentia,  to
    nine years,  three  months'  imprisonment.  2  other  offences   remain
    outstanding. .  In 1994 he was arrested  in  Belgium  and  the  Turkish
    authorities sought his extradition.  That application  was  refused  by
    the Court of Appeal in Brussels on 19 January 1995.  The appellant,  on
    release from custody in Belgium, returned to Britain.

5.   Extradition proceedings were started in Britain but in June 2001  these
    were dismissed in the High Court after a hearing  before  Rose  LJ  and
    Silber J.

6.   On 17 March 2004, the appellant was convicted for conspiracy to  supply
    a Class A drug and possession to supply Class A drugs and sentenced  to
    seven years' imprisonment.  In  2006  he  was  served  with  notice  of
    liability to deportation and a further notice of intention to deport in
    June 2007.  The appellant appealed against that decision.  The decision
    was subsequently withdrawn by the respondent on 20  August  2007  after
    the appellant had been placed in immigration detention.  On 23 November
    2009 he was served with a notice of  liability  to  deportation  and  a
    further questionnaire to  which  the  appellant  responded  by  return.
    Another questionnaire was served on him in March  2011,  to  which  the
    appellant again responded promptly.  In December  2012  a  decision  to
    deport the appellant was made.

7.   At the hearing of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant gave evidence referring to a business which he had set up  in
    Britain and to various certificates which indicated that  he  had  been
    free of alcohol and drugs for nine years and ten months.

8.   He said that  he  had  absconded  from  bail  in  Turkey  in  1987  and
    travelled to Greece before coming to Britain.  There  had  been  eleven
    cases in Turkey against him - five for which he had been  sentenced  to
    nine years and two months and another  six  cases  where  he  had  been
    fined.  He claimed that although he had  been  out  of  Turkey  for  25
    years, two cases had been kept alive.

9.   The appellant confirmed that he did not know  the  whereabouts  of  his
    wife and they had no children.  He  claimed  that  the   two  companies
    which he had started had a turnover of nearly �600,000.  He said   that
    if he were returned to Turkey, he would be imprisoned.

10.  The appellant referred to voluntary work he had  undertaken  here,  and
    claimed that his company's VAT and tax payments were up-to-date.

11.  The Tribunal heard evidence from the wife of the  appellant's  business
    partner and also from a Mr John Mealyer  of  RAPT  (Rehabilitation  for
    Addicted  Prisoners  Trust).   Mr  Mealyer   gave  evidence  that   the
    appellant had followed the RAPT drugs programme completely and that  he
    worked voluntarily with Narcotics Anonymous where he was  a  practising
    member and had a role in the service structure.

12.  Having heard submissions from both representatives,  the  Tribunal  set
    out their findings and conclusions in paragraphs 40  onwards  of  their
    determination.

13.  Having quoted from paragraph 398 of the Rules, the Tribunal  stated  in
    paragraph 42:-

         "42. Paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply to the Appellant  because
             he does not fall within Paragraph  398(b)  or  (c).   It  will
             therefore be only in exceptional circumstances that the public
             interest in deporting the  Appellant  will  be  outweighed  by
             other factors."

14.  They then quoted from the determination in MF (Article 8 -  new  rules)
    Nigeria [2012] 00393 (IAC) setting out the head  note  in  full  before
    detailing the head notes in the cases of Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules)
    [2013] UKUT 00045 and Ogundimo (Article 8  -  new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT
    00060.  They also  quoted from the judgment in Nagre and  the  judgment
    in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  They referred to paragraphs 45 of
    that judgment which states:-

         "45. The second characteristic is that there is no  rule  requiring
             an exceptional case under Article 8 to be demonstrated.   Here
             there is a risk that the absence of such a rule may appear  to
             suggest that there is a single standard for breach of  Article
             8 which, once met, will carry the claim whatever the  context.
             But that cannot be what is  meant.   The  public  interest  in
             favour of removal or deportation may be  stronger  or  weaker;
             and accordingly it will  take  more,  or  less,  to  mount  an
             Article 8 claim that will prevail against it...


         46.  Thus while the authorities demonstrate that there is  no  rule
             of exceptionality;  they  also  clearly  show  that  the  more
             pressing the public interest in removal  or  deportation,  the
             stronger must be the  claim  under  Article  8  if  it  is  to
             prevail..."

15.  The Tribunal then went on to note the appellant's conviction to  supply
    heroin, a Class A drug and the sentence  passed  on  the  appellant  of
    seven years' imprisonment.  They noted that he had also been  sentenced
    to two years' imprisonment to run  concurrently  for  possession  of  a
    Class A drug.

16.  They quoted from the sentencing remarks in which the judge had stated:-



         "The Court will give you the fullest credit for pleading guilty and
         accepting you had  got  yourself  involved  in  what  can  only  be
         described as serious crime and  criminals.   You  clearly  were  an
         important cog in this conspiracy from all the evidence I  heard  in
         the case and trial, which of course, involved the  distribution  of
         Class A drugs on a large scale; and you were caught  red-handed  in
         possession of heroin valued  at  �675,000.   You  also  clearly,  I
         accept, were somebody who was an addict, and I accept that you were
         being paid in drugs as well as receiving  some  financial  benefit.
         This was a sophisticated conspiracy as the Crown has reminded me in
         its opening this morning and you played a full part in  it;  and  a
         substantial term of imprisonment must follow..."

17.  Having concluded  that  the  appellant  took  responsibility  for  this
    offence and that he had said that it had been committed at least partly
    because of his own drug  addiction,  the  Tribunal  referred  to  "very
    positive reports" from the prison about the appellant's  behaviour  and
    his release in June 2007.

18.  In paragraphs 51 onwards, they referred to  the  appellant's  probation
    report, emphasised the seriousness of the appellant's offence, and  set
    out the various factors which they considered  should   be  taken  into
    account when assessing the proportionality of removal.  They  wrote  in
    paragraph 51 onwards :-

         "51. The  Probation  report  regarding  the  Appellant's  potential
             release from prison on licence stated:


                  'The  seconded  Probation  Officer's  report  contains   a
                  detailed  list  of  [the   Appellant's]   completed   drug
                  rehabilitative  work.   It  is  also  noted  that  he  has
                  completed the RAPT programme and his efforts are supported
                  by twice weekly voluntary drug tests, none of  which  have
                  proved positive for drugs.  In January 2007, he  was  made
                  senior peer supporter.  In this role he  is  entrusted  to
                  different areas of the  prison  to  give  support  and  to
                  encourage others engaging on the RAPT drug programme.   Mr
                  Sagman regularly attends NA and Alcoholics Anonymous.   Mr
                  Sagman is the Secretary  of  NA  group  meetings  for  the
                  remand wing of the prison...  He has no adjudications  and
                  he has held Enhanced status since January 2007...'


         52.  The report further states:


                  'Mr Sagman appeared to be sincere when  he  spoke  of  the
                  change  in  his  attitude  regarding  the  offences.    He
                  described how in his previous lifestyle  he  cared  little
                  for the illegality of his offending behaviour and he  held
                  no regard for the victims of  drug  related  crime...   Mr
                  Sagman's claim that he has been drug free for three  years
                  and that he wants to remain so is well  supported  by  his
                  conduct and progress through his sentence...'


         53.  The report also states:


                  'I do not doubt  his  motivation  to  continue  with  drug
                  rehabilitation work through the voluntary organisations of
                  NA and AA...'


         54.  The Parole Board report, dated 20th March 2007, states:


                  'Mr Sagman is described as a model prisoner;  he  has  not
                  accrued any adjudications or positive drug tests;  he  has
                  enhanced status and he has used his time constructively by
                  obtaining  employment  and   improving   his   educational
                  skills...  To his credit he has further made a  determined
                  effort to address his areas of risk and has in  particular
                  completed  the  Ley  Prison  Programme   and   Rapt   with
                  favourable  reports...   Both  probation  report   writers
                  support his early release and both assess his risk of  re-
                  offending and of harm as low.'


         55.  There are positive reports regarding the Appellant's  time  in
             prison and we note that a particular role was created for  him
             in prison because of his exceptional  work  and  rapport  with
             other prisoners  suffering  from  addiction  problems.   These
             factors all show that  the  Appellant  is  considered  by  the
             prison authorities to be a prisoner who can  be  trusted.   It
             also suggests that the Appellant has used his time  in  prison
             constructively.


         56.  The Appellant does not have any family in the UK  although  he
             has formed some close friendships.  He  is  technically  still
             married to a British national but does not currently know here
             whereabouts.  We have therefore given no consideration to this
             relationship   in   our   assessment   of   the    Appellant's
             circumstances.  We do note, however, that  the  Appellant  has
             always been lawfully in the UK, initially with leave to  enter
             as a student then with leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his
             marriage and then with indefinite leave  to  remain.   He  has
             also been in the UK for over 25 years (albeit that 3 of  those
             years have been spent in prison).


         57.  The Appellant has also formed two businesses in  the  UK.   We
             were provided with the  cash  flow  record  of  one  of  these
             businesses but there was very little other evidence before  us
             with regard to this business, for example, accounts or payroll
             information showing the number of employees or bank statements
             showing income from the business.  This is of some concern  as
             it makes it harder for us to assess the extent of the business
             in an objective manner.  Moreover,  there  was  no  suggestion
             that the business could not be run by the Appellant's business
             partner if the Appellant were not in the UK or that this would
             lead to redundancies amongst staff.  The business  is  a  web-
             based business which on the Appellant's evidence has customers
             across Europe.  There was no evidence  before  us  to  suggest
             that there was any reason why the Appellant could not continue
             to be involved with the business if he were based in Turkey.


         58.  The Appellant has continued  his  involvement  with  Narcotics
             Anonymous since his release from prison.  This involvement  is
             at a higher level than simply  attending  Narcotics  Anonymous
             meetings and the Appellant is  specifically  involved  in  the
             structure of Narcotics Anonymous.  We find that the  Appellant
             has made a considerable commitment to Narcotics Anonymous  and
             to helping others who also suffer from addictions and that  he
             intends to continue this role in the future.


         59.  The Appellant was convicted of a serious offence and there  is
             a strong argument that the public interest would be served  if
             the Appellant were deported to  Turkey  as  a  result  of  the
             seriousness of the offence  and  as  a  deterrent  to  others.
             However, balanced against this are the factors outlined  above
             as well as the fact  that  there  was  a  delay  in  making  a
             decision regarding the Appellant's deportation.   The  initial
             decision was withdrawn in 2007 but the Respondent did not make
             a new decision until December 2012.  This  delay  of  5  years
             inevitably weakens the Respondent's argument that  it  is  the
             public  interest  to  deport  the  Appellant  given  that  the
             Appellant has been out of prison during this time  and  living
             in the community.  We note too that the Appellant is  assessed
             as being at low risk of re-offending.  There is no  suggestion
             that the Appellant has  re-offended  since  his  release  from
             prison.


         60.  The Appellant has raised a further issue before  us  which  is
             that he states that he is at risk  of  a  prison  sentence  in
             Turkey following an unfair trial in his absence.   There  have
             previously been extradition  proceedings  in  respect  of  the
             Appellant where the High  Court  found  that  the  extradition
             proceedings were unjust and oppressive.  The Appellant was not
             therefore extradited.


         61.  The issue has been raised again because the Respondent  states
             that as a result of the statute of limitations, the  Appellant
             will not be expected to serve his sentence because he has been
             outside Turkey for 27 years.  The Appellant  states  that  his
             brother in Turkey has made enquiries and that he has been told
             that two sentences remain outstanding; one in  relation  to  a
             confiscation fine  and  one  in  relation  to  a  sentence  of
             imprisonment.   The  Appellant  has  provided   documents   in
             relation to this.   There  was  no  direct  challenge  to  the
             authenticity  of  those  documents  by  the  Respondent.   The
             documents state that there is an  arrest  warrant  outstanding
             with regard to the Appellant although somewhat confusingly  it
             refers to laws which have been abolished.  The document  makes
             reference to the Appellant being wanted for questioning rather
             than being wanted to serve his period of imprisonment.


         62.  The COI  response  to  a  question  posed  by  the  Respondent
             regarding the statute of limitations states:


                  'The COI service was unable to find  sources  to  indicate
                  whether the individual, if already having been  tried  and
                  sentenced, could be  made  to  service  this  sentence  on
                  return, in spite of any statute of  limitations.   Today's
                  Zaman reported on 18 March 2012 that:


                      "Turkey made amendments to  the  Turkish  Penal  Code
                      (TCK)  in  2005,  which  extended  the   statute   of
                      limitations  in  criminal  cases;  however,   jurists
                      believe  that  the  country  can  further  extend  or
                      totally remove the statute of limitations in  certain
                      criminal cases to make sure  that  justice  is  fully
                      served...   The  statute  requires  that   cases   be
                      concluded within seven and a half years of  the  date
                      of the  incident.   According  to  a  new  regulation
                      regarding the statute of limitations that  went  into
                      force in 2005, cases involving fatal  accidents  must
                      be concluded  within  15  years...   The  Council  of
                      Europe   document   entitled   'Turkey   -   national
                      procedures for  extradition',  undated...stated:  'In
                      Turkish   Criminal   Code   different   statutes   of
                      limitation periods are prescribed regarding  criminal
                      proceedings and penalties...'"'


         63.  The Appellant provided an opinion from a Turkish  lawyer  with
             regard to the offences and sentences.  This opinion states:


                  'The Turkish Court does not have the power to stop a  case
                  because of the  lapse  of  time  and  its  effect  on  the
                  suspect's ability to defend itself...  The State  Security
                  Courts are still existing and functioning.'


         64.  The opinion further states:


                  'There is both time barring for trial and time barring for
                  penalty in the Turkish Penal Code...  If Burak  Sagman  is
                  tried according to article 27 of Law no 1918, the foreseen
                  punishment would be either  10-15  years  of  imprisonment
                  with hard labour...or 8 to 10 years of  imprisonment  with
                  hard labour...  According to article 103  of  the  Turkish
                  Penal Code, the beginning of time barring is the  date  of
                  last act committed by the suspect in order to complete the
                  criminal offence...  If I take 31.05.1986 as the  date  of
                  the last action time barring  would start  on  31.05.2001.
                  After this date no more action can be taken against  Burak
                  Sagman for this particular offence and the legal  case  is
                  cancelled...'


         65.  The opinion also states:


                  '...I believe that Burak Sagman, after so much time,  will
                  not be able to defend himself well enough in those  trials
                  that could result with very heavy prison sentences.  Burak
                  Sagman has lost all his contacts.  He will not be able  to
                  find the necessary  information  and  documents,  to  find
                  witnesses and thus to organise his defence.  His situation
                  will be even more difficult because he will be arrested if
                  he is sent back to Turkey.  It is not  possible  that  the
                  trial will be  "fair"  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
                  defence...'


         66.  The information before us  is  very  unclear  with  regard  to
             whether  the  Appellant's  sentences  are  still  outstanding.
             There is documentary evidence before us of  a  Turkish  arrest
             warrant which strongly suggests that the Appellant is still of
             interest to the authorities.  There has been discussion of the
             Appellant's sentences now being time barred but  the  evidence
             before us with regard to this is  again  equivocal.   The  COI
             response suggests that the Turkish authorities can, in effect,
             extend the time and it is also unclear whether the statute  of
             limitations also applies to sentences which have already  been
             made or simply to trials for offences being time  barred.   We
             find on the basis of the evidence before  us  that  we  cannot
             confidently state that the Appellant will not be made to serve
             his  sentences  simply  as  a  result  of   the   statute   of
             limitations.  We also note  the  High  Court's  judgment  that
             stated that extradition would be unjust and oppressive because
             of the forum of the trial.  In light of this and in  light  of
             the relevant case law as set out above we find that there is a
             real risk of a breach of Article 6 and 8 if the Appellant were
             returned to Turkey.  We further find, having assessed all  the
             evidence, that it would not be  proportionate  to  deport  the
             Appellant from the UK for the reasons given above."

19.  In paragraph 61 the Tribunal they stated that the appellant "has  shown
    that there  are  exceptional  circumstances  under  the  Rules".   They
    therefore stated that they allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.

20.  The Secretary of State submitted lengthy  grounds  of  appeal   stating
    firstly that there was a failure to give reasons  or  adequate  reasons
    for findings on  material  matters  as   the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    identify  the  circumstances  which  made  the  appellant's   case   so
    exceptional that it would fall within the  exceptions  outweighing  the
    public interest.  It was submitted that the  term  "exceptional"  meant
    circumstances which although the requirement of the Rules had not  been
    met a refusal would result in an unjustifiably harsh outcome.   It  was
    claimed that there was no "quite exceptionally compelling feature"  and
    it was argued that the Tribunal had failed to resolve  the  conflicting
    evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  risk  of  a  further  trial   or
    imprisonment if deported to Turkey.

21.  It was claimed the Tribunal  had failed to give  consideration  to  the
    severity of the appellant's offences and that they were wrong  to  take
    into account the delay in reaching  a  conclusion  in  the  appellant's
    case.  It was claimed they  had  not  considered  properly  the  public
    interest in removal and further had erred in considering  a  two  stage
    test in the Article 8 assessment.

22.  The grounds referred to the judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria).

23.  The application was considered in the First-tier by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy and refused . He  stated that the Court of
    Appeal:

         "...has confirmed that the SSHD's meaning of 'exceptional' as  used
         in Immigration Rules is not as set out by the author of the grounds
         who refers to the proportionality assessment."

     He found that the Tribunal had been entitled not to find the  Secretary
    of State's evidence the appellant did not face ill-treatment on  return
    to Turkey was justified and concluded that:-

         "In light of all the evidence, notwithstanding the  seriousness  of
         those offences, it was open to the panel to find that  this  was  a
         situation where the proposed deportation was not proportionate  and
         therefore  there  were  exceptional  reasons  not  to  deport.  The
         remaining grounds are mere disagreement with  the  panel's  factual
         findings and do not disclose an arguable error on a point of law."

24.  Renewed grounds were then submitted.  These claimed that:-

         "Exceptional in the case of Article  8  in  the  Immigration  Rules
         means circumstances in which refusal of a claim would result in  an
         unjustifiably  harsh  outcome  for  the  appellant.   It  would  be
         something that does not conform to the Rules or something  that  is
         unusual.  In this case the Tribunal has found the appellant's  case
         exceptional because of the claimed risk of  a  prison  sentence  in
         Turkey following an unfair trial in his absence.  While that may be
         an unusual circumstance, it is not something that would lead to  an
         unjustifiably  harsh  outcome  and  it  is  submitted  that  it  is
         therefore not exceptional such as to be disproportionate."

25.  They argued,  moreover,  that the  panel  had  failed  to  resolve  the
    conflicting evidence regarding the appellant's risk of further trial or
    imprisonment in Turkey and had failed to give adequate consideration to
    the severity of the appellant's offences and in  particular  the  index
    offence.   The grounds further refer to the judgments  in  EB  (Kosovo)
    [2008] UKHL 41 arguing that the Tribunal were wrong to place weight  on
    delay and had  failed  to  place  appropriate   weight  on  the  public
    interest in removal as emphasised in   the judgement in   MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

26.  Upper Tribunal Judge Craig granted permission to appeal.  He stated:-

         "Although the determination is  both  thorough  and  detailed,  and
         although the panel  have  referred  to  the  relevant  authorities,
         including in particular  the  Tribunal  decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)
         (subsequently substantively upheld in the Court of Appeal) and  the
         Court of Appeal decision in SS (Nigeria) it is  at  least  arguable
         that where  at paragraph  66  the  panel  stated  that  'we  cannot
         confidently state that the appellant will not be made  to  serve  a
         sentence simply as a result of the statute of limitations' and that
         'we find there is a real risk of breach of Article 6 and 8  if  the
         appellant were returned to Turkey' the panel was applying the wrong
         standard of proof.  As the risk of a  breach  of  Article  6  would
         appear to have been  a  factor  in  the  panel's  consideration  of
         proportionality, in a finely balanced  case  such  as  this  it  is
         arguable that if there was an error, that error was material."

27.  In granting permission on the point of the  standard  of  proof,  Judge
    Craig was focussing on a point that had not been raised in the  grounds
    of appeal.

28.  In his submissions to me, Mr Nath  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal
    before turning to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  SS  (Nigeria)
    where he referred to paragraph 53 of that judgment in which Laws LJ had
    stated:-

         "The importance of the moral and political character of the  policy
         shows that the  two  drivers  of  the  decision  makers  margin  of
         discretion - the policy's  nature  and  its  source  -  operate  in
         tandem.  An Act of Parliament is any way to be specially respected;
         but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind.   In this
         case, the policy is general and overarching.  It  is  circumscribed
         only by five carefully drawn exceptions, the first is violation  of
         a  person's  Convention/Refugee  Convention   rights....    Clearly
         Parliament in the 2007 Act has attached very great  weight  to  the
         policy as a well justified imperative for  the  protection  of  the
         public and to reflect the public's proper condemnation  of  serious
         wrongdoers."

29.  Mr Nath emphasised the seriousness of the appellant's offence  and  the
    length of his prison sentence and stated that the appellant's  sentence
    was at the  top  end  of  the  sliding  scale  of  the  seriousness  of
    criminality.

30.  He stated that although the Tribunal had referred to the head  note  of
    the  determination  in  MF  (Nigeria),  there  were   not   exceptional
    circumstances in that the appellant did not know where he was wife  was
    and that there was nothing to show that he could not run  his  business
    from Turkey.

31.  He emphasised that in the letter of refusal  dated  18  December  2012,
    the issue of the statute of limitations in Turkey had been  raised  and
    that there was evidence that the appellant could not be tried  now  for
    the offences which he had committed in  1986.   He  finally  emphasised
    that the Tribunal were wrong to  place  weight  on  the  delay  in  the
    deportation proceedings, stating that it was evident from his file that
    there had been various enquiries made, particularly with regard to  the
    extradition proceedings and that had delayed the final decision.

32.  Mr Miah, in his reply, argued that Mr Nath was  attempting  to  reargue
    the facts of the case and that the grounds of  appeal  and  submissions
    from  Mr  Nath  did  not  show  any  material  error  of  law  in   the
    determination.  He asked me to place weight on the reasons for refusing
    the application given by Designated Judge McCarthy.  He referred to the
    fact that the appellant had been convicted in absentia  and  there  was
    nothing that had been put forward by the Secretary of State to indicate
    that he would not be imprisoned on return.

33.  He stated that the Tribunal had properly looked at  the  relevant  case
    law  and  reached  conclusions  thereon  and  it  was  clear  from  the
    determination that they had had  adequate  regard  to  the  Rules.   He
    referred to letters from the prison officers and other documents in the
    appellant's bundle which spoke highly of the appellant  as  a  reformed
    character and stated that it was clear that the appellant was no longer
    a risk to society.  There were clearly strong indicators that it  would
    not be  appropriate  to  deport  the  appellant.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant's  deportation might imperil the careers of the fourteen full-
    time staff which the appellant had was a further  factor  to  be  taken
    into account.

34.  He argued that the Tribunal were entitled to reach the  findings  which
    they had and  in  particular  they  were  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant's removal on  deportation and the trial and  prison  sentence
    which he might receive in Turkey  was an exceptional factor.  They  had
    taken into account the Country of  Origin  Information  Report  in  the
    bundle and there was also the opinion of  the  Turkish  lawyer  in  the
    bundle on which they were entitled to rely.  There was  clear  evidence
    that the limitation period could be extended in  Turkey  and  therefore
    arguments that the limitation period was over and the  appellant  could
    not be prosecuted or imprisoned were clearly wrong.

35.  In reply, Mr Nath emphasised that Article 8  should  not  be  a  "trump
    card" and furthermore that the Tribunal's consideration  of  Article  6
    factors was incorrect.  He also argued that the Tribunal who  had  said
    that they had  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules was clearly wrong given  that  they  had  found  that
    paragraph 399 and 399A did not apply to the appellant.

Discussion

36.  I deal first with Mr Nath's final point which  is  a  consideration  of
    paragraph 42 of the determination.   In  that  paragraph  the  Tribunal
    stated that paragraph 399 and 399A  did  not  apply  to  the  appellant
    because he did not fall within paragraph 398(b) or (c).  They went  on,
    however, to say that it would only be in exceptional circumstances that
    the public interest in deporting the appellant would be  outweighed  by
    other factors.  The  reference  to  "exceptional  circumstances"  is  a
    reference to that term  in  the  Rules.   While  the  language  of  the
    Tribunal may be infelicitous, the reality is that having found that the
    appellant could not succeed under paragraphs 398(b) or  (c)  they  were
    entitled  to  consider  whether   or   not   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances which meant  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation
    should be outweighed by other factors.  They clearly found  that  those
    exceptional circumstances exist and therefore that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to succeed under the Rules, notwithstanding the fact  that  he
    did not fall within the provisions of paragraphs 399 and  399A  because
    he did not fall within paragraph 398(b) or (c).

37.  In considering whether or not such exceptional  circumstances  existed,
    it was incumbent upon the Tribunal to take into account a wide range of
    factors - an assessment which is akin to that under the fifth  question
    in Razgar.

38.  One issue which clearly they did not  consider  was  determinative  was
    the delay that had taken place between  the  appellant  being  released
    from prison and the decision to deport.  The judgment  in  EB  (Kosovo)
    makes  it  clear  that  delay  of   itself   is   irrelevant   in   the
    proportionality exercise - what delay does is enables an  appellant  to
    build up private and family life which might  lead  to  a  decision  of
    being disproportionate.  In any event, the  Tribunal  clearly  did  not
    find that the issue was determinative.

39.  They did take into account the fact that they considered,  having  read
    the evidence and having heard from Mr Mealyer that  there  were  strong
    factors which weighed in the appellant's favour.   These  included  not
    only the business which the appellant had set up and the fact  that  he
    employed  people  here  but  also  the  voluntary  work  which  he  was
    undertaking.  They were entitled, moreover, to take  into  account  the
    various references which they had before them.

40.  The parole board report of 20 March 2007, which set  out  a  number  of
    risk factors, described the appellant as a model prisoner who  had  not
    accrued any adjudications or positive drug tests and who  had  enhanced
    status.  He had  completed  the  Ley  Prison  Programme  and  IPT  with
    favourable reports and attended AA and NA meetings on a regular  basis.
    The report  stated that he had  a  good  understanding  of  the  victim
    perspective and of drugs on  society  as  a  whole.   Weighing  up  all
    factors, the parole board recommended that he be granted parole.

41.  The parole assessment report on which the parole  board  recommendation
    was made referred to the OASys assessment  which  put  the  appellant's
    risk of reconviction as low and stated that if he  remained  drug  free
    the risk of harm to  others  was  very  low.   The  conclusion  of  the
    seconded probation officer was:-

         "I feel quite confident that if he is permitted  to  stay  in  this
         country he will be able to build a very different and offence  free
         life in Oxford and is therefore a suitable candidate for release on
         parole."

42.  There is a further positive report from a  probation  officer,  Rosalie
    Peazer, dated 13 July 2007 and a letter from Anna Thorpe  of the  CARAT
    team at HMP Ford which referred  to  the  appellant's  behaviour  since
    arrest as being exemplary and his consistently negative  voluntary  and
    mandatory drug tests.  Ms Thorpe  also said:-

         "In my time working with offenders I have never had someone inspire
         me as much as this man.   I  rarely  become  sentimental  about  my
         clients but, over the past three years, I stopped considering Burak
         as a client and started considering him as a  true  friend  whom  I
         trust 100%.  If you have the opportunity to talk to  this  man  you
         will understand why.  Burak has won the hearts of so many since his
         early recovery, including many members of Narcotics and  Alcoholics
         Anonymous who now consider him as a friend...


         Whilst I am sorry to admit I consider myself quite judgmental  when
         it comes to foreign nationals being able to stay  in  the  country,
         Burak is completely a different matter as far as  I  am  concerned.
         This is not just due to the fact that I care deeply for  this  man.
         It is more because I truly believe Burak will be an asset  to  this
         country, especially when it comes to helping others  as  he  has  a
         gift.  Burak has paid the punishment for his crime and  I  feel  he
         does not deserve to be punished further by being put at risk  in  a
         Turkish prison."

43.  The RAPT report of May 2007 stated:-

         "Normally we employ peer  supporters  for  a  maximum  six  months.
         However Burak became such a valued asset to us that  we  created  a
         new position for him and he became a  roving  RAPT  representative.
         He was given special  security  clearance  to  move  around  having
         access to addicts on other  wings  who  may  be  suitable  for  our
         programme.  He has become well known in  the  prison  where  he  is
         respected and liked.  He has become a source of inspiration to many
         addicts who have come to us."

44.  These reports plus the fact that the appellant is employed and  employs
    others  are  strong  evidence  which  weighs  in  the  balance  against
    deportation.  However, the reality is that the  appellant's  crime  and
    the length of sentence he received weighs very heavily  indeed  in  the
    opposite  direction.   Absent  any  other  factors,  deportation  would
    clearly be appropriate in this  case.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
    positive factors in this case as set out above amount to  factors  that
    would really be called "exceptional".

45.  However, there is a further factor in this case which is the fact  that
    on return to Turkey the appellant might  face  imprisonment  or  indeed
    further trial.  In the letter of refusal, the Secretary  of  State  set
    out reasons why the limitation period would  mean  that  the  appellant
    might not be at risk on return.  However, the Tribunal considered  that
    those assertions were  countered  in  the  detailed  opinion  from  the
    Turkish lawyer, from which the Tribunal quoted in paragraph 63  through
    65.  While that report stated that after 31 May 2001   the  legal  case
    could be time barred   it  did  state  that  the   appellant  would  be
    unlikely to be able to  defend himself  and that that could  result  in
    heavy prison  sentences.

46.  The Tribunal took into account the COI response to the  question  posed
    by the respondent regarding the statute of limitations.  That  referred
    to a report dated  18 March 2012 which stated:


        "Turkey made amendments to the Turkish penal code  (TCK)  in  2005,
        which extended  the statute  of  limitations   in  criminal  cases;
        however, jurists  believe that the country can  further  extend  or
        totally remove the statute of limitations in certain criminal cases
        to make sure that justice is fully served..."

         I consider that they were entitled to consider  that  there  was  a
    real risk that the appellant might be tried  in  Turkey  and  that  the
    trial would not be fair and therefore he might be imprisoned  unjustly.
    Whereas, in granting permission to appeal Judge Craig indicated that he
    felt that he considered that the Tribunal were wrong in the standard of
    proof which they used - an issue which I  have  stated  above  was  not
    raised in the grounds  of  appeal  -  the  reality  is  that  what  the
    appellant would be likely to face -  and  which  the  Tribunal  clearly
    found there was a real risk of his facing -  was  unfair  treatment  in
    Turkey which would, in effect, be contrary to his rights the ECHR.

48.  The Tribunal were clearly  fortified  in  their   conclusions  by   the
    judgment of Lord  Justice  Rose  in  the  extradition  proceedings.  In
    paragraph 60 they noted  that  the   High  Court  had  found  that  the
    extradition  proceedings were unjust and oppressive.   In his  judgment
    Rose LJ  took into account a number of decisions of the European  Court
    of Human Rights in which, having referred to the proceedings in Turkey,
    he said that:-

         "27. ...The history of this matter, as I have set  it  out,  in  my
             judgment demonstrates both oppression  and  injustice  if  the
             applicant were to be returned to Turkey.  Length of  delay  in
             this case is not only enormous  in  itself,  in  that  fifteen
             years or thereabouts has lapsed since the criminal conduct  is
             said to have taken place, but there have been many, many years
             during which the Turkish Government has  made  no  significant
             attempt to obtain the applicant's  extradition.


         28.  Having regard to the unsuccessful attempts made  to  extradite
             him from Belgium (and it may  be  that  also  an  unsuccessful
             attempt to extradite him  from  Greece  in  1998),  the  whole
             history of this matter is such as  to  demonstrate  oppression
             resulting from delay in his case.


         29.   Equally,  not  withstanding  the  validity  of  Ms  Malcolm's
             submission as to the possible availability of  opportunity  to
             the applicant to retain relevant  documentation  and  identify
             witnesses, this fifteen year time lapse seems to me one  which
             demonstrates it would be unjust if the subject  were  returned
             to face a trial, even leaving aside  a  limitation  aspect  of
             this matter to which I have already sufficiently referred."

47.  It simply cannot be said that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    in this case.  The issue of what  might  happen  to  the  appellant  on
    return was clearly exceptional.  It is unusual as was clearly indicated
    by the email sent by John Miers of the respondent to  the  CCT  process
    team on 17 April 2009 where he stated that:

         "What I need to know is whether we can seek  to  deport  to  Turkey
         after the sub (sic) has  been  granted  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus
         permitting his extradition to Turkey.  Clearly  we  would  need  to
         refer to this in any decision and would also need to  give  reasons
         as to why we feel deportation is appropriate, even with the earlier
         extradition proceedings in mind."


48.  These must  be  exceptional  circumstances  and  I  consider  that  the
    Tribunal properly referred to relevant case law and indeed  clearly  in
    their determination placed weight on the seriousness of the appellant's
    offence to which they referred in paragraphs 3 and  59  in  which  they
    stated that there was a strong argument that the public interest  would
    be served if the appellant were deported as a  result  of  the  serious
    offence as a deterrent to others.   The  Tribunal  concluded,  however,
    that, combined with positive factors to  which I have referred earlier,
    the  fact that there was a real risk  that  the  appellant  might  face
    oppression and injustice if returned to Turkey was  sufficient to  make
    this a case that was exceptional and that therefore the deportation  of
    the appellant would not be appropriate.

49.  The Tribunal clearly had  in  mind  the  correct  test  and  reached  a
    conclusion which was fully open to them.

50.  I bear in mind the judgment of Carnwath  LJ  in  Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA
    1045 and the guidance therein that it  is  not  for  another  judge  to
    substitute his own decision for that of a First-tier  Tribunal,  merely
    because he might reach a different decision.

51.  I have  concluded that the Tribunal did take into account all  relevant
    factors and it was simply wrong for the grounds of appeal to argue that
    they were incorrect to find there  were  exceptional  factors  in  this
    case.

52.  I therefore find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand and therefore the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Decision

53.  The appellant's appeal against the decision to  deport  is  allowed  on
    both immigration and human rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
