
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00140/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 10 July 2019                      |
|Ex tempore judgment                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Yanneck [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ferguson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    for the sake of clarity I continue to refer to the parties as they were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of France born in August 1991.   A  decision
    was made on 20 February 2017 to make a deportation order against him in
    the light of his criminal offending.  The  appellant  appealed  against
    that decision and his appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  at  a
    hearing on 4 June 2018.  The appeal was allowed, both with reference to
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  (the  EEA
    Regulations) and with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. I start by summarising the judge's decision, the grounds of appeal  and
    submissions, and then give my reasons for concluding that the  decision
    is marred by error of law, such as to require it to be set aside.

 4. By way of brief background, the appellant is said to have  entered  the
    UK in or about 2009.  His convictions occurred between 20 May 2014  and
    2 September 2016.  In May  2014  he  was  convicted  of  theft  (as  an
    employee) and was made the subject of  a  community  order.   That  was
    subsequently varied on 17 September 2014  because  of  his  failure  to
    comply with the community order and he was given a 16 week sentence  of
    imprisonment, suspended for two years.

 5. On 17  March  2016  he  was  convicted  of  criminal  damage,  using  a
    controlled article for fraud,  common  assault  and  commission  of  an
    offence during the operational period of a suspended sentence.  He  was
    given a 10 week  prison  sentence  and  ordered  to  pay  �1,995.00  in
    compensation.  On 16 June 2016 he was convicted  of  theft  by  way  of
    shoplifting and given a  community  order  and  a  three  month  curfew
    requirement.  He was convicted of a similar offence on 13 July 2016 and
    received a fine and ordered to pay costs.

 6. The most serious offence he was convicted of was on 2 September 2016 at
    the Crown Court sitting at Southwark; two counts of burglary and theft,
    receiving a sentence of two years and nine  months'  imprisonment  with
    the previous suspended sentences  activated.   It  was  that  offending
    behaviour that led the respondent to make the decision to deport him.

 7. After reciting some of the procedural history of the appeal  the  judge
    summarised the  respondent's  case  in  relation  to  the  reasons  for
    deportation and set out the evidence that he heard from  the  appellant
    and his partner. That summary included the explanations  given  by  the
    appellant for his offending.  He then  summarised  the  submissions  on
    behalf of the parties and gave his conclusions.

 8. At para 30 he concluded that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  a
    permanent right of residence.  His  reasons  included  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant had  been  engaged  in
    qualifying activity because the record of his economic activity was "so
    patchy".  He accepted that the appellant had been in the UK since  2009
    and had started a family.  The appellant and  his  partner  have  three
    children born on 23 February 2011, 11 December 2012 and 11  July  2015,
    respectively. The judge concluded that the appellant had  not  in  fact
    established himself as an employee which is the basis upon which it was
    contended that he was entitled to a permanent right of residence.

 9. At para 32 he concluded that the appellant  was  in  the  circumstances
    entitled only to  the  lowest  level  of  protection.  He  referred  to
    regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations and  summarised  its  effect.   He
    then referred to the need to make an assessment  of  the  appellant  in
    relation to his previous offending and how that may or may not indicate
    that  he  represents  "a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat".  At para 33 he gave his assessment of the  appellant  and  his
    evidence.  He  referred  to  the  appellant's  background  as  a  semi-
    professional goalkeeper in France, but that his expectations  or  hopes
    of succeeding in that regard in the UK were dashed by his offending.

10. He concluded at para 34 that the appellant was motivated to offend by a
    need to raise money.  He further concluded  that  the  appellant  as  a
    young father with responsibilities was unable to deal with the fact  of
    not having made a success of a career in football in a mature  way.  He
    then said this:

         "I give him the benefit there, of concluding that the offending was
         not based on some deep-rooted, recidivist trend, but as the  result
         of poor decision-making at a time when he was struggling".

11. He said at para 35 that that did not reflect well on him in that he was
    not able to share this experience with his partner or  seek  help.   He
    also said that it did not reflect well on the appellant that it  was  a
    specious claim to say that he had been  particularly  affected  by  the
    illness of his partner's mother. He concluded that there  were  certain
    elements of self-denial  by  the  appellant  in  relation  to  his  own
    failings.  He did nevertheless conclude that the appellant  had  had  a
    very salutary experience of being imprisoned.

12. He found  at  para  36  that  the  appellant's  persistent  pattern  of
    offending over a relatively short period of  time  was  linked  to  his
    particular situation at the time.  He referred very favourably  to  the
    appellant's partner,  nevertheless  finding  that  she  was  unable  to
    prevent him from offending or  reoffending,  but  concluding  that  she
    presented as a potentially very solid force in his life.

13. In para 37 the judge said  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  it  was
    necessary for him to be removed in accordance  with  regulation  20(7).
    He found that it was not a proportionate decision to remove him  having
    regard to the factors "as set out above".  He said that  that  included
    considering his personal conduct and whether it  demonstrated  that  he
    was a real risk to society.  He concluded by saying  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that his previous offending was indicative of him remaining a
    sufficiently serious threat because he was satisfied that his  risk  of
    reoffending was relatively low.

14. In the next paragraph the judge turned to consider  the  OASys  report,
    but significantly in my view having already decided that the  appellant
    was at relatively low risk of reoffending.  It is true to say  that  he
    had referred to the OASys report earlier on in his decision but only in
    the context of summarising the respondent's decision.

15. Turning to the OASys report at para 38 he said that in one part of  the
    report his risk of reoffending was assessed as being a low.  In another
    category it was again asserted, based on his previous  offending,  that
    his risk of reoffending was high.  The judge said  that  he  had  taken
    those factors into account, but had also based his decision on his  own
    analysis of the explanation given by the appellant during his evidence.

16. At para 39 he said, "I therefore do not consider that,  in  this  case,
    the OASys reports are absolutely indicative of proven capacity  to  re-
    offend in the future."

17. He then turned to Article 8 from para 40, concluding  that  the  appeal
    should succeed on Article 8 grounds as well.  He took  into  account  a
    letter to which he had previously referred, from the Montessori  School
    in relation to  one  or  more  of  the  children.  He  found  that  the
    appellant's partner's evidence was "compelling" in its  explanation  as
    to how the family's  life  would  be  adversely  affected  without  the
    presence of the appellant. He concluded that it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant's partner and  the  children  to  reside  in  the  UK
    without him, "notwithstanding his criminal record committed  whilst  he
    was a father and should have been exercising  responsibilities  towards
    his children".

18. He then reaffirmed  the  earlier  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had
    satisfied him that he now sees that his future cannot be  in  offending
    but in relation to  being  a  good  father.   He  found  that  all  the
    indications were that he is moving towards  the  next  stage  of  adult
    life, which is to be a responsible father, and thus his  removal  would
    be unduly harsh on the partner and the children.

    The grounds and submissions

19. I now turn to summarise the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  in
    relation to the decision and the  parties'  submissions.   The  judge's
    decision is criticised on the basis that the letter from the Montessori
    School did not indicate that the author of the  letter  was  given  the
    full picture in relation to the appellant's offending.   It  is  argued
    that he did not refer to the part of the letter which states  that  the
    appellant's partner had not told the children the full story as to  the
    circumstances resulting  in  the  appellant's  departure,  nor  was  it
    evident that the author of the letter  was  aware  of  the  appellant's
    criminality, or on  what  basis  his  departure  was  described  as  an
    injustice.  There are in fact two letters from the  Montessori  School:
    one dated January 2018 and the other  dated  September  2016,  but  the
    point made in the grounds relates to one or both of those letters.

20. Next, the judge's decision is criticised on the basis of its assessment
    of the risk of reoffending, as set out in the OASys report.  In essence
    it is argued that  the  import  of  the  OASys  report  was  not  fully
    appreciated or taken into account by him.  It is also argued  that  the
    judge erred in relying on the evidence of the appellant, a person found
    guilty of crimes of dishonesty.

21. Further, it is argued that he failed to have regard to  Schedule  1  of
    the EEA Regulations which he was required  to  do  by  the  Regulations
    themselves.  As a criticism in relation to his assessment of Article  8
    the decision in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617 is  relied  on  in  the
    grounds although in submissions it was conceded that that decision  has
    now been overtaken by the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)
    & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

22. In his submissions Mr Bramble relied on the grounds,  and  referred  to
    various aspects of the judge's decision.

23. For her part Ms Ferguson submitted that there was no material error  of
    law in the decision.  She referred to various aspects  of  the  judge's
    decision in order to make good the submission that he had in fact taken
    into account the OASys report. For example, it was pointed out that the
    report is referred to at paras 12 and 38 of the judge's decision in the
    summary of the respondent's decision. It was submitted  therefore  that
    the judge plainly did appreciate the full import of the report and  had
    taken it into account.  It was also pointed out that in at least  three
    places he did refer to the report's stating that there was a high  risk
    of reoffending.

24. The grounds were wrong to contend that the judge was  not  entitled  to
    take into account the evidence of  someone  convicted  of  offences  of
    dishonesty. It was up to  the  judge  to  decide  how  much  weight  he
    attached to the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant.   I  was  further
    referred to the aspects of the  judge's  decision  where  said  he  was
    impressed with the evidence of the appellant's partner. The overarching
    point made on behalf of the appellant was that the judge  was  entitled
    to assess the risk of reoffending as being low  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence of  both  the  appellant  and  his  partner,  he  having  been
    particularly impressed with his partner's evidence.

25. As regards schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations, I was referred to para 37
    of the judge's decision. It was submitted that, in  effect,  the  judge
    had taken into account the schedule 1  considerations.   One  of  those
    considerations (schedule 1 paragraph 7(k)) is the best interests of the
    children, which the judge had assessed.

26. As regards Article 8, it was submitted that the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to  be
    separated from his children.  He  gave  reasons  for  coming  to  those
    conclusions at paras 41 and 42.

27. In addition, he was entitled  to  take  into  account  the  information
    provided in the Montessori School report.  It was  submitted  that  the
    evidence from the appellant's partner was that she had always been very
    candid about the appellant's offending, in particular with the  school.



28. In reply, Mr Bramble submitted that para 37 could not in any  sense  be
    considered to be a comprehensive catch-all paragraph  that  dealt  with
    schedule 1.  Although in that paragraph the judge had referred  to  the
    factors he had previously set out, it was submitted that  the  analysis
    was significantly lacking (my words, not Mr Bramble's). It was  further
    reiterated that there was in fact no consideration of schedule 1.

29. I referred the parties to two decisions of the Upper  Tribunal:  Munday
    (EEA decision: grounds of appeal) [2019] UKUT 91(IAC)  and  Badewa  (ss
    117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT 329 (IAC) in  relation  to  the
    interaction between the EEA Regulations and Article 8.  However, I also
    expressed the view to the  parties  that  for  present  purposes  those
    decisions were not relevant in terms of whether the decision was marred
    by error of law.  In those circumstances I did not  invite  submissions
    from the parties in relation to those cases.

    Conclusions

30. As I indicated at the outset, I am satisfied that the judge's  decision
    must be set aside for error of law.  Under regulation  27  of  the  EEA
    Regulations the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account the past  conduct
    of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent.

31. It is true to say that the judge's decision does assess  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant represents a risk of reoffending,  a  fundamental
    part of the assessment that he needed  to  undertake.   However,  I  am
    satisfied that in undertaking that assessment he erred in law.  I  have
    referred already to paragraph 37 of his decision.  He concluded that he
    was not  satisfied  that  the  previous  offending  in  this  case  was
    indicative of him remaining a sufficiently serious threat  because  the
    risk of reoffending "is relatively low".  In coming to  that  view  the
    judge at that point had not assessed the import of the OASys report.

32. He did refer to the report at paragraph 38 but not in a way  which  was
    entirely clear and not in a way which fully reflected  the  assessments
    made in the OASys report.  At  page  10  of  the  report  the  risk  of
    reoffending is said to be  59%  within  the  first  year  of  community
    sentence or discharge and  75%  within  two  years.   At  page  36  the
    assessment of the risk of reoffending is said to  be  high  overall  in
    relation to those two 59% and 75% scores.  It was said to be medium  in
    terms of non-violent reoffending, 49% and 64% respectively, but it  was
    only in relation to the violent type of reoffending that the assessment
    was said to be low.

33. In my judgement the judge's decision does not  properly  reflect  those
    assessments in the OASys report.  Furthermore, I am not satisfied  that
    in assessing the appellant's risk of reoffending as being low the judge
    explained why he concluded  that  the  assessment  made  in  the  OASys
    report, a comprehensive document of 40 pages, is not  to  be  preferred
    over the oral evidence that he heard.

34. If the respondent's grounds of appeal in relation  to  the  appellant's
    dishonest conduct are to be taken to mean that his evidence  could  not
    be relied on, I reject that contention.  I agree with Ms Ferguson  that
    it was up to the  judge  to  make  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, notwithstanding  his  convictions  for  dishonesty.   If  the
    grounds of appeal are intended  to  mean  that  an  individual  in  the
    appellant's circumstances could never be relied on to tell the truth, I
    reject that contention also.

35. However, where an individual has a record of offending for offences  of
    dishonesty, that is a factor that needs to be taken into account in  an
    assessment of his evidence.  That point it seems to me requires careful
    consideration in a case where there is an  issue  as  to  the  risk  of
    reoffending and in that sense, or in  that  context,  I  consider  that
    there is merit in the respondent's argument as to whether there  was  a
    proper assessment of the risk of reoffending as set out  in  the  OASys
    report. All those factors combine to lead to the  conclusion  that  the
    judge's assessment of the risk of reoffending was flawed, requiring the
    decision to be set aside.

36. There is a further factor however, which again alone, but certainly  in
    combination with the issue to which I have already referred,  satisfies
    me that the  judge's  decision  cannot  stand.  That  is  the  lack  of
    reference to the considerations set  out  in  schedule  1.   Regulation
    27(8) states that:

         "A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements  of  this
         regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy, public security and the fundamental  interests  of  society
         etc.)".

    To repeat, the considerations in regulation 27 include,  amongst  other
    things, the issue of protecting the fundamental  interests  of  society
    and the public policy considerations to be taken into account.

37. The matters set out at Schedule 1 are comprehensive. At paragraph 7  of
    Schedule 1 there is a detailed statement of the issues to be taken into
    account in assessing the fundamental interests of society.  I need only
    refer to a few of them.  One is maintaining public  order;  another  is
    preventing social harm.  Another is maintaining  public  confidence  in
    the ability of the relevant authorities to take  action  to  remove  an
    individual.  Likewise, one of the factors is combating the  effects  of
    persistent offending, protecting the rights and freedoms of others  and
    protecting the public.  Not all of those matters are of equal weight in
    an appeal of this sort with this appellant's background, but  they  are
    factors that the judge  at  least  needed  to  advert  to,  and  in  my
    judgement expressly so.  That consideration of schedule 1  was  lacking
    in this case.

38. In those circumstances, notwithstanding the  alternative  consideration
    under Article 8, the decision as a whole needs to be set aside

39. In any event, looking at the judge's  assessment  of  Article  8  as  a
    separate matter, I am not satisfied that it represents a  comprehensive
    assessment of the issue of undue harshness, even accepting the  current
    position as set out by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  One  of  the
    factors that the judge needed to bear in mind is the issue  of  whether
    separation in itself was a sufficient basis from which to conclude that
    the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh.  The  mere  fact  of
    separation in deportation cases is a common place.  The  assessment  of
    Article 8 is itself therefore, flawed.

40. Thus the decision must be set aside in its entirety with no findings of
    fact preserved.  I indicated to the parties that  my  preliminary  view
    was that that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing de novo, but that I would further reflect on that matter.
    Having given the matter further consideration, I am satisfied that  the
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Paul.

41. Ms Ferguson indicated that if the decision was set aside the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant  is  entitled  to  a  permanent  right  of
    residence is a matter that she would wish to reopen on the  appellant's
    behalf. Given that no findings of fact are to be preserved, I  can  see
    no reason as to why that course should not be open to the appellant.

    Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a  judge  other
    than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul,  with  no  findings  of   fact
    preserved.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 04/07/19








