

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 January 2016                       |On 14 March 2016                  |


                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                             jason jamory smythe
                                     aka
                                jason jamary
                              jason Jamor Smyth
                             jason jamary Smyth
                             jason jamari smythe
                             Jason jamary smythe
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr P Haywood of Counsel, instructed by Owens Stevens
solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against the respondent's  deportation
   order made on 22 January 2013, pursuant to sections 32 and 33 of  the  UK
   Borders Act 2007 on the  basis  that  he  is  a  foreign  criminal.   The
   appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.

Background

2. The appellant was born in Jamaica in 1980 and came to the United  Kingdom
   in December 1997, age 17, seeking leave to enter as a visitor, which  was
   refused at  Gatwick  airport.   He  was  given  temporary  admission  and
   absconded. In January 1998 he made an asylum claim which was refused  and
   certified in March 2001. The appellant appealed: his appeal  rights  were
   exhausted on 1 November 2001.

3. In his original witness statement, the appellant said  that  his  parents
   had left Jamaica for the United States, leaving him in the  care  of  his
   grandmother, and close to his aunt who moved to the United  Kingdom.   He
   was generally well-behaved at school  but  did  not  make  much  progress
   because of undiagnosed dyslexia.  He wanted to become a  footballer.   He
   began taking drugs when he was about 15 (when he would still have been in
   Jamaica) and he dropped out of school at 16, deciding to join his aunt in
   the United Kingdom.  He thought that the drugs had probably had an effect
   on his mental health.

4. On 12 November 2001 the appellant sought leave to remain  as  the  spouse
   of  a  British  citizen.    The   application   was   refused.    Further
   representations on human rights grounds were also  refused.   A  judicial
   review application was refused, both  on  the  papers  and  orally.   The
   judicial review proceedings concluded on 23 September 2002.

5. The appellant's  account  is  that  he  resumed  taking  drugs  (ecstasy,
   cocaine and cannabis) not long after he entered the United  Kingdom,  and
   he contends that his criminal history occurred because he was using drugs
   and 'hanging around with the wrong crowd'.

6. The appellant has a lengthy criminal history: his early offences  led  to
   a hospital order, because the appellant was mentally unwell.  The  Police
   National Computer printout shows 12 convictions for 20  offences  between
   10 December 1999 and 22 April 2014, including 11  convictions  for  theft
   and kindred offence, 4 offences relating to police, court or  prisons,  2
   drugs offences, and 2 offences relating to bladed articles.

7. On 2 August 2006 the appellant was  convicted  at  the  Central  Criminal
   Court of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and sentenced to
   indeterminate detention for public protection.  He had attacked a man who
   had previously attacked him, and who had made threats to the  appellant's
   family.  On the night in question, both the appellant and the victim were
   armed, the victim with a knife and the appellant  with  a  machete.   The
   sentencing judge described the attack thus:

         "Even accepting what you say, what you did to [the victim] that day
         went far beyond defending yourself.  You aimed blow after blow onto
         [the victim] in a chopping motion, inflicting a series of  injuries
         upon him including a fracture to the right  arm  and  a  number  of
         lacerations to his body.  He had to have  two  operations  and  was
         detained in hospital for 5 days.  It was a  serious  and  sustained
         attack and it is, perhaps, by sheer luck that you are not facing  a
         more serious charge.  You carried on  this  attack  even  when  the
         police arrived and told you to put down the machete.  As the author
         of  the  pre-sentence  report  says,  your  attitude  was  one   of
         aggression and retaliation rather than self-defence.

         The offence for which you pleaded guilty is  a  serious,  specified
         violent offence. ...Your  record  shows  that  you  have  committed
         serious specified offences in the past and I refer in particular to
         the offence of robbery of which you were convicted  in  1999.  ...I
         have taken into account the information I  have  been  given  about
         those offences of robbery and the information I have been given  as
         to the pattern of behaviour you have exhibited in  carrying  bladed
         articles as recently as 2004 and 2005.  You committed this  offence
         within 4  months  of  being  sentenced  for  the  second  of  those
         offences. ...  I  have  concluded  that  you  do,  indeed,  pose  a
         significant risk to members of the public of serious  harm  by  the
         commission of further serious offences. ..."

8. The sentencing judge considered that a life  sentence  was  not  required
   but that he must pass a sentence of imprisonment  for  public  protection
   (IPP).  He held that the determinate sentence he would have imposed was 6
   years and 8 months, and  directed  that  the  applicant  should  serve  a
   minimum sentence  of  3  years  and  4  months  before  parole  could  be
   considered.

9. The appellant has 2 daughters, both British citizens, who  were  5  years
   and 18 months old when he went to prison.  They are 14 and  11  now.   He
   has not lived with his  children  since  September  2005,  although  they
   visited him in prison in 2010 and 2011 on a  number  of  occasions.   His
   elder daughter provided a letter of support and was present at court  but
   not called, when the First-tier Tribunal heard this appeal: she said that
   she and her sister enjoyed their fortnightly visits  with  the  appellant
   and would be really  upset  if  he  were  deported.   It  would  be  very
   expensive for them to visit him in Jamaica, and their  mother  would  not
   allow them to do so unaccompanied.  She would not see him till she was 'a
   grown adult having missed all the time they could  have  shared  together
   when she and her sister were kids' as the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
   records.

10. In March 2012, the appellant  became  eligible  for  day  and  overnight
   releases prior to resettlement, and he did see the children then.  It  is
   not in dispute that the children's best interests lie in remaining in the
   United Kingdom with their  mother,  who  is  their  primary  carer.   The
   children's mother visited the appellant in prison with  the  children  in
   2010 and 2011  on  a  number  of  occasions  but  by  October  2012,  the
   relationship had failed, although they remained friends.

11. The appellant was paroled from his IPP sentence  in  December  2012  but
   then re-detained on immigration detention in January 2013. The respondent
   gave the appellant an opportunity to show cause  why  he  should  not  be
   deported under the automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.   On
   22 January 2013, she served a deportation order upon him.

12. On 7 March 2014, while on  bail,  the  appellant  committed  a  domestic
   burglary, stealing property worth well over �4000 while  the  householder
   slept.  He was convicted of burglary at Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  on  22
   April 2014 and returned to prison  with  a  determinate  sentence  of  14
   months' imprisonment.  He was released again on 19 December 2014.

13. The appellant stated that he no longer had any family in Jamaica,  where
   he had not lived since he was 17.  He  is  36  years  old.  However,  the
   mother of his children still has connections to Jamaica: her  father  and
   her brother live there and she had visited, as recently as 2013, with her
   sister, for a renewal of vows ceremony between her sister and her brother-
   in-law who live in Jamaica.

14. The appellant told the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  had  fortnightly
   contact with his children: his new partner would drive him  over  to  see
   them, on a Saturday or a Sunday.  He stated that his new partner was  not
   a positive role model for him, and he blamed his further offending  on  a
   'rough patch' and her influence. The appellant's  current  partner  is  a
   British citizen and wishes to marry  him.  She  is  unwilling  to  go  to
   Jamaica with him.  She supports him financially in the United Kingdom but
   would not do so if he were living in Jamaica.  She has a Jamaican  father
   who now lives in the United States.  Her mother was not Jamaican and  the
   appellant's partner was born in the United Kingdom.

15. On 6 October 2014, the respondent wrote to the  appellant  to  say  that
   she maintained her deportation decision but that additional circumstances
   required consideration, in this case the appellant's burglary  conviction
   on 21 April 2014. She applied paragraphs A398 to 399D of the  Immigration
   Rules HC395 (as amended) and part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and quoted extensively from  the  sentencing
   remarks of the Snaresbrook Crown Court judge in relation  to  the  latest
   offence.  The appellant had made no attempt to rehabilitate  himself  and
   had committed the latest offence while on bail and in the full  knowledge
   that the respondent was already pursuing deportation action  in  relation
   to his previous offending.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  original  deportation
   order.  On 20 June 2013, the First-tier Tribunal heard it and allowed the
   appeal on human rights grounds.  The Secretary of State appealed  and  on
   13 September 2013 the Upper Tribunal (Lord Bannatyne and  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Warr) found an error  of  law  and  directed  that  the  appeal  be
   reheard.

17. The appeal was reheard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Monson, who  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.  He
   applied section 117C of the 2002 Act, on the basis that the IPP  sentence
   should be treated as a  sentence  in  excess  of  4  years,  because  the
   sentencing judge had indicated that the  determinate  sentence  he  would
   have imposed was 6 years and 8 months, with a minimum to be served before
   parole could be considered of 3 years and 4 months.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered whether any of  the  Exceptions
   in section 117C(2) was applicable.  Exception 1 did not apply because  it
   required lawful residence. The appellant had never been lawfully  in  the
   United Kingdom  after  his  temporary  admission  in  December  1997  and
   subsequent absconding. There was clear evidence that  the  appellant  did
   still have a network of family support available in Jamaica.

19. Exception 2 was also inapplicable.  The appellant's current partner  was
   not a partner as defined in  Appendix  FM  because  they  had  not  lived
   together in a relationship akin to marriage for at  least  2  years.   As
   regards the children, even accepting that the appellant had a genuine and
   subsisting relationship with them, and that it would not be in their best
   interests for him  to  be  deported,  his  deportation  was  not  gravely
   inimical to their best interests because they  had  not  lived  with  him
   since they were very small and neither of them could remember that  time;
   he was not their primary carer;   there  were  no  concerns  about  their
   mother's ability to meet  the  children's  needs;  and  the  family  life
   between the appellant and his children had always been attenuated, either
   because he was in  prison  or  because  contact  between  them  had  been
   relatively restricted when he was not.

20. The judge considered the OASys report to be flawed, for the reasons  set
   out at [77]-[79] and noted that even with the family support of his  aunt
   and partner, the appellant had reoffended.  He  found  the  appellant  to
   pose a medium risk of re-offending and a  medium  risk  of  harm  to  the
   community.  He did not consider that removal of the appellant would  have
   an unduly harsh effect on his children or that there were any  compelling
   circumstances over and above Exception  1  and  2  which  outweighed  the
   public interest in deportation.

21. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

22. The appellant sought permission to appeal from the First-tier  Tribunal,
   which refused permission.  The appellant then renewed his application for
   permission to the Upper Tribunal, on three grounds:  ground  1  contended
   that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  its  approach  to  the  IPP
   sentence and that the respondent was required  before  releasing  him  to
   assess the risk posed by the appellant in the community, not just in  the
   United Kingdom but in Jamaica.  He relied on the decision of the House of
   Lords in Clift, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State  for  the
   Home Department [2006] UKHL 54 and contended that it was not open to  the
   First-tier Tribunal not to consider the risk to the community in  Jamaica
   as well as in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  contended  that  the
   respondent's decision therefore was not in accordance with law  and  that
   the First-tier Tribunal had erred in not engaging with the Clift point.

23. Ground 2 concerned the length  of  the  appellant's  IPP  sentence,  and
   whether it should be treated as being more or less than 4 years  for  the
   purposes of section 117C.

24. Ground 3 concerned the application of the Exceptions  in  section  117C.
   He contended that the First-tier Tribunal had  not  applied  the  correct
   definition of 'qualifying partner' as set out in section 117D(1)  of  the
   Act and that the definition in Appendix FM  was  not  relevant  for  this
   purpose. He contended that the First-tier Tribunal had failed properly to
   apply the 'unduly harsh' test in relation to the  children  and  had  not
   applied it at all in relation to the appellant's partner.

25. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  all  grounds,  but  in  granting
   permission Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle stated  that  there  was  no
   substance to the first ground.

Rule 24 Reply

26. The respondent in her  Reply  treated  the  observation  of  a  lack  of
   substance in Ground 1 as a refusal on that grounds.  She argued that  the
   IPP sentence should be treated as amounting to a sentence of over 4 years
   and that section 117C(6) required 'very compelling circumstances'  before
   the public interest in deportation  could  be  outweighed.   She  further
   relied on the Immigration Rules being a complete code on deportation,  as
   held by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
   Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and subsequent  decisions.   Nothing
   in the facts of  this  particular  appeal  amounted  to  very  compelling
   circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

27. The Reply concludes with the following curious paragraph:

         "10. It will be submitted that the words used by Judge Monson are a
         matter of  semantics  and  make  no  material  difference  to  this
         appeal."

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

29. For the appellant, Mr Haywood relied on his  skeleton  argument  and  on
   the provisions section 225(1)(b) of the Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  and
   section 117D(4)(d) of the 2002 Act.  The IPP sentence was a sentence  for
   less than 4 years and section 117C(6) was not applicable. The appellant's
   circumstances should be considered under section 117C(3),  (4)  and  (5),
   whereby the public interest required deportation unless  Exception  1  or
   Exception 2 could be shown to apply.

30. Mr Haywood did not seek to argue that Exception  1  applied.   That  was
   for migrants who had been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
   most of their lives, which was not this appellant's case.

31. The relevant considerations were those in Exception 2, that is  to  say,
   whether the effect on  the  appellant's  partner  or  children  would  be
   'unduly harsh'.   It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  strong
   relationship with his  children  and  that  it  was  not  in  their  best
   interests for him to be removed.  He relied on Sanade and others (British
   children - Zambrano - Dereci) India [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC) which held  that
   British citizen children could not be expected to  follow  a  non-citizen
   parent to that parent's country of origin,  Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new
   rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) which held that:

         "3.  Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules conflicts  with  the
         Secretary of State's duties under Article 3 of the UN Convention on
         the Rights of the  Child  1989  and  section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.  Little  weight  should  be
         attached to this Rule when consideration  is  being  given  to  the
         assessment of proportionality under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
         Convention."

   It is not suggested here that the children should follow the appellant to
   Jamaica.  Accordingly, the principle in Ogundimu has been respected.

32. The appellant relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MA and  SM
   (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013]  UKUT  00380  (IAC)  which
   held that in principle there was no reason why the parent of an  European
   Union child living outside the European Union could not rely on  Zambrano
   to seek admission to the United Kingdom to accompany  that  child,  where
   that parent is the primary carer of the child. It is not clear  what  the
   relevance of that might be to the facts of the present appeal.

33. For the respondent, Mr Jarvis  contended  that  none  of  the  arguments
   relied upon by the appellant was material to the outcome of  the  appeal.
   The  grounds  of  appeal  did  not  challenge  the  public  interest   in
   deportation.  Whilst it was correct that at [75] the First-tier  Tribunal
   had referred to the appellant's removal not being 'gravely  inimical'  to
   the children, that was not the determinative element in its reasoning and
   the whole paragraph needed to be considered to put that particular phrase
   in its proper context. At [82]  the  judge  had  considered  the  'unduly
   harsh' test.

34. The respondent was aware of  a  perceived  conflict  between  the  Upper
   Tribunal decisions in MAB (para 399;  "unduly  harsh")  [2015]  UKUT  435
   (IAC) and KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015]  UKUT  543  (IAC).   He
   submitted, however, that on the facts it was not determinative  which  of
   those decisions correctly expressed the  proper  approach  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal to the  'unduly  harsh'  test  because  whichever  approach  was
   applied, the test was not met.

35. The First-tier Tribunal  had  assessed  the  OASys  report  and  reached
   proper, intelligible and lawful conclusions as to  the  weight  which  it
   would bear.

Discussion

36. I take the grounds of appeal in turn.  The first ground, in relation  to
   the risk to the community in Jamaica, has  not  been  raised  previously.
   There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal advanced  either  by
   the  appellant  or  the  respondent  that  there  is  any  risk,  or  any
   differential risk, to the community in Jamaica. The passage  relied  upon
   in the Clift decision in the House of Lords is at [37] in the opinion  of
   Lord Bingham of Cornhill, giving the judgment of the Court. Lord  Bingham
   referred to an  earlier  decision  in  R  v  Parole  Board,  Ex  p  White
   (unreported) 16 December 1994, Divisional Court:

         "37.  ... it has been authoritatively decided (R v Parole Board, Ex
         p White (unreported) 16 December 1994, Divisional Court)  that  the
         risk which the Parole Board must assess is  not  limited  to  those
         within the United Kingdom but extends also to those elsewhere.  The
         potential risk of a person released early on parole in any  country
         to which he is removed is, therefore, a risk which the Parole Board
         is able to and does assess in the case  of  indeterminate  sentence
         prisoners."

37. That is a direction to the Parole Board and not to  immigration  judges.
   There is nothing in this point for the purposes of the present analysis.

38. The next question is how  to  treat  the  IPP  sentence.   That  is  not
   difficult:  section 117D(4)(d) sets out how the sentence is to be treated
   for the purposes of part 5A:

         "(4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
         a period  of  imprisonment  of  a  certain  length  of  time-...(d)
         include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention,  or
         ordered or directed to be detained, for  an  indeterminate  period,
         provided that it may last for at least that length of time."

39. The IPP sentence must therefore be treated as being one of 3  years  and
   4 months, because that was the minimum length of  time  for  which  might
   last.  The observation in the First-tier Tribunal decision at  [67]  that
   such an outcome is 'paradoxical...[in that] he appears  to  have  greater
   protection from deportation than he would have done if he had  not  posed
   such a high risk of serious harm to the public following his  conviction'
   has some force, but in circumstances where the statutory definition is as
   plain as that in section 117D(4)(d) that is a matter for Parliament,  and
   not for this Tribunal.

40. Accordingly, the test of  'very  compelling  circumstances'  in  section
   117C(6) is not in play.  The Tribunal was required to assess whether  the
   appellant could bring himself within section 117C(5), the 'unduly  harsh'
   exception:

         "(5)     Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

41.  Mr  Haywood  correctly  observed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   had
   misdirected  itself  as  to  whether  the  appellant's  partner   was   a
   'qualifying partner' for  this  purpose.   Section  117D(1)  defines  the
   meaning of 'qualifying partner' and 'qualifying child' for the purpose of
   Part 5A as follows:

         "(1)In this Part-
         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;
         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-
             (a)  is a British citizen, or
             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;
         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
             (a)  is a British citizen, or
             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
             "

42. Again, the language of the statute is plain.   The  appellant's  partner
   and his children by his former partner are all British citizens  and  are
   respectively a qualifying partner and qualifying children.

43. The First-tier Tribunal did consider whether the appellant's removal  to
   Jamaica would be unduly harsh for his children, at [75]:

         "75.     I accept  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with two qualifying children and  I  am  also
         prepared to accept that it is not in the children's best  interests
         that he should be deported. From the  children's  perspective,  the
         ideal outcome is that they should  continue  to  have  regular  and
         direct contact with their father. However, his deportation  is  not
         gravely inimical to their best  interests,  for  a  combination  of
         reasons.  The children cannot remember a time when they lived  with
         their father under the same roof.  He is not their  primary  carer,
         and there are no concerns about their mother's ability to meet  all
         their needs. Their enjoyment of family life with their  father  has
         always been very attenuated, either because he has been  in  prison
         or because, when he is out of prison, contact between them has been
         relatively restricted."

44. In context, that is a perfectly proper assessment.  In  MAB,  the  Upper
   Tribunal said that 'unduly harsh' was a high standard:


         "1. The phrase "unduly  harsh"  in  para  399  of  the  Rules  (and
         s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not  import  a  balancing  exercise
         requiring  the  public  interest  to   be   weighed   against   the
         circumstances of the individual (whether child or  partner  of  the
         deportee).  The  focus  is  solely  upon  an  evaluation   of   the
         consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.
         2. Whether the consequences of deportation will be  "unduly  harsh"
         for an individual involves more than "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging"
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold.
         3. The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if  they  are
         "severe" or "bleak" and they  will  be  "unduly"  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  of  all
         the circumstances of the individual.

   The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was no  more  than  that  his
   daughters enjoyed seeing him and would miss him if he  were  in  Jamaica,
   because it would be expensive to travel there to see him and  they  would
   not be able to do so unaccompanied  until  they  were  adults.   That  is
   nowhere near the standard of  'severe'  or  'bleak'  or  inordinately  or
   excessively harsh.

45. The Tribunal in KMO put it differently:

      "The Immigration Rules, when applied in the context of the deportation
      of a foreign criminal, are a complete code.  Where  an  assessment  is
      required to be made as to whether a person meets the  requirements  of
      para 399 of the Immigration Rules, as that comprises an assessment  of
      that person's claim under article 8 of the ECHR, it  is  necessary  to
      have regard, in making that assessment, to the matters  to  which  the
      Tribunal must have regard as a consequence of the provisions of s117C.
      In particular,  those  include  that  the  more  serious  the  offence
      committed, the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation  of  a
      foreign criminal. Therefore, the word "unduly" in the  phrase  "unduly
      harsh"  requires  consideration  of  whether,  in  the  light  of  the
      seriousness of the offences committed by the foreign criminal and  the
      public interest considerations that come into play, the impact on  the
      child, children or partner of the foreign criminal being  deported  is
      inordinately or excessively harsh."


   The offence in this case was so serious that the Central  Criminal  Court
   imposed  an  IPP  sentence.   The  public  interest  considerations   are
   therefore substantial. Again, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
   did not come close to showing that the effect on the appellant's children
   would be inordinately or excessively harsh.

46. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  whether  the  appellant's
   removal to Jamaica  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  his  current  partner.
   However,  in  the  light  of  the  limited  evidence  from  her,  similar
   considerations apply.  His partner cannot be expected to  go  to  Jamaica
   with him and is not prepared to continue to support him financially if he
   has to go.  The  relationship  is  relatively  recent  and  although  the
   parties are living together, there was nothing in the evidence before the
   First-tier  Tribunal  which  would  indicate  that  the  effect  on   the
   appellant's current partner would be bleak,  severe,  or  excessively  or
   inordinately harsh.

47. The appellant has not discharged the burden upon  him  of  showing  that
   the errors of law made by the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  section
   117C and 117D are such as to be material to the outcome of the appeal.  I
   decline to reopen the First-tier Tribunal decision, which shall stand.

DECISION

48. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         3 March 2016              Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


