
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00548/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing, 28th May 2020     |On 2nd June 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               TOMASZ POPRAWKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. FtT Judge Devlin, for reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on
         12th February 2020, dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
         decision by the respondent, dated 3rd October 2019, to  deport  him
         in accordance with regulation23(6)(b) and regulation 27 of the  EEA
         Regulations. The decision was  not  certified  in  accordance  with
         regulation 33. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  judge  Bird
         on 11th March 2020. Directions  for  the  further  conduct  of  the
         appeal were sent on 30th  April  2020  and,  in  the  circumstances
         surrounding COVID 19,  provision  was  made  for  the  question  of
         whether there was an error of law and if so whether the decision of
         the FtT Judge should be set aside, to be determined on the papers.

      2. The appellant did not comply with directions and did  not  make  an
         application for an extension of time; he did  not  respond  to  the
         respondent's submissions. He did not object to the decision whether
         there was an error of law such that the decision is set aside being
         determined on the papers. The respondent made  written  submissions
         and did not object to the decision being reached on the papers.

      3. I  am  satisfied  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent together with the papers before  me  are  sufficient  to
         enable me to be able to take a decision  on  whether  there  is  an
         error of law in the decision of the  FtT  and  if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside, on the  papers  and  without  hearing
         oral submissions.

      4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
         arguable the judge had

             "failed to take into account the fact that [the appellant] had
             been in the UK for 22  years  and  further  that  his  partner
             needed him."

         The permission to appeal goes on to state that

             "although the judge considered the appellant's convictions  at
             great  length,  it  is  arguable  that  in  finding  that  the
             appellant presented a present and sufficiently serious  threat
             to the public, he failed to explain how domestic violence fell
             into this category (see judge's comments  at  paragraph  146).
             Further the judge makes no reference to any evidence  provided
             by the respondent to show such a threat."

         The appellant, in  his  grounds  of  appeal,  also  refers  to  his
         partner's ill health and asserts the judge failed to take this into
         account in reaching his decision.

      5. The appellant, a Polish citizen, claims to have arrived in  the  UK
         prior to 1998; Poland joined the EU on 1st May  2004  and  thus  he
         would not have been subject to immigration control thereafter.  The
         judge concluded that the appellant had acquired permanent residence
         but had not been resident in the UK for a continuous period  of  at
         least 10 years prior  to  the  date  of  decision.  The  judge,  in
         reaching that conclusion  set  out  the  documentary  evidence  the
         appellant relied upon and his and his partners  oral  evidence.  He
         analysed the wage records and identified to  the  appellant  during
         evidence  the  'gaps'  in  evidence.  The  judge  refers   to   the
         appellant's lack of credibility arising from the evidence  he  gave
         in connection with the offences for which  he  had  been  convicted
         and, looking at that evidence as a whole,  the  judge  reached  the
         conclusion that was reasonably open to him, that the appellant  had
         not been resident in the UK for the period he claimed. There is  no
         error of  law  by  the  judge  in  the  findings  made  as  to  the
         appellant's length of residence or how that impacts upon the  level
         of protection from deportation.

      6. The judge set out in detail the appellant's  partner's  ill  health
         and the appellant's submissions that his partner was a 'protective'
         feature that would prevent further offending. The judge  notes  the
         appellant assaulted his partner (5 times) and received  convictions
         for those assaults. The judge  also  notes  the  appellant's  other
         convictions whilst under the influence  of  alcohol,  including  an
         offence of assaulting an emergency worker. When dealing  with  each
         offence the judge makes clear which of the respondent's submissions
         with regard to  that  offence  are  rejected  because  of  lack  of
         evidence. The judge  considers  the  offences  holistically,  their
         timing and the appellant's evidence as to the possibility of future
         offences, his apparent lack of contrition and/or  remorse  and  his
         denial of some of the assaults. The judge noted that  some  of  the
         assaults on his partner occurred whilst she was becoming  more  ill
         with the quite serious medical conditions she  was  suffering  from
         and the medical investigations she was undergoing.

      7. The judge considered the evidence as a whole for each  offence  and
         sentence, including the dates of the offences and that the offences
         had been occurring between January 2015 and July 2019.  The  judge,
         having set out the evidence in detail and  his  detailed  reasoning
         underpinning  his  reasoning  leading  to  his  assessment  of  the
         seriousness of the risks, concluded that there was  a  genuine  and
         serious risk that he would re-offend by committing  common  assault
         or battery on his partner and that his future  behaviour  may  have
         more serious consequences. The judge set out clearly which offences
         he did not consider amounted to such serious risks.

      8.  The  judge  summarised  the  appellant's  multiple  offending  and
         repeated criminal conduct over a relatively long period of time and
         that there had been an  escalation  in  the  offending.  The  judge
         identified that the restrictions on freedom  of  movement  must  be
         interpreted strictly and that the appellant's overall conduct  must
         represent a genuine and present threat.  The  judge  gave  detailed
         reasons for reaching his conclusion that  in  this  case,  although
         each offence may not be of the  gravity  normally  associated  with
         such a stringent test, the appellant fell within that  category  as
         representing a sufficiently  serious  genuine  and  present  threat
         affecting the fundamental interests of society.

      9. In the grant of permission, the judge states it  was  arguable  the
         judge had  not  explained  how  domestic  violence  fell  into  the
         category of a present and serious threat to society. This itself is
         difficult  to  understand.  Domestic   violence   whilst   directly
         impacting upon an individual has an established  and  known  impact
         upon society in general  through  economic,  financial  and  health
         care. It is a criminal offence not only because of the impact on an
         individual but also because  of  the  impact  on  society  and  the
         acceptable norms of behaviour. The fact that an individual may  not
         categorise an assault as violence does not mean it is not; nor does
         the fact that an individual victim describes an act  of  aggression
         as "not much" does not prevent it from  being  criminal  behaviour.
         The FtT judge correctly characterised the appellant's incidents  of
         domestic violence against his partner as being a threat to  society
         in general.

     10. The judge  considered  in  detail  and  with  lengthy  citation  of
         evidence and reasons whether the decision to deport  complied  with
         the principle of proportionality. The judge took fully into account
         and gave reasons for concluding that previous attempts  to  prevent
         further drink related offending had been unsuccessful and that  the
         appellant had further assaulted his partner despite her being  ill.
         The judge considered the appellant's age, his length  of  residence
         in the UK, his partner's  health,  her  citizenship,  his  and  her
         family members and  their  whereabouts,  access  to  medical  care,
         social  and  cultural  integration  and  links  with   Poland.   He
         considered the lack of evidence of rehabilitation.

     11. The FtT judge, in a lengthy and detailed judgment  identified,  set
         out and reached reasoned and detailed conclusions. He did not  omit
         to consider and take account of evidence  before  him  and  reached
         findings that were plainly open to him.

     12. There is no error of law.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT judge stands.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

Date 28May 2020
