

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00245/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 September 2013                          |On 5 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ABIMBOLA TAWA QUADRI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior HOPO
For the Respondent:    Ms Bond, Counsel








                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1.   This matter came before us as an appeal on behalf of the Secretary of
      State against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  ("the  tribunal")
      promulgated on 31  May  2013.   In  terms  of  its  determination  the
      tribunal dismissed an appeal against a  deportation  order  under  the
      immigration rules but allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
      (Article 8).  It was against that latter decision which the  Secretary
      of State appealed.

Background

 2.   The respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born on 16 December 1962.


 3.   The respondent arrived in the  UK  with  leave  as  a  visitor  on  4
      February 1988.  That leave was subsequently extended  until  4  August
      1988.


 4.   The respondent thereafter became an overstayer although she  made  an
      application for further leave to remain both as  a  spouse  and  as  a
      student in 1989.  Both of  these  applications  were  refused  by  the
      appellant in a letter dated 26 March  1990.   The  respondent  had  no
      right of appeal and was informed she should leave the UK  immediately.




 5.   The  respondent  thereafter  failed  to  regularise  her  status  and
      continued to remain in the UK  without  leave.   She  made  a  further
      application for leave as the spouse of a different British citizen  in
      February 1994, which did not appear to have elicited a  response  from
      the appellant.


 6.   While living in the UK the respondent gave birth  to  two  daughters.
      The first of these was born on 19 April 1988  and  the  second  on  11
      October 1991.


 7.   On 21 May 1999 the respondent sought indefinite leave to remain as  a
      result of her long residence and the fact that her children  had  been
      living continuously in the UK since their birth.  The  respondent  was
      granted indefinite leave to remain by the appellant on  12  June  2000
      and her two daughters  were  registered  as  British  citizens  on  20
      December 1999 and 19 September  2000.   The  respondent  had  a  third
      child, born after she had been granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
      This child, a son, was born on  10  October  2000  and  is  a  British
      citizen.


 8.   On 28 November 2003 the respondent was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to
      supply Class A drugs at Snaresbrook Crown Court.   No  less  than  12
      kilograms of high quality cocaine was found  in  her  home.   She  was
      sentenced to 15 years imprisonment and her application  to  naturalise
      as a British citizen was refused by the appellant as a  result  on  27
      April 2004.


 9.   On 8 November 2008 the respondent was informed of  her  liability  to
      automatic deportation.


 10.  On 28 June 2012 the appellant made a deportation  order  against  the
      respondent in terms of section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  set
      out her reasons for doing so in a letter.

Submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State

 11.  The submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State broke down in  to
      two discrete chapters.


 12.  The  first  chapter  challenged  the  findings  of  the  tribunal  at
      paragraphs 80 and 81 of its determination to  the  effect  that:   the
      youngest child of the respondent ("the child") (a citizen  of  the  UK
      and EU) could not be required to relocate to the USA and be cared  for
      there in that a citizen of the EU could  not  be  required  to  locate
      outwith the EU.  In so finding the tribunal relied on the guidance  in
      Sanade and others (British children  -  Zambrano-Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
      00048.


 13.  The background to this finding by the tribunal was that the child had
      been cared for by members of the respondent's family for a substantial
      period of time in the USA while the respondent was in prison.


 14.  Mr Bramble contended that this finding  was  an  error  of  law.   In
      elaboration of that point he relied on certain submissions which  were
      made on behalf of the Secretary of State in Izuazu (Article  8  -  new
      rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC).  These submissions were in the  following
      terms:


           "It is the Secretary of State's position that the proposition in
           Zambrano cannot sensibly be read as imposing a complete  bar  to
           the deportation or removal of the primary carer of an EU citizen
           in circumstances in which  that  decision  would  force  the  EU
           citizen to leave the EU.  Such a proposition would suggest  that
           irrespective of the severity of  the  threat  to  public  policy
           posed by such a person, the Member State in  question  would  be
           powerless to take any action to remove or deport them.  This  is
           not a proposition which the Secretary of State  accepts  and  is
           difficult to reconcile  with  the  fact  that  even  the  rights
           conferred directly by the treaties are subject to limitation  on
           public policy grounds.


           The Secretary of State therefore submits that Member States must
           be entitled to refuse to  recognise  Zambrano  rights  in  cases
           where the primary carer in question can be  deported  under  the
           domestic law of the relevant Member State.  In such cases  there
           would therefore also be the prospect  of  an  EU  citizen  being
           required to leave the EU.  This position is now reflected in the
           Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  following
           their amendment by  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
           (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2012."

 15.  It was his position that in light of the  foregoing  submissions  the
      tribunal should not have made its findings at paragraph 80 and 81  and
      that in the circumstances of this case where the best interests of the
      child were a primary consideration in the  proportionality  assessment
      this amounted to a material error of law.


 16.  The second broad branch of the argument advanced by  Mr  Bramble  was
      this:  the tribunal had failed to have proper regard to  the  guidance
      of the court in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  The deportation  of
      a foreign criminal under the 2007 Act following  her  conviction  for
      supplying crack cocaine as a street dealer was not, having  regard  to
      the guidance in SS (Nigeria), disproportionate with her  rights  under
      the European Convention of Human Rights 1950, Article  8.   While  the
      best interests of the child were a primary consideration, there was no
      evidence establishing a right under Article 8 sufficiently  strong  to
      prevail  over  the  extremely  pressing   public   interest   in   her
      deportation.


 17.  Mr Bramble reminded us that before  the  tribunal  the  Secretary  of
      State had relied on AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 which  supported
      the view that deportation can  be  proportionate  even  if  it  caused
      parent and child to be separated.


 18.  He went on to say this:  the supply or potential supply  of  Class  A
      drugs and the respondent's involvement in such crime was reflected  in
      a very lengthy sentence of 15 years.  The tribunal, he submitted,  had
      failed to adequately weigh the public interest and the public's  right
      to be protected from those  who  committed  crimes  of  such  severity
      against the best interests of the said child.


 19.  In summary he submitted that in terms  of  each  of  these  arguments
      there was a material error  of  law  and  that  the  decision  of  the
      tribunal should be set aside.

Reply on behalf of the respondent

 20.  With respect to the first ground argued on behalf of the Secretary of
      State Ms Bond took a preliminary point:  what had been  argued  formed
      no part of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal and  accordingly
      it was not open to the Secretary of State to put forward this line  of
      argument.


 21.  It was her position that if we were not with her in relation  to  her
      primary submission that the Secretary of State was barred from arguing
      this ground then her reply to the Secretary of  State's  position  was
      this:   the argument ran counter to the decision in the case of Sanade
      and that was the end of the matter.


 22.  Ms Bond put forward an equally concise reply to the second ground  of
      appeal.  Her position was that the tribunal in a careful determination
      had carried out a proper Article 8 assessment.  She submitted that  it
      had fully considered and given proper weight to the  public  interest.
      It had then proceeded to properly consider the best interests  of  the
      child.  Its approach in carrying out the balancing exercise  contained
      no error of law.  The place where it had decided to strike the balance
      could not be described as being perverse.  It was  her  position  that
      the decision which the tribunal ultimately came to was  one  which  it
      was entitled to reach.


 23.  For the foregoing reasons  she  submitted  that  the  appeal  of  the
      Secretary of State should be refused.  She submitted that  there  were
      no errors of law contained in the determination of the tribunal.


Discussion

 24.  With respect to the first branch of the argument  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State it is not foreshadowed in the Secretary of  State's
      grounds of appeal and in those circumstances we are of the  view  that
      the Secretary of State was not entitled to put forward this  argument.
      Further, and in any event,  we  believe  there  is  no  merit  in  the
      argument advanced in terms of this branch of the appeal.  It,  in  our
      clear view, runs counter to the law as explained in  Sanade.   If,  as
      the Secretary of State put forward, the child, on the removal  of  the
      respondent, should reside in the US then the child would be denied the
      genuine enjoyment of the substance of the right conferred  on  him  by
      virtue of his status as a citizen of the European Union  and  that  is
      unlawful.  For these reasons it seems to us that as a  matter  of  law
      the tribunal's findings at paragraphs 80 and 81 are unimpeachable.


 25.  Turning to the second branch of the appeal and to the contention that
      the tribunal failed to have regard to the guidance  in  SS  (Nigeria).
      There is no express reference to that case in the determination.  That
      is perhaps not surprising since the decision in SS (Nigeria)  was  not
      promulgated until after the hearing before the tribunal and only  days
      before the determination was promulgated.


 26.  At paragraphs 54 and 55  of  SS  (Nigeria)  Laws  LJ  summarises  the
      principles which the decision-maker must have in mind when considering
      an Article 8 claim in the context of  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
      criminal in terms of the 2007 Act.  He says this  first  at  paragraph
      54:


           "The pressing nature of the  public  interest  here  is  vividly
           informed by the fact that by  Parliament's  express  declaration
           that  the  public  interest  is  injured   if   the   criminal's
           deportation is not effected.  Such a result could  ...  only  be
           justified by a very strong claim indeed."

      He moves on to say this at paragraph 55:


           "None of this, I apprehend,  is  inconsistent  with  established
           principle, and the approach I have outlined is well supported by
           the  authorities  concerning  the  decision-maker's  margin   of
           discretion.  The leading  Supreme  Court  cases,  ZH  and  H(H),
           demonstrate that the interests of a child affected by a  removal
           decision are a matter of substantial importance,  and  that  the
           court must proceed on a proper understanding of the facts  which
           illuminate those interests (though upon the latter point I would
           not with respect accept that the decision in Tinizaray should be
           regarded as establishing  anything  in  the  nature  of  general
           principle).  At the  same  time  H(H)  shows  the  impact  of  a
           powerful public interest (in  that  case  extradition)  on  what
           needs to be demonstrated for an Article 8 claim to prevail  over
           it.  Proportionality, the absence of an  'exceptionality'  rule,
           and the meaning of  'a  primary  consideration'  are  all,  when
           properly understood, consonant with the force to be attached  in
           cases of the present kind to the two drivers  of  the  decision-
           maker's margin of  discretion:   the  policy's  source  and  the
           policy's nature, and in particular to the great weight which the
           2007 Act attributes to the deportation of foreign criminals."

 27.  The broad contention of Mr Bramble was that  the  tribunal  did  not,
      having regard to the foregoing guidance, have  appropriate  regard  to
      the impact of the powerful public interest in the instant  case.   For
      the following reasons we do not believe that there  is  any  merit  in
      this submission:


      (a)   The tribunal's consideration  of  proportionality  commences  at
        paragraph 58.  Between paragraphs 68 and 75 the tribunal deals with
        the issue of public interest.  It accordingly in some  detail  sets
        out and seeks to deal with the issue of the public interest.


      (b)   It commences that consideration by reminding itself at paragraph
        68 as follows:


           "The welfare of the child is not a trump card and we now  go  on
           to  consider  the  other  matters  relevant  to  assessing   the
           proportionality of the appellant's deportation."

        It accordingly takes as its starting point a  proper  understanding
        of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 as viewed through  the  observations
        in SS (Nigeria).


      (c)   At paragraph 69 the tribunal then says this:


           "Of  very  weighty  significance  indeed  is  the  fact  of  the
           appellant's conviction and sentence and we must and do give  due
           and proper weight to the various facets of the  public  interest
           which the respondent has taken into account in this matter."

        The tribunal accordingly had at  the  forefront  of  its  mind  the
        points made in SS (Nigeria) about  the  importance  of  the  public
        interest.


      (d)   The tribunal then refers at paragraph 70 to the following cases:


           "We  have  had  particular  regard  to  the   guidance   in   RU
           (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 651 to the effect that  the  facets
           of the public interest  in  cases  such  as  N  (Kenya)  and  OH
           (Serbia) [2009] INLR 109 continue to  be  highly  relevant  when
           conducting the proportionality balance in an Article 8 case such
           as this."

      (e)   The above cases do not  stress  the  importance  of  the  policy
        source (Parliament) and its nature when considering the  Article  8
        assessment which has been emphasised in SS (Nigeria).  Nevertheless
        these are cases in which  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  public
        interest are set out and the importance of the  various  facets  of
        the public interest in the proportionality exercise are emphasised.




      (f)   The tribunal list the facets of public interest to which it  has
        had regard at paragraph 71.  As far as we can identify no facet has
        been omitted from its consideration.


      (g)   The tribunal then proceeds  between  paragraphs  72  and  74  to
        carefully and fully analyse these factors.


      (h)   The  tribunal  in  its  consideration  of  the  public  interest
        concludes by referring to AD Lee v SSHD the case in  which  it  was
        observed that even where deportation  would  result  in  separation
        from a child such a result may  be  proportionate  in  cases  where
        criminality is serious, as of course it was in the instant case.

 28.  It seems to us that, having regard to the  above,  the  tribunal  has
      fully and carefully set out and assessed the public interest which  it
      required to have in mind when making its Article 8 assessment.


 29.   It  appears  to  us  that  looking  to  these  paragraphs  of  their
      determination and to the determination as a  whole  the  tribunal  has
      clearly considered and attached the appropriate weight to  the  public
      interest.  At all stages in its Article 8 assessment the tribunal  has
      attached very significant weight to the public interest.


 30.  The other matter which the tribunal considers in the  course  of  its
      proportionality assessment is the best interests of the child  of  the
      respondent.


 31.  The tribunal, in the course of its  determination,  we  believe,  has
      referred to and had proper  regard  to  the  relevant  case  law  when
      considering the interests of the child in the context of its Article 8
      assessment.


 32.  The tribunal concludes in  light  of  these  authorities  and  having
      regard to the child's right as a British citizen and as a  citizen  of
      the European Union that it would not be  reasonable  or  proportionate
      for the child to be sent to the USA.  We have earlier stated  that  we
      can find no fault in that decision having regard to Sanade.  Moreover,
      the tribunal reaches the conclusion for reasons it  sets  out  between
      paragraphs 83 and 91 that it would not be possible, if the  respondent
      were deported, for the child to be cared for in the UK by any relative
      and that the child would therefore have to be cared for by  the  local
      authority.  This was, in our view, a conclusion that the tribunal  was
      entitled to reach on the evidence before it and in those paragraphs it
      gives adequate reasons for reaching that conclusion.


 33.  The tribunal, at paragraphs 91 and 92, then seeks to strike a balance
      between the public interest and the private interest of the respondent
      and the child.  It is implicit in the decision of  the  tribunal  that
      its decision was a very finely balanced one.  We can easily  see  that
      many other differently constituted panels may have reached a different
      conclusion as to where the balance should be struck and  have  decided
      that deportation was proportionate.  However, that is not the test for
      us.  We must consider whether in reaching that decision  the  tribunal
      has erred in law.  It appears to us that it has not done so.


 34.  In summary:  in its assessment of Article  8  the  tribunal  has  had
      regard to the relevant law and attached the appropriate weight to  the
      public  interest.   It  appears  to  us  that  SS  (Nigeria)  has  not
      significantly increased the extent to which regard has to be given  to
      the public interest, beyond that to which the tribunal had regard, and
      its failure therefore to have specific regard to that  case  does  not
      amount to a material error of law.  The tribunal has properly analysed
      the issue of the best interests of the child having regard to  all  of
      the relevant factors and it  has  carefully  considered  against  that
      background where the balance should  be  struck  (between  the  public
      interest and the private interest of the child  and   respondent)  and
      given adequate reasons for where it decides  that  balance  should  be
      struck.  It has given adequate reasons for the view to  which  it  has
      come.  It is a decision the tribunal was entitled to  reach.   Overall
      this is a carefully written determination which properly analyses  the
      relevant law and comes to a decision in which we can identify no error
      of law.


Decision

35. For the foregoing reasons we hold that the tribunal  has  not  made  any
   material error  of  law  and  we  accordingly  refuse  the  appeal.   The
   determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


36.   No anonymity order has been requested or made.





3 October 2013
