
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: DA/00209/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 19 October 2015                            | On 2 November 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DARIUS GUDAITIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E  Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant challenges a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Keane
    of 24 March 2015 allowing his appeal under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   The  claimant  is  a  citizen  of
    Lithuania who arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2008.   On  29  May
    2013 he was convicted of two counts of robbery and on 26 June 2013  was
    sentenced to terms in a young offenders' institution of eight months in
    respect of the first count and twenty months in respect of  the  second
    count, the terms to run concurrently, making a total of twenty  months.
    The respondent made a decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  on  15
    January 2014.  The grounds are essentially a challenge to  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 11 that the claimant met the requirements  of  the
    2006 Regulations "by reference to Regulation 21.3 of the Regulations".

2.   If the issue in this case is whether the judge was  right  to  consider
    that the claimant had acquired permanent residence  the  grounds  would
    most certainly be made out for the reason that he had not shown by  the
    evidence that he had been exercising Treaty rights for that period  but
    that is in fact conceded and was always conceded by  Miss  Daykin  both
    before the First-tier Tribunal and before me.

3.   The  judge's  decision  can  be  criticised  for  making  reference  to
    Regulation 21(3)   which  concerns  the  second  level  of  protection,
    "serious grounds of public policy...". Not  having  acquired  permanent
    residence the claimant was only entitled to  be  considered  under  the
    baseline level  of  protection  which  is  simply  "grounds  of  public
    policy...". In paragraphs 12 and 13 the judge also embarked confusingly
    upon an Article 8 assessment rather than an assessment under the  terms
    of the 2006 Regulations.

4.   Nevertheless I discern no shortcomings in the  determination  that  are
    material.  As Miss Daykin has pointed out, even in paragraph  11  where
    there is the mistaken reference to Regulation 21(3) the judge does  not
    refer to a test of serious grounds of public policy  but  only  to  the
    baseline level of protection. (Misplaced reference to Regulation  21(3)
    can also in part be put down to the drafting of  the  Regulation  which
    does not in any specific subparagraph refer to the  baseline  level  of
    protection, although there is a specific reference to both the  serious
    grounds provision and the imperative grounds levels of protection).

5.   Further and  more  importantly,  the  judge  in  paragraphs  12  to  16
    correctly proceeds to refer to  the  requirements  contained  in  other
    provisions  of  Regulation  21  in  particular   the   requirement   of
    proportionality, the requirement of a present and sufficiently  serious
    threat and  the requirement in Regulation 21(6) of integration.

6.    The  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  those  other  provisions  of
    Regulation 21 are  not  as  I  understand  matters  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State. In any event the judge's findings  were  adequately
    reasoned and properly based on the evidence that  was  before  her,  in
    particular (i) the fact that the  sentencing  judge  as  referenced  in
    paragraph 15 was unequivocal in concluding he had  no  doubt  that  the
    claimant would not commit further  offences,  and  (ii)  the  probation
    officer's assessment of the low risk that the claimant posed in respect
    of violent and non-violent  offending.  There  were  also  findings  of
    genuine expressions of remorse and of evident rehabilitation and social
    and cultural integration into the United Kingdom.

7.   In light of those findings it was  inevitable  that  a  judge  applying
    Regulation 21 based on the lowest level of protection would  find  that
    the deportation was in accordance with the Regulations.

Notice of Decision

8.   Therefore I conclude that the challenge of the Secretary of State  must
    fail and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal remains in place.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Dr H H Storey, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


