
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00088/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11th June 2013                             |On 12  June 2013             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            JEVAUGHAN OMARO BROWN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Goldborough of Cleveland & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs K Heath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of  Designated  Judge  Coates  and  Mr  G  H
        Getlevog  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  'the  Panel')  who  in  a
        determination promulgated on the 27th February 2013  dismissed  the
        appellants appeal against the order for his  deportation  from  the
        United Kingdom.



Discussion



     2. The first ground of appeal claims the Panel  erred  in  failing  to
        consider paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules in  force
        at the date of the hearing so far as they relate to  the  facts  of
        this appeal.


     3. The respondents Rule 24 Reply, dated 4th April 2013, and  paragraph
        10 of the determination record that  at  the  commencement  of  the
        hearing it was stated that the only issue was  the  proportionality
        of removal under Article 8 ECHR, indicating the  reason  the  Panel
        did  not  consider  the   Rules   was   because   the   appellant's
        representative, Mr Goldborough,  did  not  ask  them  to.  This  is
        disputed before me. The record of proceedings taken  by  the  Panel
        has an endorsement in the following terms:


          "Issue is Art - 8".


     4. Mrs Heath confirmed that the Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Singh,  also
        noted that the appeal "centred around Article 8". What there is  no
        confirmation of is that the acceptance that main issues was Article
        8 is an acknowledgement it was restricted to Article  8  ECHR  only
        and not Article 8 as incorporated into the  Immigration Rules.   In
        light of the lack of clarity/ambiguity in the  record  relating  to
        the scope of the hearing and the submission by Mr Goldborough  that
        there was no concession in relation to the Rules,  the  finding  by
        the Panel that the issues in the appeal were limited to  Article  8
        ECHR only, and their failure to determine the  Article  8  elements
        under the Immigration Rules too, is infected by  an  error  of  law
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.


     5. I set the determination aside and proceed to remake the decision.


     6. The amendment to the Immigration Rules in force from 12th July 2012
        was to reflect the Secretary of  States  views  on  how  Article  8
        should be interpreted. Paragraph 399A, which is  relevant  to  this
        appeal, states a person can succeed under these provisions if:


              (b)      the person is aged under 25 years, he  has  spent  at
   least half of his  life                 living  continuously  in  the  UK
   immediately  preceding  the  date  of  his                    immigration
   decision (discounting any periods of imprisonment)                    and
   he  has  no  ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with   the
     country to which he would have to go if required the leave the UK.


     7. It is a preserved finding that the appellant arrived in the UK with
        his mother at the age of seven. He was nineteen years  old  at  the
        date of the decision and so had lived  in  this  country  for  over
        twelve years at that time, over half his lifetime.  The  respondent
        considered  the  provisions  of  the  Rules  in  the  reasons   for
        deportation letter and found that notwithstanding  the  appellant's
        ability to satisfy this part of the rule he could not succeed as he
        continued to have ties to Jamaica. On page 11 of the letter  it  is
        stated:


              "It is not considered that there are no ties to  Jamaica.  You
   spent the first              seven years of your life in that country and
   came to the United Kingdom            and lived with your mother and step-
   father who are of Jamaican origin.            As the language  spoken  in
   Jamaica is English, it cannot be said that there            would be  any
   language barrier."


     8. The question of  what  constitutes  ties  to  a  home  country  was
        considered by the Upper Tribunal  in  Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new
        rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) in which the Tribunal said that
        the natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  in  paragraph
        399A of the Immigration Rules (HC194) imports a  concept  involving
        something more than merely remote or abstract links to the  country
        of proposed deportation or  removal.  It  involves  there  being  a
        connection to life in that  country.  Consideration  of  whether  a
        person has 'no ties' to such  a  country  must  involve  a  rounded
        assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is  not  to  be
        limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances [123-125].


     9. There is no evidence that such ties exist and the finding that they
        do in the refusal letter appears to be based upon a view  taken  by
        the respondent, and disapproved in Ogundimu, that persons with  the
        most  minimal  links  to  the  country  of  proposed   removal   is
        sufficient.


    10. I find on the evidence that the appellant has discharged the burden
        of proof upon him to the required standard to prove he is  able  to
        meet the requirements of paragraph 399A (b) and so on the basis  of
        the Secretary of States own interpretation of the law  in  relation
        to this area the appeal must be allowed. I have  no  discretion  to
        depart from the Rules.


Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law. I  set  aside  the
        decision of the Panel. I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.  This
        appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11th June 2013









