
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00151/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2021                   |On 5 March 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 TIAGO PINTO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  Chakmakjian,  instructed  by   Reiss   Edwards
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. By a decision  promulgated  on  the  12  November  2020  the  Upper
        Tribunal found a judge of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT)  has  erred
        in law for the reasons stated  and  directed  that  the  appeal  be
        listed for a  further  hearing  to  allow  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
        substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.   This
        decision follows that hearing.



Background


     2. Mr Pinto is a citizen of Portugal who was born on the 7 June  1990.
        There are a number of preserved findings  from  the  FTT  decision.
        These include his immigration history which is based upon  a  claim
        to have entered the UK with  his  parents  in  1992,  his  criminal
        convictions which are set  out  below,  and  the  presence  of  his
        parents and brother in the UK.
     3. On 15 November 2017 Mr Pinto  was  convicted  on  three  counts  of
        making indecent photographs or pseudo-photographs of  children  for
        which he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment on each  count  of
        12 months, 6 months and 2 months respectively, all suspended for  a
        period of 18 months, made the subject of an unpaid work requirement
        of 120 hours, 60  days  rehabilitation  requirement  and  100  days
        programme requirement, was made the  subject  of  a  Sex  Offenders
        Notice requirement for 10 years,  and  subject  to  a  Sexual  Harm
        Prevention Order for life.
     4. On 3 August 2018 Mr Pinto was convicted of  a  breach  of  the  Sex
        Offender  Prevention  Order  on  two  counts  of  making   indecent
        photographs or  pseudo-photographs  of  children,  and  failure  to
        comply with the community requirements of  the  suspended  sentence
        order.
     5. The sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Hillen are as follows:


        ... Tiago Pinto you are 28 years old and on  15  November  of  last
        year 2017, you appeared before me. At  that  stage  having,  before
        your plea of guilty, been a person of good character and a man  who
        demonstrated your ability to be a decent citizen, but what you  had
        done was to become firstly as is revealed in the presentence report
        that was before me on the 15 November 2017, addicted to pornography
        and whilst you have stated that  you  had  no  sexual  interest  in
        children, that had led you to come across on the  Internet,  images
        of children. Children who were being sexually abused  and  who  had
        undergone what was described in that report as pain and misery  and
        distress in those images being photographed in  order  that  people
        like you  could  gain  sexual  gratification,  masturbation  whilst
        watching those images and having come across those images, you then
        as is indicated in that report, sought out further images, so  that
        you had on your electronic devices at that stage in that matter,  a
        very large number of Category A images as well as other images.

        Inevitably that led me to the conclusion that the only  appropriate
        sentence was a custodial sentence. However, you had admitted before
        me to your solicitors, to the Probation Service, that you had  this
        serious problem which you wished  to  address  and  so  I  on  that
        occasion, was persuaded by the probation report, by the information
        before me, by the advocate who was mitigating and through  them  of
        course from yourself, that you were a person capable of reform  and
        in the light of that I suspended the  sentence  on  the  conditions
        which you well know.  You  did  engage,  as  is  indicated  in  the
        progress report with the Probation Service, you  did  complete  the
        unpaid work but behind  that  you  were  secretly  accessing  child
        pornography again. Mr Aslam as always making  careful  and  skilled
        submissions to me, describe that as being a ghost of the past not a
        resurrection. I do not accept that. You quite  deliberately  sought
        to continue disguising that from those who were trying to help  you
        as is apparent in the progress report.  You  deliberately  accessed
        those images, not only that, but you quite deliberately,  at  least
        in relation to the Dell computer tower, which  had  access  to  the
        pair to  pair  software,  deliberately  breached  the  Sexual  Harm
        Prevention Order which I imposed not only to  protect  the  public,
        but to help you by keeping you on the straight and narrow. Now what
        of course you did was to access child pornography at a  much  lower
        level than that which had been the case  hitherto,  but  I  do  not
        accept Mr Aslam's submission, as eloquent as they were,  that  this
        was a ghost of a resurrection. This was a quite deliberate breach.

        You will remember that when I sentenced you  on  15  November  last
        year, I said what I say  to  all  defendants  upon  whom  I  impose
        suspended sentences, that the  first  condition  of  any  suspended
        sentence is that you  do  not  commit  any  offence  punishable  by
        imprisonment anywhere in the United Kingdom during the  18  months,
        the operational period of the suspended sentence. You did that.  It
        was not as has been described to me  a  lapse,  it  was  deliberate
        seeking out of those images and a deliberate breach  of  the  Order
        that the court had  made,  both  in  respect  of  the  Sexual  Harm
        Prevention Order and the Suspended Sentence Order. I am required by
        law to impose all or part of the Suspended Sentence Order unless it
        would be unjust to do so and I can  see  no  reason  in  your  case
        having read carefully your letter, the letter of  your  mother  who
        sits in court obviously in distress at yet again having to  witness
        her son in the dock and the very careful report of the psychologist
        who is [inaudible]  Jackson,  who  makes  various  recommendations.
        Once you are released from the prison sentence, I hope that whether
        as part of your licence or generally with the help of  your  family
        who are clearly supportive of you, that you do so engage,  but  for
        the moment you are going to remain in prison  for  some  time.  You
        have access, as is indicated in paragraph 5.1 of the psychologist's
        report, the Horizon programme within  the  prison  system  and  you
        should take every  opportunity  to  seek  help  within  the  prison
        system, though I have to appreciate that the length of the sentence
        that I have concluded is appropriate in this case,  will  not  mean
        that you can get on a full course, but that is going to be down now
        to you once you are released. Therefore, for the  two  offences  of
        possession of the indecent images of Class C, as you  have  already
        heard, had that stood alone and there  had  not  been  a  suspended
        sentence, the starting point would have been a Community Order with
        a range of up to 6 months. The sentence that I would  have  imposed
        is one of three months' imprisonment had you pleaded not guilty and
        been convicted by a jury, I would reduce that to two months, a full
        third reduction, concurrent the one with the other. In  respect  of
        the telephones, I accept the mitigation in respect of  the  failure
        to disclose those to the police, I accept  the  mitigation  of  the
        ownership of those telephones, but they were  in  your  possession.
        For that reason, I will impose a sentence in respect of that matter
        only of one months imprisonment, but in respect of the Dell  tower,
        which had the pair to pair  access  on  it,  that  was  a  flagrant
        breach. It was from that Dell tower that you  downloaded  onto  the
        USB stick, some of the images which you were  viewing  for  further
        sexual gratification, therefore the sentence would  have  been  six
        months imprisonment for that breach. I reduce that to four  months.
        That will be concurrent with the one months, but consecutive to the
        two-months on the first two charges, making the total of six months
        imprisonment in all and I will impose the 12 months suspended  that
        I sentenced you to  last  year  following  the  guidelines  on  New
        Sentences Criminal Justice Act 2003, paragraph 2.2.21. I will  make
        that consecutive, making a total of 18 months imprisonment in all.



        ...


        I should warn you of this, that the  Sexual  Prevention  Order  was
        made for a period of ten years from November  last  year  and  that
        will continue. If you breach that again, you will be liable  to  be
        sentenced for up to 5 years imprisonment and the fact that you  now
        have  a  previous  conviction  for  breaching  that   Sexual   Harm
        Prevention Order will be treated as an aggravating factor.

     6. There are three categories for this type of  offence  divided  into
        Category A, B and C. In each group there is a further  division  of
        possession, distribution and/or production of the images. Mr  Pinto
        was  charged  and  convicted  of  making  indecent  photographs  of
        children but as 'production' includes the taking or making  of  any
        image at source, for instance the original image, the making of  an
        image by simple downloading is  treated  as  'possession'  for  the
        purposes of sentencing.
     7. The OASys report dated 26 February 2019 refers to 1082  category  A
        images (995 still and 87 moving), 667 category B images (653  still
        and 14 moving) and 9989 category  C  images  (9837  still  and  152
        moving) which Mr Pinto pleaded guilty to having  downloaded  on  or
        before 6 January 2017. It is also  noted  that  following  forensic
        analysis of his computer by the police a total of  11,738  indecent
        images of children were found to have been downloaded since 2015.
     8. The three categories, A, B and C, are defined in the sentencing
        guidelines as:



        |           |Possession                 |Production**              |
|Category A |Possession of images       |Creating images involving |
|           |involving penetrative      |penetrative sexual        |
|           |sexual activity. Possession|activity. Creating images |
|           |of images involving sexual |involving sexual activity |
|           |activity with an animal or |with an animal or sadism. |
|           |sadism.                    |                          |
|Category B |Possession of images       |Creating images involving |
|           |involving non-penetrative  |non-penetrative sexual    |
|           |sexual activity.           |activity.                 |
|Category C |Possession of other        |Creating other indecent   |
|           |indecent images not falling|images not falling within |
|           |within categories A or B.  |categories A or B.        |





The law


     9. Mr Pinto  is  an  EU  citizen.  Under  Article  20  of  the  Brexit
        Withdrawal Agreement the  conduct  of  EU  Citizens,  their  family
        members, and other persons, who exercise Citizens' rights under the
        Withdrawal Agreement, where that conduct occurred before the end of
        the transition period, 31 December 2020, shall be considered  under
        the provisions of Directive 2004/38/EC which gives  effect  to  the
        free movement of persons. This means that in this appeal it is  the
        EU standards and not the UK standard that applies to  any  decision
        to deport, which  are  more  favourable  to  Mr  Pinto  than  those
        applying under UK law.
    10. In Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 it was said that it was for the
        Member State to justify its action where  the  removal  of  an  EEA
        national would prima facie interfere with treaty rights.
    11. In Arranz (EEA regulations - deportation - test)  [2017]  UKUT  294
        the Upper Tribunal held  that  the  burden  of  proof  lay  on  the
        Secretary of State to prove that a  person  represents  a  genuine,
        present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
        fundamental interests of society.
    12. That the burden of  proof  lies  on  the  Secretary  of  State  has
        recently been accepted by the Inner House of the Court  of  Session
        in SA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 28.
    13. The Directive provides three  levels  of  protection  for  European
        nationals who commit crime in the UK:


        1. the  basic  protection,  for  those  who  have  not  acquired  a
           permanent right of residence;
        2. a mid-level for those who have permanent residence; and
        3. a third level, offering much greater protection  for  those  who
           have been in the UK for a continuous period of 10 years prior to
           the making of the deportation decision.

        The  basic  protection  regime:  Under  the  Immigration  (European
        Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ('the  2016  Regulations')  the
        provisions relating to European nationals who had not yet  acquired
        permanent residence in the UK are to be found in Regulation  27(5).
        Regulation 27 as a whole reads:



        Decisions taken on grounds of public policy,  public  security  and
    public health

        27.- (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
         ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a) has a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
                  and who has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                  is in the best interests of the person concerned, as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
                  20th November 1989.

             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
             proportionality;

                  (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
                      affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                      society, taking into account past conduct of the
                      person and that the threat does not need to be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                      which relate to considerations of general prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,
                      even in the absence of a previous criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

             (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
         public health-

                  (a)  a disease that does not have epidemic potential as
                      defined by the relevant instruments of the World
                      Health Organisation or is not a disease listed in
                      Schedule 1 to the Health Protection (Notification)
                      Regulations 2010; or

                  (b)  if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
                      disease occurring after the three month period
                      beginning on the date on which the person arrived in
                      the United Kingdom,

                  does not constitute grounds for the decision.

             (8) A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

    14. If there is no real risk of reoffending then there is no power to
        deport a national of another Member State on the grounds of public
        policy: SSHD v Dumliauskas, Wozniak and ME (Netherlands) [2015]
        EWCA Civ 145.
    15. If an individual's conduct is found to represent 'a genuine,
        present and sufficiently serious threat' then, and only then, will
        a tribunal consider whether the other potential protections set out
        in the regulations should militate against deportation: MC (Essa
        principles recast) Portugal[2015] UKUT 520 (IAC). This requires a
        court or tribunal to ask whether the decision is 'proportionate'
        under 27(5)(a), which requires consideration of the factors under
        the new Regulation 27(6) which reads:
        Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
        and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is resident
        in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take account of
        considerations such as the age, state of health, family and
        economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
        Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
        Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin
        When considering the prospects of rehabilitation of European
        offenders, the following matters are relevant:
        family ties and responsibilities, accommodation, education,
        training, employment, active membership of a community and the
        like...However, lack of access to a Probation Officer or equivalent
        in the other Member State should not, in general, preclude
        deportation.
Discussion
Level of protection.
    16. At the error of law hearing the Secretary of States representative
        conceded that Mr Pinto had acquired permanent residence in the UK
        but disputed his entitlement to the highest level of protection.
        Regulation 27(3) of the 2016 Regulations states that a deportation
        decision cannot be made in respect of a person with permanent
        residence 'except on serious grounds of public policy and public
        security'.
   18. In relation to Mr Pinto, although he has been in the UK  since  1992
       European law requires there to  have  been  an  unbroken  period  of
       'continuous' residence for  the  10  years before  the  deportation
       decision was made.
   19. The leading case on this issue is Vomero [2016] UKSC 49 in which the
       Supreme Court referred to the European Court of Justice the question
       whether enhanced  protection  against  deportation  under  Directive
       2004/38 art.28(3)(a) depended on an EU  citizen's  possession  of  a
       right of permanent residence within art.16 and art.28(2). It further
       asked how the time period under which enhanced protection  could  be
       acquired was to be calculated. The  CJEU  decided  (C316/16  and  C-
       424/16) that it was necessary for the EU citizen to have a right  of
       permanent residence to benefit from  the  10-year  protection.  They
       clarified that the 10-year period does run back from the date of the
       expulsion decision but where a Union citizen had already resided  in
       the Member  State  for  10  years  before  detention  that  did  not
       automatically mean that the person was deprived of  the  benefit  of
       the enhanced protection.  An  overall  assessment  of  the  person's
       situation may  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  notwithstanding  the
       detention, the integrative links between the  person  and  the  host
       Member State  have  not  been  broken.  Those  aspects  include  the
       strength of the  integrative  links  forged  before  detention,  the
       nature  of  the  offences   which   resulted   in   detention,   the
       circumstances in which the offence was committed and the conduct  of
       the person during the period of detention.
   20. Mr Pinto lives with his family, but the 2016 Regulations, schedule 1
       para 2, says that having extensive familial and societal links  with
       persons of the same nationality  or  language  does  not  amount  to
       integration; a significant degree of  wider  cultural  and  societal
       integration  must  be  present  before  a  person  is  regarded   as
       integrated. Paragraph 4 says that little weight is to be attached to
       the integration of an EEA national if the alleged links were  formed
       at or around the same time as the commission of an offence,  an  act
       otherwise affecting the fundamental interests  of  society,  or  the
       person was in custody.
   21. Mr Pinto has been educated and worked until his conviction in the UK
       and has been supported by his family both  during  his  imprisonment
       and since his release.
   22. Mrs Aboni relied upon the refusal letter in support of the Secretary
       of States position that notwithstanding  the  evidence  of  previous
       integration into the UK those links had been  broken.  The  relevant
       section of the refusal letter reads:


         15.  As already stated above, in your response  to  the  Notice  of
             liability, you claim to have entered the United Kingdom at the
             age of 2/3 and have been educated here, at primary, secondary,
             college and subsequently at university level.  Having  claimed
             to have entered at the age of 2/3 years, you would have been a
             dependent child of a parent, who was or is  exercising  treaty
             rights and had or has comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover
             in the  United  Kingdom  over  the  period  that  you  were  a
             dependent child. You have provided no such evidence that  your
             parent/parents have exercised  treaty  rights  in  the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of five  years  in  accordance
             with the EEA Regulations 2016.


         16.  You have further claimed to have worked several jobs and  that
             you  have  been  in  consistent  employment  prior   to   your
             incarceration. You asserted that  you  and  your  family  have
             lived in the United Kingdom for over 25  years,  however,  you
             have  not  provided   sufficient   documentary   evidence   of
             exercising treaty rights or of residence in your own right  in
             accordance with the EEA Regulations for a continuous period of
             5 years or more.


         17.  As you have not acquired a permanent right of residence  under
             the EEA regulations 2016,  consideration  has  been  given  to
             whether your deportation is justified  on  grounds  of  public
             policy. For the  same  reasons  explained  above,  it  is  not
             accepted that you  have  been  continuously  resident  in  the
             United Kingdom  for  10  years  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
             Regulations 2016. Consequently,  consideration  has  not  been
             given to whether your deportation is justified and  imperative
             grounds of public security.


   23. Mr Chakmakjian relied upon the respondent's  own  guidance  entitled
       'Public policy, public security or public health decisions', Version
       4, dated 31 December 2020 which states "Where the  person  had  weak
       social  and  cultural  integrative  links  with  the  UK  prior   to
       imprisonment, it may be more likely that  imprisonment  could  break
       those links. Where the person has been in the UK since they  were  a
       young child, have undertaken their entire education in  the  UK  and
       have not lived in another EEA country for more than  2  years,  that
       may indicate that they have strong integrative  links  with  the  UK
       that have not been broken by the period of  imprisonment,  depending
       on all of the facts of the case."
   24. The type of information referred to as being absent in  the  refusal
       was provided to the First-tier  Tribunal;  establishing  Mr  Pinto's
       father has worked in the United Kingdom exercising treaty rights. It
       is also the case  that  the  concession  that  at  least  'permanent
       residence' had been acquired by  Mr  Pinto  is  recognition  by  the
       respondent  that  matters  have  moved  on  considerably  since  the
       assessment in the refusal letter.
   25. In Warsame [2016] EWCA Civ 16 the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  in
       Secretary of State for the Home Department v MG (Portugal) (Case  C-
       400/12) it was established that the  ten-year  period  of  residence
       required to benefit  from  the  enhanced  protection  of  imperative
       grounds must  in  principle  be  continuous  and  be  calculated  by
       counting back from the date of the deportation decision.
   26. In the present case, Mr Pinto was sentenced to a total of 1 year and
       6 months' imprisonment following his conviction, backdated  to  the
       date he was remanded in custody, the  period  spent  in  custody  on
       remand counting towards the sentence  for  the  underlying  offence.
       The 10-year period must, however, be assessed by counting  backwards
       from the decision to deport, made on 29 February 2019.
   27. During that 10-year period, Mr Pinto had been in custody, on  remand
       following  his  arrest,  and  later  as  a  prisoner  following  his
       conviction, and sentence.   On  that  basis  Mrs  Aboni  argues  the
       continuous 10-year period was broken.
   28. It is also the case that the  continuous  period  was  broken  as  a
       result of a sentence for a serious offence, a  classification  which
       is discussed in more detail below, and it was  not  the  appellant's
       first conviction for an offence involving a similar modus operandi.
   29. Integration includes recognition of the laws applicable to the state
       in  which  the  person  claiming  such  resides.   In   this   case,
       notwithstanding the support of his family and  knowing  his  actions
       were illegal, and notwithstanding the sanction imposed upon Mr Pinto
       by the criminal courts in handing down a  suspended  sentence  by  a
       judge of the Blackfriars Crown Court on 15 November 2017, he decided
       such applicable laws were not binding upon him and showed no  regard
       whatsoever for the opportunity that he had  been  offered  to  avoid
       imprisonment, or the family support, as clearly demonstrated by  his
       breach of the suspended sentence and other associated orders.
   30. In Mr Pinto's witness statements, he identifies his connection  with
       the UK as being primarily based upon  his  family.  In  the  witness
       statement dated 8 November 2019 he refers to primary  and  secondary
       education in  United  Kingdom,  studying  a  programme  of  forensic
       science at the London Metropolitan University and previous full-time
       employment. At [5] Mr Pinto states:


       5.         I have been an introvert or my life and do  not  have  an
             extensive circle of friends as a result. I am also a naturally
             shy person and my social life is rarely extended beyond family
             vacations and outgoings. I confide in my older  brother,  with
             whom we share a very strong bond and who my regards to  be  my
             best friend. He has been nothing but a positive  force  in  my
             life and continues to inspire and encourage me to  repair  the
             roles I have done to find a new path for myself.


   31. Returning to the 2016 Regulations, schedule  1  para  2,  says  that
       having extensive familial and societal links  with  persons  of  the
       same nationality or language  does  not  amount  to  integration;  a
       significant degree of wider cultural and societal  integration  must
       be present before a person is regarded as integrated,
   32. I find Mr Pinto has failed to  establish  a  significant  degree  of
       wider cultural or societal links  to  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find
       despite the length of time Mr Pinto has been in the  United  Kingdom
       he has not demonstrated strong integration and that  whatever  level
       of integration he had was  substantially  weakened  by  his  initial
       offending; even though not lost due to the length of time in the  UK
       and issues identified in the respondent's guidance noted above,  and
       lack of imprisonment.
   33.  I  find,  however,  that  the  strength  of  such  integration  was
       undermined and the integrative links he  relies  upon  broken  as  a
       result of the  second  offending  and  his  imprisonment  which  was
       clearly accepted by the Sentencing Judge  as  a  deliberate  further
       period of deliberate offending, and  not  a  'ghost  of  the  past',
       sufficient to warrant a finding Mr Pinto  is  not  entitled  to  the
       higher level of protection. That  is  my  primary  finding  on  this
       issue.
   34. In light of the Secretary of State's concession that Mr Pinto has  a
       right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom, it is the middle
       level of protection that is applicable to this appeal.


If Mr Pinto was entitled to the higher level of protection  (an  alternative
finding)

   35. In  the  alternative,  in  case  the  primary  finding  relating  to
       entitlement  to  the  middle  level  of  protection  is   considered
       incorrect on the facts, the situation  for  Mr  Pinto  is  discussed
       below.
   36. In MG and VC (Ireland) [2006] UKAIT 00053 the Tribunal considered
       that this last test "...  is  at  the  very  highest  level  of  the
       calculus  introduced  by  the   2006   Regulations   and   Directive
       2004/38/EC" and took the view that the phrase  did  not  'cover  the
       ordinary risk to society arising  from  the  commission  of  further
       offences by a convicted criminal. That is the risk which has in  the
       past been met by the removal decisions based on  grounds  of  public
       policy'.
   37. In LG (Italy) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  190 the  Court  of  Appeal
       confirmed that a European national who had been in  the  UK  for  10
       years could only be deported on imperative grounds, commenting  that
       those grounds bore a marked difference to the  less  stringent  test
       applicable  to  deportation  of  those  with  shorter   periods   of
       residence. The  'imperative  grounds'  test  presents  a  very  high
       threshold: a compelling risk to public security must be demonstrated
       (though this did not necessarily mean a risk to national  security).
       The Court of Appeal said that 'risk to the safety of the public or a
       section  of  the  public'  seemed  reasonably  consistent  with  the
       ordinary meaning of the test. The Court seemed to be of the  opinion
       that the severity of the offence committed was not  necessarily  one
       to make removal 'imperative'.
   38. In VP (Italy) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  806 the  Court  of  Appeal
       endorsed LG (Italy) v SSHD and said  that  imperative  grounds  of
       public security required not  simply  a  serious  matter  of  public
       policy but an actual risk to public security so compelling  that  it
       justified an exceptional course of removing someone who  had  become
       integrated by many years residence in the host state.  The  severity
       of the offence could be a starting point for consideration but there
       had to be something more to justify a conclusion that  that  removal
       was imperative to the interests of public security.
   39. The presence of the child sexual abuse element of the case requires
       consideration of the cross-border element of the appeal. The images
       record severe harm to children aged between 2 and 13 years, wherever
       the pictures were taken.
   40. In relation to sexual offences,  in  PI  v  Oberb�rgermeisterin  der
       Stadt Remscheid (Case C348/09)  CJEU  (Grand  Chamber)  the  Italian
       Appellant had been sentenced in Germany to seven years' imprisonment
       for sexual abuse, coercion and rape  of  a  minor  daughter  of  his
       former partner between 1990 and  2001.  On  appeal  a  question  was
       referred  to  the  CJEU  about  whether  his  offences   constituted
       imperative grounds of public security which might justify a  measure
       expelling a Union citizen who had resided in the host  Member  State
       for more than ten years. It was held that essentially, Member States
       retained  the  freedom  to  determine  the  requirements  of  public
       security in accordance with the national needs and that  could  vary
       from one Member State to another and also from one era  to  another.
       In order to determine whether the offences might be covered  by  the
       concept of  imperative  grounds  of  public  security,  a  range  of
       different factors had to be taken into  account.  Most  importantly,
       Article 83(1) TFEU provided that the sexual abuse  and  exploitation
       of children was one of the areas of particularly serious crime  with
       a  cross-border  dimension  in  which  the  EU   legislature   might
       intervene. The serious nature of those kinds of  offences  was  also
       apparent from the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child  and  the
       Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (paras 24 - 27).
       However, should the national  court  find  that,  according  to  the
       particular values of the legal order of the Member State in which it
       had jurisdiction, offences such as those committed  posed  a  direct
       threat to the calm and physical security  of  the  population,  that
       should  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  expulsion  of  the   person
       concerned. Expulsion was conditional on  the  requirement  that  the
       personal conduct of the person concerned must represent  a  genuine,
       present threat affecting one the fundamental interests  of  society,
       which implied, in general, the existence  in  the  individual  of  a
       propensity to act in the same way in the future (paras 29 -  30  and
       34). In principle therefore this kind  of  behaviour  might  justify
       expulsion in the most serious cases.

   41. In the case of E v Subdelegacion del Gobierno en  Alava  (Case  C  -
       193/16) the CJEU referred to the above case when noting that it  was
       open to Member States to regard the sexual exploitation of  children
       as a particularly serious threat capable of  being  covered  by  the
       concept of "imperative grounds of public security" as  long  as  the
       manner in which the offences were committed  discloses  particularly
       serious characteristics.

   42. In that judgment the Court found that "in accordance with Article 83
       (1) TFEU, the sexual exploitation of children is one of the areas of
       particularly serious crime with a cross-border  dimension  in  which
       the European Union legislature may intervene. Therefore, it is  open
       to the Member State  to  regard  criminal  offences  such  as  those
       referred to in the second  paragraph  of  Article  83  (1)  TFEU  as
       constituting a particularly serious threat to one of the fundamental
       interests of society, which might pose a direct threat to  the  calm
       and physical security of the population and thus is capable of being
       covered by the concept of 'imperative grounds of  public  security',
       capable of justifying an expulsion order under  Article  28  (3)  of
       Directive 2004/38, as long as the manner in which such offences were
       committed discloses particularly serious characteristics, which is a
       matter for the referring court to  determine  on  the  basis  of  an
       individual examination of the specific case before it".

   43. Article 83(1) Treaty Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) reads:


         The European Parliament and the Council may, by means of directives
         adopted in accordance  with  the  ordinary  legislative  procedure,
         establish minimum  rules  concerning  the  definition  of  criminal
         offences and sanctions in the areas of particularly  serious  crime
         with a cross-border dimension resulting from the nature  impact  of
         such offences or from a special need to combat  them  on  a  common
         basis.

          These areas of crime are the following: terrorism, trafficking  in
         human beings and sexual exploitation of women and children, illicit
         drug  trafficking,  illicit  arms  trafficking,  money  laundering,
         corruption, counterfeiting of means of payment, computer crime  and
         organised crime.

         On the basis of developments in crime,  the  Council  may  adopt  a
         decision identifying other areas of crime that  meet  the  criteria
         specified  in  this  paragraph.  It  shall  act  unanimously  after
         obtaining the consent of the European Parliament.




   44. The respondent in this case clearly views the offences committed  by
       Mr Pinto, specifically in relation to the 'production' of the  child
       pornographic content disclosed in the images downloaded by  him,  to
       constitute a particularly serious threat to one of  the  fundamental
       interests in society;  posing  a  direct  threat  to  the  calm  and
       physical security of the population capable of being covered by  the
       concept of imperative grounds of public security. I find such a view
       to be made out on the evidence. Such a stance has not been shown  to
       be irrational on the facts or outside the power or right of  the  UK
       government.

   45. It is not known where the children who were subject  to  the  sexual
       and other  abuse  who  appeared  in  the  videos  and  still  images
       downloaded by Mr Pinto are based, but it is not disputed that  those
       children were abused. The cross-border element is also  referred  to
       in the OASys report.

   46. Whilst it is accepted that Mr Pinto has  not,  to  date,  personally
       raped or indecently assaulted a child, and his convictions relate to
       the possession of indecent images of children, it cannot be  ignored
       that possessing 995 images falling into category A is indicative  of
       a  substantial  number  of  children  being  subjected  to  rape  or
       penetrative sexual acts for the purposes of sexual gratification  of
       those such as Mr Pinto, who create the market  for  such  images  by
       purchasing and downloading them. This is the personal conduct of  Mr
       Pinto which I find there is a real risk of being  repeated  for  the
       reasons set out below. Whether an individual in one case  rapes  one
       child as opposed to a case in  which  an  individual  downloads  995
       images which cannot be of the  same  child  and  possibly  represent
       hundreds of children being sexually abused,  does  not  prevent  the
       requisite test being established on the facts.
   47. In the OASys report the Probation Officer writes at paragraph R6.1:


     "The schedule of images provide an insight  into  the  nature  of  the
     images downloaded. It shows that there are moving and still images  of
     children as young as 2 with file names such as  "3yo  Girl  sucks  dad
     Great  blow  jobs".  Images  include  children  being  tied  up,  been
     subjected to oral and penetrative rape, and with  injuries  consistent
     of physical abuse."


   48. In relation to the impact upon  the  victim  the  Probation  Officer
       writes:



     Impact on the victim




       It is clear that there is a devastating impact on the victim which is
       likely to be long lasting. The images displayed serious  sexual  harm
       being inflicted on the children, ranging  from  oral  to  penetrative
       rape and also showed children being tied up  and  experiencing  other
       physical abuse. Aside from the physical harm caused,  there  is  also
       clear  psychological  and  emotional  harm,  in  respect  of   having
       difficulties placing trust in adults,  difficulties  managing  future
       relationship, feeling angry and resentful and  feeling  powerless  to
       get out of their cycle of abuse. This also has the  potential  to  be
       long lasting.




   49. When discussing the issue of risk of serious harm from the appellant
       the Probation Officer writes at paragraph R10.1:


     Who is at risk


     The following groups are deemed by us being at risk:


     Children: this risk is specially towards females aged between two  and
     thirteen years and are considered as vulnerable. It is clear that  the
     children are being placed in these situations stipulated in the  video
     against their will, either through a  lack  of  understanding  due  to
     their age or through the threat or actual use of physical violence. In
     addition it is also  clear  that  these  children  are  not  receiving
     appropriate supervision and care from an adult to have the ability  to
     take them away from the situation.


     There are no indications that harm was inflicted by  Mr  Machado-Pinto
     directly.  However  it  is  clear  that  his  actions  of  downloading
     inappropriate material, helps to feed the interest within this market.
     Subsequently this attracts individuals who cause direct harm to  these
     children, to create images  in  order  to  sustain  and  satisfy  this
     interest.


   50. In relation to the nature of the risk the Probation Officer writes:


     The nature of the risk is identified as the following:


     Physical - it is likely that those children featured in the video  and
     still images would have experienced physical harm in  terms  of  being
     assaulted in a sexual manner. In some cases excessive force would have
     been with the potential for the resulting harm to be long lasting  and
     effective development in later life


     Emotional harm - this  is  respect  of  feeling  scared,  overwhelmed,
     disgusted, upset and powerless. It is possible that they may not  have
     the opportunities to escape this abuse therefore  this  harm  has  the
     potential to be long lasting. In the future they may have difficulties
     managing the emotions in respect of feeling angry and resentful.  They
     may also feel a sense of suspicion and paranoia around others.


     Psychological harm: this is in terms of being manipulated and betrayed
     by an adult whom they may have trusted and  respected.  It  is  likely
     that this would have a long-term effect and lead to difficulties later
     on in their childhood and early  adulthood.  This  is  in  respect  of
     having difficulties placing trust in adults and  others,  particularly
     in managing a successful relationships and allowing them to help  them
     move forward in their lives.


   51. I find the offences committed by Mr Pinto  of  downloading  sexually
       explicit images of children being abused, even in the privacy of his
       own bedroom, were clearly part of a  chain  or  network  of  persons
       criminality sexually exploiting children for gain, posing a real and
       substantial threat to the individual child  concerned.  I  find  the
       required degree of seriousness to be made out by  the  Secretary  of
       State on the facts even if Mr Pinto is entitled to the high level of
       protection.  I  find  the   offences   have   particularly   serious
       characteristics based upon the risk to children as identified in the
       OASys report of Mr Pinto fuelling a market for such images resulting
       in the rape and  sexual  abuse  of  children,  the  impact  of  such
       offences upon those children, and from a special need to combat such
       offending on a common basis in all civilised society,  in  light  of
       the real risk of his further offending.


Finding on risk

   52. Whatever the level of protection to which Mr Pinto is entitled it is
       important to establish whether there is a risk of reoffending for if
       no risk exists, he cannot be deported under EU law.
   53. A point raised during the hearing was that  the  witness  statements
       from the family speak extensively of the steps they  are  taking  to
       limit Mr Pinto's access to the computer  that  the  family  have  in
       their flat in London. A question was raised by the  Tribunal  as  to
       whether there were any checks imposed upon his smart phone which  he
       accepted, in reply to a question from the Tribunal,  he  had.  There
       was no evidence that the family monitored Mr Pinto's  usage  of  his
       smart phone which is a device capable of accessing the Internet and,
       more likely than not, the Internet sites from which Mr Pinto is able
       to obtain the type of images referred to in the charge  sheet.   The
       use of a telephone in the breach of orders imposed for the first set
       of offences was commented upon by the Sentencing Judge in the second
       criminal case.
   54. In light of the importance of this aspect  Mr  Pinto  was  given  an
       opportunity to file additional evidence with a  copy  to  be  served
       upon Mrs Aboni who was given a right of reply. A response  has  been
       received by way of a copy email from  Mr  Pinto's  Offender  Manager
       received 11 February 2021 in the following terms: "I am the  current
       offender manager of the concerned In relation to the below points  I
       can confirm the following 1) Mobile phone is registered with  police
       2) Internet monitoring software is on the  family  PC  at  the  home
       address - not on mobile phone however mobile phone  can  be  checked
       during a visit 3)  As  part  of  being  a  registered  sex  offender
       unannounced home visits are conducted and have been conducted on the
       concerned. I offer this information as a  factual  response  to  the
       below questions and do not offer it in support or to  the  detriment
       of any ongoing case for Mr  Pinto  ,  these  are  just  the  current
       facts".
   55. I am satisfied in light of this information that the authorities are
       aware that Mr Pinto possesses at least one smart phone and  has  the
       capability to ascertain what sites he visits either as a  result  of
       the search history of the device or by other means.
   56. Mr Pinto is assessed as posing a medium risk to children within  the
       community following  a  comprehensive  assessment  by  the  assigned
       Probation Officer with the  National  Offender  Management  Service,
       such category being defined as 'there being identifiable  indicators
       of risk of serious harm. The offender has  the  potential  to  cause
       serious harm but is unlikely to do so unless there is  a  change  in
       circumstances, for example, failure  to  take  medication,  loss  of
       accommodation, relationship breakdown, drug or alcohol misuse'.
   57. Mr Pinto is also subject to  supervision  under  the  MAPPA  scheme,
       currently at level 1, has been admitted to the Horizon programme, an
       intervention delivered to men who have a sexual conviction  as  part
       of an antisocial criminal orientation and are considered to be at  a
       medium, high  or  very  high  risk  of  reconviction.  Letters  from
       Probation Service dated 8 October 2019 confirming an appointment for
       the first individual session on 23  October  2019  and  first  group
       session on 12 November 2019 have been provided.
   58. Mr Pinto is also subject to a Sexual Harm  Prevention  Order  (SHPO)
       for  a  period  of  10  years  from  November  2017.   This  is   an
       order imposed on an individual who it is considered to pose a  risk
       of sexual harm to either the general public or a  certain  group  of
       people or individual person(s).
   59. Mr Pinto suggests he will not reoffend referring to his awareness of
       his offending, its causes, attendance  on  the  Horizon  course  and
       support from family. Those statements have been noted together  with
       the correspondence from the Probation Serve, and it is not  disputed
       that there is a genuine desire amongst Mr Pinto's family for him  to
       be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom and for them to do  all
       they can to ensure he does not offend again in the future.
   60. Mr Pinto has also provided a copy  of  a  report  from  a  Chartered
       Psychologist, dated 14 October 2018, prepared at the request of  the
       solicitors who represented him before the  Blackfriars  Crown  Court
       for the purposes of mitigating sentence on the basis it was said  Mr
       Pinto (referred to in the report as the Defendant) recognises he has
       a problem and his willingness to receive treatment with reference to
       Mr Pinto  partly  completing  the  Horizon  Course  in  prison.  The
       psychologist's opinion set out in section  5  is  in  the  following
       terms:

5.   Opinion


       5.1    To give my opinion on whether the Defendant recognises he  has
           a problem and his  willingness  to  receive  treatment.  He  has
           already partly completed the Horizon Course in prison.


         5.1.1    Tiago has been consistent through both  these  proceedings
             and the 2017  proceedings  in  verbalising  that  his  use  of
             pornography is a problem, and he wishes to receive help. There
             are two significant factors  that  have  inhibited  meaningful
             change in his behaviour - one is his psychological functioning
             and context, and the other is the type of support he needs but
             he has not yet had access to.
         5.1.2    Tiago's personality overall includes a tendency to be self-
             conscious, socially withdrawn and  isolated,  without  friends
             and without a support network outside  his  family.  He  lacks
             confidence, being meek, self-denigrating,  non-assertive,  and
             rarely forceful. He  will  take  the  path  of  non-resistance
             rather than confront an issue. The result of this is  that  he
             lacks motivation to do things and is ineffectual  in  creating
             change around him. He lacks self-discipline, underpinning much
             of his behaviour, including his  use  of  pornography.  It  is
             positive that he has a slightly higher than average  level  of
             self awareness and an at least average level of honesty.
         5.1.3     Tiago's  social  isolation  is  not  his  choice  but  is
             underpinned by his social anxiety, feelings of depression  and
             lack  of  confidence/self  esteem.  He   wishes   to   develop
             friendships and have a partner and is aware that his isolation
             - especially the  lack  of  a  relationship  with  a  woman  -
             contributes to his use of pornography. He reported that he did
             not have difficulties with friendships when at school and  his
             pornography only became a problem in his mid-twenties. He  was
             able to  identify  the  link  between  this  problem  and  the
             context/psychological state he was in.
         5.1.4    Tiago needs to have a two-part approach for change. One is
             to  receive  individual  therapy  to  focus  on  his  use   of
             pornography and which will also need to involve  his  personal
             profile. The other part is for him  to  become  less  socially
             isolated and more active in  other  aspects  of  his  life  by
             becoming  involved  in  activities.  The  therapy  could  also
             contribute to this. It may  be  that  a  probationary  officer
             would be appropriate to help Tiago identify a plan  for  this,
             and to support him following this consistently.  His  previous
             choice of activities to become more active - getting a tattoo,
             skydiving -  have  not  been  appropriate  for  this.  Playing
             football would be, if he could be  more  integrated  with  the
             other players.
         5.1.5    The support or therapy that Tiago needs to achieve  change
             would be Cognitive Behaviour Therapy/CBT. CBT is generally for
             only be for up to 6 months  and  less  the  therapist  advises
             differently once involved with Tiago.  As Tiago's  personality
             and context is quite entrenched, it is likely to take  longer,
             I think a year. If he became fully  involved  with  this,  the
             likely prognosis is  positive.  He  should  be  encouraged  to
             consider the additional benefits of this for  helping  explore
             the depression/anxiety he has experienced and giving  him  the
             tools to deal with this and his urge to  use  pornography  for
             any future incidents. It would be appropriate if the therapist
             could have access to this personality assessment.
         5.1.6    The therapist will often require a 1-2  week  gap  between
             CBT sessions to allow the person taking part to practice their
             'homework'.  This is a vital part of the therapy that involves
             the person taking part  making  changes  in  their  day-to-day
             thoughts  and  behaviour  as  have  been  identified  in   the
             sessions, such as replacing a negative  thought  with  a  more
             helpful one that has been developed in CBT or recognising that
             a certain behaviour  will  make  them  feel  worse  and  doing
             something more helpful. This homework can be discussed  during
             the sessions. The advantage of CBT is that the  skills  learnt
             during this process can be  practised  and  developed  by  the
             person taking part after the therapy has finished, which makes
             it more likely that changes in thoughts and behaviour will  be
             long term. The therapy  is  usually  structured  so  that  the
             person  taking  part  takes  progressively  more  control   of
             sessions throughout  its  course,  encouraging  them  to  feel
             empowered  to  continue  working  independently  once  it   is
             finished. This means that CBT is suited for long-term problems
             such as anxiety/depression, even though the therapy itself  is
             relatively short-term, only lasting on average 3-6 months.
         5.1.7    Within NHS,  CBT  is  available  from  the  mental  health
             service through a referral from Tiago's GP.


   61. There is also  recorded  in  the  report  at  paragraph  4.1.22  the
       following observation:


         4.1.22   Asked about his purchase/use of the 'small realistic  ass
             & vagina & baby clothes' (case file summary 2.8.18) he put his
             head in his hands briefly and said he just tried  it.  In  the
             previous proceedings  the  evidence  against  Tiago  contained
             Category A, B and C material. In these current proceedings the
             evidence has  only  category  C,  with  the  addition  of  the
             realistic vagina and children's clothes. Overall  Tiago's  use
             of  pornography   does   not   present   as   having   reduced
             significantly since the previous proceedings other than  there
             being no evidence of his use of category A or B  within  these
             proceedings. There is no evidence of  his  intention  to  move
             from use  of  pornography  to  practice  what  he  views  with
             children.

   62. The report from the psychologist clearly identifies two  aspects  of
       the work required by Mr Pinto to  address  the  reasons  behind  his
       offending which clearly suggests a two-pronged approach, "One is  to
       receive individual therapy to focus on his use  of  pornography  and
       which will also need to involve his personal profile. The other part
       is for him to become less socially isolated and more active in other
       aspects of  his  life  by  becoming  involved  in  activities".  The
       psychologist's report was written in 2018 but when asked during  the
       course of the hearing  whether  Mr  Pinto  had  undertaken  any  CBT
       treatment it was confirmed he had  not.  The  report  has  not  been
       updated.

   63. Whilst Mr Pinto  has  completed  the  Horizon  course  there  is  no
       statistical or subjective evidence to indicate whether this will  or
       will not  guarantee  that  he  will  not  reoffend  in  the  future.
       Recidivism rates for those convicted of sexual  offences,  in  which
       category I place Mr Pinto, are higher than some other categories and
       not low.  Whilst  it  is  noted  Mr  Pinto  states  in  his  witness
       statements that he will not reoffend again it would have  been  made
       crystal clear to him during the course of  the  sentencing  exercise
       when he received the suspended sentences of the serious consequences
       of reoffending, which seems to have had  no  impact  upon  him.  The
       judge was clearly persuaded at that time that Mr  Pintos  assertions
       he will not offend in the future and will deal  with  his  'problem'
       were genuine, which was proved not to be the case.

   64. Whilst Mr Pinto may  have  taken  up  running  this  is  clearly  an
       individual pastime with there being no evidence of  his  running  as
       part of a running club or community group  which  would  reduce  his
       level of isolation.

   65. It  is  of  concern  that  Mr  Pinto's  underlying  personality  and
       character and how that  manifests  itself  when  he  seeks  personal
       sexual gratification, remains as it  was  previously.  There  is  no
       evidence of work having been undertaken of a  sufficient  degree  in
       relation to the 'triggers' or for how, in relation to his  emotional
       management, Mr Pinto deals with this element. It was  identified  in
       the OASys report that the factors that  may  inhibit  change  in  Mr
       Pinto are:

         . In the event he  appears  to  spend  a  lot  of  time  living  in
           isolation.

         . He feels unable to process and manage his emotions,  particularly
           around his self-confidence.

         . He lacks an ability  to  address  his  sexual  thoughts  and  his
           management of this.

         . Failure to address his offending behaviour.

         . Loss of employment.

         . A breakdown of his relationship with his family.

   66. Although the evidence indicates Mr Pinto is spending more time  with
       his family including learning to cook and  spending  time  with  his
       brother, and there is no evidence of a breakdown of his relationship
       with his family at this point,  all  the  other  issues  highlighted
       above do not appear to have been adequately dealt with save  through
       the  Horizon  programme,  but  not  through  the   intense   trained
       intervention recommended by the psychologist through CBT. Until that
       occurs with evidence of a successful outcome,  I  find  there  is  a
       credible real risk of harm to children as identified  in  the  OASys
       report, through Mr Pinto reoffending.

   67. The argument advanced by Mr Chakmakjian in his  submission  that  Mr
       Pinto's offending should be viewed in a similar manner to  a  person
       who buys drugs from a dealer and who is  therefore  not  responsible
       for the manufacture or production of such drugs is noted, but it  is
       not made out such analogy is correct in  light  of  the  substantial
       harm caused to the young children,  some  as  young  as  2,  in  the
       production of the material downloaded by  Mr  Pinto.  Children  have
       specific protection in the law and through  the  UN  Rights  of  the
       Child and are identified as vulnerable. It  is  not  appropriate  to
       compare a child to a heroin poppy or a coca plant.

   68. Whilst it is accepted Mr Pinto did not rape the children and has not
       physically sexual abused a child in the UK yet,  his  offending  was
       clearly a perverted campaign of sexually deviant behaviour. Mr Pinto
       displays evidence of being a potentially dangerous individual.   The
       evidence shows the nature of the images and refers to his search for
       more shocking elements to fuel his sexual desires as they  grew.  Mr
       Pinto claims he 'stumbled' across images of this nature, but  it  is
       noted that would have been before 2015 after which time  the  police
       found a substantial number of images had been  downloaded  onto  his
       computer. The  nature  of  the  images  increased  in  severity  and
       included Category A images. He clearly chose to continue to download
       and view such images until be was caught.

   69. Then evidence also shows the sole reason for  Mr  Pinto's  offending
       was for his personal sexual gratification. Mr Pinto revelled in  the
       'thrill'  and  was  seeking  'excitement'.   The  element   of   his
       personality that gives rise to the same is that  identified  by  the
       psychologist which has not been dealt with by CBT or otherwise.

   70. This is a case involving not only images  but  the  purchase  by  Mr
       Pinto of baby clothes and a replica of a  'small  ass  and  vagina',
       which he no doubt viewed as sex toys connected with his  desire  for
       gratification connected  to  children.   This  demonstrates  a  more
       troubling approach to his 'enjoyment'. Mr Pinto claims  to  have  no
       sexual interest in children, but the evidence is all of his  seeking
       images of children being sexually abused and using the same in  both
       still photographic and moving  video  form  for  his  gratification,
       combined with replica items more associated with  children  than  an
       adult female, which is very troubling.
   71. I find the required degree of risk is made out by the respondent  of
       Mr Pinto re-offending in such a manner as to pose  a  real  risk  to
       children aged between 2 and 13. I find Mr Pinto's  personal  conduct
       represent a  serious  genuine,  present  threat  affecting  one  the
       fundamental interests of society to protect those who are  the  most
       vulnerable, from the sexual abuse and exploitation of children.
   72. The evidence clearly demonstrates that such images  are  part  of  a
       chain of  causation  of  commercial  exploitation  of  the  children
       through means of sexual abuse. Mr Pinto in  downloading  the  images
       would have been fully aware of the ages of  the  children  involved,
       the acts to which they have been subjected, and that his purchase of
       such items will directly lead to the provision of more of the  same.
       In the modern digital world, the distinction between those  directly
       causing the abuse and those it is reasonable to find will  be  aware
       their actions contribute to such abuse is lessened. Whilst there was
       no detailed discussion about culpability at the hearing it is  clear
       that Mr Pinto is culpable.




Proportionality

   73. The finding as to the applicable level of protection and  real  risk
       presented by Mr Pinto, sufficient to satisfy the relevant test, does
       not necessarily mean, however, that he can be deported under EU law.
       It is still necessary to consider Regulation 27.
   74. In relation to those issues, I find as follows (with the replies  to
       the specific issues being in italics following the  wording  of  the
       regulation:


        27.- (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health. The decision is clearly being taken
             on the grounds of public policy  and  public  security,  there
             being no issue of public health raised in this appeal.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends. There is no evidence  the  relevant  decision  has  been
             taken to serve economic ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security. The case law shows the nature of offences  involving
             child exploitation are sufficient to engage imperative grounds
             of public security a higher threshold than that applicable  to
             those  entitled  to  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
             regulation 15, surpassing the serious ground threshold. In any
             event, that the serious grounds of public  policy  and  public
             security test is met is clearly made out.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a) has a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
                  and who has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b) is under the age of 18, unless the  relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989.

                  Noted, but the case law  shows  offences  involving  child
                  sexual exploitation may be sufficient to engage imperative
                  grounds of public security as noted above. In this  appeal
                  the relevant decision can be taken on imperative  grounds,
                  indicating that even if the appellant is entitled  to  the
                  higher level of protection (the alternative  finding)  the
                  necessary threshold enabling the respondent to deport  him
                  has been crossed.

             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality; this issue is considered in  further
                      detail below.

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal  conduct  of  the  person   concerned;   the
                      decision  to  deport  is  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the appellant.

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent; it has been found that the personal conduct
                      of the appellant represents  a  sufficiently  serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society taking into account past conduct and the fact
                      the threat does not  need  to  be  imminent  for  the
                      reasons set out above.

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision; it has  not  been  shown
                      the decision is based upon matters isolated from  the
                      particulars  of  the  case   or   which   relate   to
                      considerations of general prevention where  the  same
                      is not permitted. The specific  sufficiently  serious
                      threat is to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                      society, the protection of  vulnerable  children  and
                      prevention  of  their  sexual  exploitation   arising
                      directly from the personal conduct of the appellant.

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify  the  decision;  the  decision  to
                      deport is not based  upon  the  appellant's  previous
                      criminal convictions but on the credible real risk of
                      a repeat of such conduct leading to similar offending
                      in the future.

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person. Although not a decision taken on the basis of
                      deterrent only, which is available in UK domestic law
                      but  not  applicable  EU  provisions,  there   is   a
                      preventative element of this decision in light of the
                      real  risk  identified   above,   specific   to   the
                      appellant.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

                  Appellants age: the appellant was born on 7 June 1990 and
                  is therefore 30 years of age.

                  Appellant's state of health: there is  no  evidence  that
                  the appellant is in anything other than in  good  physical
                  and mental health bar the incidence of a  general  medical
                  nature referred to in the copy GP notes  provided  and  in
                  the psychologist's report.

                  Appellant's family situation: the  appellant  lives  with
                  his parents  and  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  a
                  supportive family environment.

                  Appellant's economic situation: the appellant has  worked
                  previously but is currently  unemployed  which  he  blames
                  upon the respondent retaining his identity document.

                  Appellant's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom:
                  the appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  his
                  claimed date of entry in 1992.

                  Appellants  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the
                  United Kingdom: the extent of the appellant's  integration
                  into the United Kingdom is  discussed  above.  He  is  not
                  found to be integrated despite the length of time  in  the
                  UK, on the facts.

                  Appellant's links with Portugal: the appellant claims  in
                  his latest witness statement:

                  6. In the way of family, I have an estranged aunt  living
                  in Portugal with whom we do not have a close  relationship
                  or ongoing contact. The most recent communication  we  had
                  goes back five years. I have no immediate family or  close
                  friends in Portugal.  In  addition,  despite  having  been
                  raised in a Portuguese speaking household, I do not  speak
                  or understand the language very well and  when  conversing
                  with my parents I speaking English in response to what  my
                  parents say.

                  7. It would be extremely difficult to start my life  anew
                  in Portugal as I have been detached from my  cultural  and
                  social ties in Portugal for the best part of my  life.  In
                  effect, I would be forced to build a new life for  myself,
                  away from everything I know, a  domestic  environment,  my
                  family and home community where I have the necessary setup
                  and support to successfully  complete  the  rehabilitation
                  process and integrate back into  society,  which  requires
                  commitment and dedication both on my part and  I  rely  on
                  the assistance of my family.




                  The appellant's mother in her  latest  witness  statement
                  states:

                  5. We have lived in the UK for the last 26 years  of  our
                  lives and consider this country to be our home. We have no
                  social, cultural or family ties to Portugal. Most  of  our
                  immediate and extended family there have passed away, with
                  the exception of my estranged sister-in-law with  whom  we
                  have no contact for close relationship.

                  There was no challenge to  the  evidence  concerning  the
                  appellant's family position in  Portugal  which  indicates
                  that  he  will  experience  problems  in   re-establishing
                  himself although it was not made out that the same will be
                  sufficient to make a decision  disproportionate  on  their
                  own,  but I accept are matters that have to be  considered
                  together with all the other relevant facts, which  I  have
                  done. It was not made out that even though the appellant's
                  knowledge of Portuguese may be limited  his  understanding
                  and use of the language was not sufficient to  enable  him
                  to function or that he will not  be  able  to  reintegrate
                  into or survive within Portugal. It was not made out  that
                  family in Portugal, albeit limited, could not be  located.
                  There was no evidence that any attempt had  been  made  to
                  trace family members in Portugal or to show that  if  they
                  were located they will not be willing  or  able  to  offer
                  advice and assistance to the appellant. It is not made out
                  that society in Portugal is so different from that in  the
                  UK, such that the life skills developed by  the  appellant
                  in the UK will not be of benefit to him in  Portugal.  The
                  reference by the  appellant  to  being  brought  up  in  a
                  Portuguese  speaking  household  is  noted   as   is   the
                  appellants statement that whilst his parents  may  address
                  him in Portuguese he replies in English, which indicates a
                  clear  understanding  of  the  Portuguese  language.   The
                  appellant was previously employed in  the  United  Kingdom
                  and it  was  not  made  out  he  will  not  have  credible
                  employment opportunities based  upon  his  experience  and
                  education, sufficient to enable him  to  reintegrate  into
                  Portuguese society.

                  Whilst it is accepted that the appellant's  ties  to  the
                  United Kingdom are considerably greater to those Portugal,
                  the country to which the appellant will be deported, it is
                  not made out that the strength  of  the  family  ties  and
                  family support that the apparent benefits from, but  which
                  did not prevent him offending and reoffending in the past,
                  would mean he will be effectively  abandoned  in  Portugal
                  without emotional or financial support from them.

             (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
         public health-

                  (a)  a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                      defined by the  relevant  instruments  of  the  World
                      Health Organisation or is not  a  disease  listed  in
                      Schedule 1 to the  Health  Protection  (Notification)
                      Regulations 2010; or

                  (b)  if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
                      disease  occurring  after  the  three  month   period
                      beginning on the date on which the person arrived  in
                      the United Kingdom,

                  does not constitute grounds for the decision.

                  This is not a public health appeal.

             (8) A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.). See below.




   75. Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulation,  which  has  been  factored  into
       consideration of relevant issues, reads:

         SCHEDULE 1CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND  THE
         FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.


         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
             or public security values: member  States  enjoy  considerable
             discretion,  acting  within  the  parameters  set  by  the  EU
             Treaties, applied where relevant  by  the  EEA  agreement,  to
             define  their  own  standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.


         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
             extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
             nationality or language does not amount to integration in  the
             United Kingdom; a significant degree  of  wider  cultural  and
             societal integration must be present before a  person  may  be
             regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
         society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
         in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
             family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

         6.   It is  consistent  with  public  policy  and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including-

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.


         The fundamental interests of society

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
         values.

Rehabilitation

       In  relation  to  the  issue  of  rehabilitation,  in   Essa   (EEA:
       rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) it was held that
       for those who at the time of determination are or remain  a  present
       threat  to  public  policy  but  where  the  factors   relevant   to
       integration  suggest  that  there  are   reasonable   prospects   of
       rehabilitation, those prospects can be a substantial relevant factor
       in  the  proportionality  balance  as  to  whether  deportation   is
       justified. If the claimant cannot constitute a present  threat  when
       rehabilitated, and is well advanced  in  rehabilitation  in  a  host
       state where there is a substantial degree  of  integration,  it  may
       well very well be disproportionate to proceed to deportation. At the
       other end of the scale, if there  are  no  reasonable  prospects  of
       rehabilitation, the claimant is a present threat and  is  likely  to
       remain so for the indefinite future,  it  cannot  be  seen  how  the
       prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a significant factor in
       the balance. Thus, recidivist  offenders,  career  criminals,  adult
       offenders who have  failed  to  engage  with  treatment  programmes,
       claimants with propensity to commit sexual or violent  offences  and
       the like may well fall into this category.
   76. In MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520  (IAC)  it
       was held that:
                 i) Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to decisions
                    taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
                    health grounds under  regulation  21  of  the  2006  EEA
                    Regulations;
                ii) It is  only  if  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person
                    concerned is found to represent a genuine,  present  and
                    sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
                    fundamental interests of society  (regulation  21(5)(c))
                    that  it  becomes  relevant  to  consider  whether   the
                    decision is proportionate taking into  account  all  the
                    considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6);
               iii)  There  is  no  specific  reference  in  the   expulsion
                    provisions of either Directive 2004/38/EC  or  the  2006
                    EEA Regulations to rehabilitation, but it has been  seen
                    by the Court of Justice as  an  aspect  of  integration,
                    which is one of the factors referred to in Article 28(1)
                    and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]);
                iv) Rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed in  every
                    EEA  deportation  or  removal   decision   taken   under
                    regulation 21; it will not be relevant, for example,  if
                    rehabilitation has already been completed  (Essa  (2013)
                    at [32]-[33]);
                 v)  Reference  to  prospects  of  rehabilitation   concerns
                    reasonable prospects of a person ceasing to commit crime
                    (Essa (2013) at  [35]),  not  the  mere  possibility  of
                    rehabilitation. Mere capability of rehabilitation is not
                    to   be   equated   with    reasonable    prospect    of
                    rehabilitation;
                vi) Where relevant (see (4)  above)  such  prospects  are  a
                    factor to be taken into account in  the  proportionality
                    assessment  required  by  regulation   21(5)   and   (6)
                    ((Dumliauskas [41]);
               vii) Such prospects are to be taken into account even if  not
                    raised by the offender (Dumliauskas [52])
              viii) Gauging such prospects requires assessing  the  relative
                    prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member State  as
                    compared with those in the Member State of origin,  but,
                    in the absence of evidence, it is not to be assumed that
                    prospects are materially different in that other  Member
                    State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]- [53] and [59]);
                ix) Matters that are relevant when examining  the  prospects
                    of the rehabilitation of offenders include  family  ties
                    and    responsibilities,    accommodation,    education,
                    training, employment, active membership of  a  community
                    and the like (Essa (2013) at  [34]).  However,  lack  of
                    access to a Probation Officer or equivalent in the other
                    Member  State   should   not,   in   general,   preclude
                    deportation (Dumliauskas [55])
                 x) In the absence of integration and a right  of  permanent
                    residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be
                    a weighty factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even  when
                    such prospects have significant weight they  are  not  a
                    trump card, as what  the  Directive  and  the  2006  EEA
                    Regulations  require  is   a   wide   ranging   holistic
                    assessment. Both recognise that  the  more  serious  the
                    risk of reoffending, and the offences that a person  may
                    commit, the greater the  right  to  interfere  with  the
                    right of residence (Dumliauskas at [46] and [54]).


   77. Mr Pinto has not addressed this issue at all in his  statement.  His
       failure to actively engage in the CBT treatment recommended in  2018
       casts serious doubt upon his prospects of rehabilitation.
   78. It has not been shown that  there  is  not  an  effective  Probation
       Service in Portugal. Portugal has a Sex Offender Register indicating
       an awareness of this issue. At [53] of the refusal  decision  it  is
       said there was no reason why the appellant  could  not  continue  to
       work towards rehabilitation in Portugal and that he did not need  to
       remain in the United Kingdom to become rehabilitated. Mr  Pinto  has
       provided insufficient evidence to show the contrary is the  case.  I
       find on the material available to the Upper Tribunal that  Mr  Pinto
       will have equal prospects of being rehabilitated in Portugal  as  he
       has in the United Kingdom. It is not made  out  Mr  Pinto  needs  to
       remain in the UK to become rehabilitated.
   79. No evidence has been provided to show that the Probation Service  in
       the UK or Mr Pinto's Offender Management could not liaise  with  the
       Probation   Service   in   Portugal   to   ensure   continuity    of
       monitoring/assistance as required.
   80. It is also not made out Mr Pinto will not be able to gain access  to
       the  type  of  CBT  required  to  address  the   underlying   issues
       surrounding  his  offending  behaviour  in  Portugal.   This  is  of
       particular  importance  for  as  noted  in  the  OASys  report,  the
       underlying issues led to Mr Pinto  seeking  to  satisfy  his  sexual
       desires by seeking more extreme images of children being abused  and
       continue to by seeking out pornography that  was  more  shocking  to
       him.

Conclusion on proportionality of the deportation decision under EU law

   81. I find the Secretary of State has established,  when  balancing  all
       the competing aspects of this case in the round, that even in  light
       of the length of time Mr Pinto has been in the  United  Kingdom  and
       his previous integration which included into his family  unit,  that
       his deportation from  the  United  Kingdom  is  proportionate  under
       European law.
   82. I find the respondents decision proportionate  to  any  interference
       with Mr Pinto's right for free movement protected by EU law.  It  is
       not suggested any other family member will be forced to leave the UK
       if Mr Pinto is deported. They will be able to continue  to  exercise
       their treaty rights as before.
   83. I find insufficient evidence has been provided to show that Mr Pinto
       will be unable to establish himself in Portugal, even if his aunt
       cannot be traced, in light of his age, education, and support from
       his family in the United Kingdom.


Conclusion on proportionality - Article 8 ECHR

   84. In relation to article 8 ECHR, which is applicable  to  all  parties
       whether European nationals or not, having considered in  detail  the
       provisions of section 117 of the 2002 Act, with particular reference
       to 117C which applies to a person subject to a  decision  to  deport
       him from the United Kingdom, I do not find it made out that Mr Pinto
       satisfies any of the exceptions to deportation or  established  that
       there are very compelling circumstances or insurmountable  obstacles
       to his integration into Portuguese society, sufficient  to  outweigh
       the strong public interest in his removal from the United Kingdom in
       light of  the  serious  nature  of  his  offences,  the  finding  he
       continues to pose a risk of harm to the public or a section  of  the
       public, specifically children, and that he has failed to address the
       underlying  issues  in  his  personality  which  are  said  to  have
       contributed to  his  criminal  behaviour  and  which  heightens  the
       credible real risk of reoffending.
   85. Mrs Aboni in her submissions stated the protected rights related  to
       Mr Pinto's private life as a necessary degree of dependency had  not
       been established to show the private life recognised  by  article  8
       existed. There  is  merit  in  this  submission  although  the  most
       important aspect of Mr Pinto's private life  is  possibly  the  bond
       that he has with his family members in the UK which is been factored
       into the required balancing exercise.
   86. Having considered the competing arguments I find  the  Secretary  of
       State has established that any interference in a protected right  is
       proportionate in any event, for the reasons set out above.


Decision


   87. I dismiss the appeal.


Anonymity.

The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 25 February 2021
