

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: DA/00872/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR IH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

                       DIRECTIONS FOR RESUMED HEARING

1. This appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
House for a fresh hearing on all matters before a  judge,  judges  or  panel
other than Judge M Colvin and Ms S Singer.

2. Both parties have leave to file and serve  updating  witness  statements,
reports and other evidence to be served no later than 10 working days  prior
to the substantive hearing.

3. The First-tier Tribunal will expect (a) to have produced to it  not  only
the PNC record but the results of any investigations about its accuracy  and
(b) to hear argument about which convictions are disputed.

4. Solicitors for  Mr  H  to  notify  the  Tribunal  if  an  interpreter  is
required, and if so, in which language.

5. Such other directions as may be considered appropriate shall be  made  by
the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                       Dated
Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

APPELLANT:  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

RESPONDENT:  MR IH

CASE NO:  DA/00872/2013

DATE OF INITIAL HEARING IN UPPER TRIBUNAL: 24 APRIL 2014


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr P Duffy
For the Respondent:  Miss L Taylor-Gee


REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE


 1. For ease of reference purposes the parties are referred to as they were
    before the First-tier Tribunal so that Mr H is the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State is the respondent.

 2. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  the  Netherlands.   He  appealed  the
    decision of the respondent made on 23 April 2013 to make a  deportation
    order against him.  A panel comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin
    and Ms S Singer (Non-legal  member)  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    deportation under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal and permission was  granted.
    The respondent's grounds argue that the panel failed to identify  which
    of the appellant's  thirteen  convictions  for  23  offences  they  had
    disregarded because the appellant disputed them and why the  panel  did
    so.

 4. The judge granting permission said that (a) there is no doubt that  the
    appellant had an extensive and serious criminal record  for  a  man  of
    only 30 years of age.   Given  that  his  convictions  include  serious
    offences of violence and of dishonesty and his own history of substance
    abuse, it is arguable that the panel erred in disregarding some of  the
    convictions without clear evidence that it was correct to  do  so;  (b)
    furthermore, the convictions that were  disregarded  should  have  been
    identified.  The panel did not make adequate findings  on  the  central
    issue and that disclosed the arguable error of  law;  (c)  the  grounds
    also argue that the panel paid insufficient weight to the  danger  that
    the appellant posed to the public from his offending.  There is  little
    in the determination that explains why the panel rejected the  evidence
    of the serious risk posed to the public by the  appellant  which  is  a
    further arguable error; (d) in addition it is an  arguable  error  that
    the panel mis-directed  itself  as  to  the  balancing  of  the  public
    interest and the interest of the appellant's child.

 5. By a letter dated 23 April 2014  the  respondent  sent  a  fax  to  the
    Tribunal seeking leave to vary the respondent's grounds of appeal. This
    was on the following basis: -- At paragraph 46 of the determination the
    panel find that the appellant  may  only  be  deported  on  "imperative
    grounds of public security".  The submission  in  the  letter  is  that
    following the decision of the ECJ in the case of Secretary of State for
    the Home Department vs MG (Judgment of the Court) [2014] EUECJ C-400 in
    the  instant  case  the  appellant  could  not  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of Regulation 21(4) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations  2006.  This  Regulation  states  that  the  relevant
    decision may not be  taken  except  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security in respect of an EEA national who has resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the
    relevant decision.

 6. The submission by the Secretary of State is that  as  the  decision  to
    make a deportation order  was  made  whilst  the  appellant  was  still
    serving a custodial  sentence  counting  back  from  the  date  of  the
    decision the ten year period is immediately broken by the fact that the
    appellant is still in custody.  The decision was  published  some  four
    days prior to the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.   Although  that  meant
    that it may be that none of the parties to the hearing  were  aware  of
    the judgment the failure to take into account the judgment of  the  ECJ
    on the very issue in hand must be a material error.

 7. I asked Miss Taylor-Gee whether she objected to the application to vary
    the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal and she responded  that  she
    did.  I asked her if the application caused  her  difficulties  because
    she was taken by  surprise  by  it.   Miss  Taylor-Gee  responded  that
    although she had been briefed only very recently she had been  able  to
    prepare to meet the argument. Indeed I noted that  in  the  short  time
    available she had managed to address in a lengthy skeleton argument not
    only those matters upon which permission to appeal had been  given  but
    also the application for the variation of the grounds of appeal.

 8. On the basis that the appellant  was  not  taken  by  surprise  at  the
    hearing before me and caused no difficulties in putting  forward  legal
    argument I decided that there would be no unfairness to  the  appellant
    to allow the grounds to be varied. An important point had  been  raised
    by the respondent which ought to  be  aired  before  me.   The  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal are therefore varied.

 9.  According  to  the  determination  (at  paragraph  9)  the   appellant
    challenged the  PNC  record.  At  his  trial  the  judge  accepted  the
    convictions that he disputed and disregarded them.  The appellant  gave
    oral evidence before the panel, adopted his two written statements  and
    although he was cross-examined there  is  no  reference  to  him  being
    challenged about the offences he did not accept.  I  find  that  it  is
    hardly surprising therefore that the panel at paragraph  47  discounted
    some convictions disputed by the appellant.  I do  not  find  therefore
    that the panel erred in relation to that matter although I comment that
    the panel may have wished to judge for itself the issue of the disputed
    convictions after asking appropriate questions and made  findings  that
    would have helped in the consideration of the panel's conclusions as to
    the appellant's integration into UK society.  A future  hearing  should
    have that matter canvassed before it.

10. It is arguable that the panel failed to attach sufficient weight to the
    appellant's offending behaviour. There is little in  the  determination
    that explains why the panel rejected the evidence of the  serious  risk
    posed to the public by the appellant. It is not  apparent  anywhere  in
    the determination what the panel makes of both the OASys Report and the
    independent  risk  assessment  report  placing  the  appellant  in  the
    category of medium risk of harm to members of the public.   It  may  be
    that the panel merely agreed with what is said in the OASys Report that
    the appellant has a potential to cause serious harm but is unlikely  to
    do so unless there is a change in circumstances but that needed  to  be
    stated with reasons and this was not done.  Such findings needed to  go
    into the "mix".  The panel failed to  spell  out  the  public  interest
    aspect in the appellant's own deportation and therefore fell into error
    in not doing so.

11. The panel can be forgiven for not being aware of the case of MG  as  it
    had only very recently been promulgated and it was  not  drawn  to  the
    panel's attention.

12. I do not consider that the respondent's representative at  the  hearing
    conceded  that  the  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  point
    applied.  As  recorded  in  paragraph  31  Mr  Little  (the  Presenting
    Officer) accepted that the appellant has been in the UK for  ten  years
    and wishes to leave the issue of "imperative" to the panel.

13. In paragraph 52 of the determination the panel was of the firm  opinion
    that the appellant's deportation could not be said to be  justified  on
    "imperative grounds of public security" which  is  necessarily  a  high
    threshold to expel an EEA national with over ten  years'  residence  in
    the UK.  However, I agree with  the  respondent  that  because  of  the
    decision in MG the ten year period of residence must  in  principle  be
    continuous and must be calculated by counting back from the date of the
    decision  ordering  the  expulsion  of  the   person   concerned.    An
    interpretation of Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38  means  that  a
    period of imprisonment is, in principle, capable both  of  interrupting
    the continuity of the period of residence  for  the  purposes  of  that
    provision and of affecting the decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the
    enhanced protection provided for  thereunder,  even  where  the  person
    concerned resided in the host member state for the ten years  prior  to
    imprisonment.  However, the fact that the person resided  in  the  host
    member state for ten years prior to  imprisonment  may  be  taken  into
    consideration as part of the overall assessment required  in  order  to
    determine whether the integrating links previously forged with the host
    member state have been broken.

14. I find that it cannot be said that had the  panel  been  aware  of  and
    heard argument about the case of MG it would inevitably  have  come  to
    the same conclusion and therefore this  point  on  its  own  reveals  a
    material error of law.

15. As I announced at the hearing the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel is therefore set aside and the appeal will be heard afresh.

16. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  s.12  (2)  of
    the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  with
    directions or make a fresh decision for myself.  In accordance with the
    practice statement dated 25 September 2012 and in particular the nature
    of the judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision in the  appeal  to  be  re-made,  and  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2 of the practice statement I find that it
    is more appropriate in this appeal for the case to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a different panel, judge or  judges,
    and I direct accordingly.


Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
