

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
DA/00438/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 February 2018                       |On 20 February 2018                 |


                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
               SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RUBEN TAVERES PINTO

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hawkin, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Nightingale promulgated on 11 October 2017 in which she
      granted an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 7
      September 2015 to deport him from the United Kingdom. We  shall  refer
      to the respondent in this appeal as the appellant as he was before the
      First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal born on 19 July 1995.  He  came
      to the United Kingdom as a  young  child  and  there  was  documentary
      evidence  showing  that  he  was  enrolled  in  primary  education  in
      September 2002. He has been the United Kingdom since then.

   3. Between 4 January 2011 and 7 July 2015 the appellant was convicted  of
      eight criminal offences, including offences against the  person,  more
      fully narrated at paragraph 2.  On  18  May  2015  the  appellant  was
      convicted of conspiracy  to  commit  burglary  and  on  30  June  2015
      sentenced to 24 months in a young offenders' institution.  On  7  July
      2015 he was convicted of an offence of dishonesty and sentenced  to  4
      months  imprisonment.  Judge  Nightingale  records   this   as   being
      concurrent with the previous sentence but the criminal record  appears
      to show it as consecutive. Nothing turns on this point.

   4. The decision to deport the appellant was made  under  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").
      The reasons are set out in a supplementary letter dated  23  September
      2015. The letter noted that the appellant had not shown  that  he  had
      acquired a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Accordingly consideration had been given to whether or not deportation
      could be justified on the grounds of public policy or public  security
      (regulations 19(3(b) and 21). The Secretary of  State  concluded  that
      the order was justified.

   5. One of the issues before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the
      appellant had resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
      at least 10 years prior to the decision to deport. Both  parties  made
      submissions on this issue, recorded at paragraphs 34 and 35. The  Home
      Office Presenting Officer accepted that if the appellant had made  out
      the 10 years' residence then he could only be excluded  on  imperative
      grounds of public security (regulation 21(4)). The burden however  was
      on the appellant.

   6. Judge Nightingale found that the appellant has resided in  the  United
      Kingdom continuously since at least  2002.  She  continued,  "He  had,
      therefore, by the date of his first period of  detention  in  a  young
      offenders' institution in December 2014, resided in the United Kingdom
      for a continuous period of at least 10 years. Unlike  the  acquisition
      of permanent residence under regulation 15,  the  Regulations  do  not
      state that the continuous period has to be  calculated  in  accordance
      with the Regulations"

   7. That finding, and  Judge  Nightingale's  interpretation  of  the  2006
      Regulations encapsulates the issue between the parties.

   8. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  take  no  issue  with  the
      finding that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom continuously
      since 2002. It is however  submitted  that  in  order  to  obtain  the
      highest level of protection in regulation 21(4) the 10 year  residence
      must be established in accordance with the 2006 Regulations. Mr Melvin
      submitted that, amongst other things, this would include demonstrating
      that throughout this period the  appellant  had  comprehensive  health
      insurance. The appellant had provided no evidence that would justify a
      finding of  continuous  10  year  residence  in  accordance  with  the
      Regulations. The Supreme Court made a reference to  the  ECJ  on  this
      point; FV(Italy) [2016] UKSC 49. On 24 October 2017  Advocate  General
      Szpunar had given his opinion in which he  stated,  at  paragraph  59,
      "...the acquisition of a permanent right of residence  under  Articles
      16 and 28(2) of the Directive 2004/38 is a prerequisite  for  enhanced
      protection under Article 28(3)  of  that  directive."  Accordingly  Mr
      Melvin submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a  material
      error of law.

   9. Mr Hawkin submitted that there was no error. He pointed  out  that  in
      making the reference to ECJ the Supreme Court had said that a majority
      of the Court favours the view that possession of a right of  permanent
      residence is not needed to enjoy  enhanced  protection  under  article
      28(3)(a) but a minority regards the position as at least  unclear  and
      so requires a reference to the ECJ. Accordingly Judge Nightingale  had
      reached her decision on the basis of the law as it stands at  present.
      So far as the Advocate General's opinion was concerned it was  yet  to
      be seen whether it would be adopted by the ECJ.

  10. For reasons set out below we do not consider that it is necessary  for
      us to adjudicate on this issue.

  11. At paragraph 50 Judge Nightingale says  this,  "It  is  also  for  the
      respondent to satisfy me that the personal conduct of  this  appellant
      represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
      affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. I do  not  find
      that this has been established even leaving aside,  for  the  sake  of
      argument, the appellant's ten years  of  residence."  (our  emphasis).
      That is  a  reference  to  regulation  21(5)(c)  and  is  one  of  the
      principles with which a decision taken on grounds of public policy and
      public security must comply.

  12. There is no direct challenge to that finding in the grounds of appeal.
      Mr Melvin made a valiant attempt to persuade us that ground 11 covered
      the point but we are not persuaded that  this  is  so.  As  Mr  Hawkin
      pointed out the  ground  is  predicated  on  the  assertion  that  the
      appellant's  convictions  showed  a  lack  of  social   and   cultural
      integration. That was not accepted by the judge. In the alternative Mr
      Melvin argued that this finding was infected  by  Judge  Nightingale's
      error in her approach to  ten  year's  residence.  Again  we  are  not
      persuaded by that submission.

  13. There  was  in  our  opinion  sufficient  evidence  from  which  Judge
      Nightingale could make that finding. It is of  course  true  that  the
      appellant has amassed  a  number  of  convictions  detailed  in  Judge
      Nightingale's determination. She had regard to  the  OASys  assessment
      and the finding that he was a medium risk to the public though it  was
      noted that the assessment was  nearly  two  years  old.  However  what
      clearly impressed Judge Nightingale was the evidence of his engagement
      with a rehabilitation programme run by Saracens Rugby Club. She  heard
      evidence from Nick Gourlay who was involved in Saracens Education  and
      Work Programme for  Young  Offenders.  His  evidence  is  detailed  in
      paragraphs 27 to 29. The programme used sport, specifically, rugby  to
      promote discipline, honesty and adherence to the rules. The  appellant
      had undergone an eight week programme and had  received  a  leadership
      award for his involvement. He had become a team leader on the  course.
      At paragraph 47 Judge Nightingale assesses Mr Gourlay's  evidence  and
      concludes that the appellant has begun on the road  to  rehabilitation
      and that there would be available some support in those  efforts  from
      the Club.

  14. Judge Nightingale also took into account the  accepted  basis  of  the
      plea on the most serious charge, the conspiracy to commit burglary. It
      was on the basis of having been involved on one day only in a "spur of
      the moment" incident. That appears to be borne out by reference to the
      remarks of the sentencing judge.

  15. Accordingly, even if  Judge  Nightingale  made  an  error  of  law  in
      concluding that the appellant benefitted from the enhanced  protection
      under regulation 21(4), and we express no opinion on the point, we are
      not satisfied for the reasons set out by her in paragraph 50 that  the
      error was material.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                             Date


Lord Boyd of Duncansby
