
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00927/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2014                              |On 27 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                           tendai abraham goremano
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A MacKenzie instructed by Kesar & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 25 August  1990.
    On 16 May 2012, he was convicted  at  the  Canterbury  Crown  Court  of
    unlawful wounding and burglary.  On 2 July 2012, he was sentenced to  a
    term of 32  months'  imprisonment  for  the  unlawful  wounding  and  a
    consecutive term of  nine  months'  imprisonment  for  the  offence  of
    burglary,  making  a  total  term  of  three  years  and  five  months'
    imprisonment.  As a consequence of that conviction, the  appellant  was
    liable to automatic deportation under the provisions of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007.  On 23 August 2012, he  was  informed  of  his  liability  to
    deportation unless one of the  exceptions  in  s.33  of  the  2007  Act
    applied.  In response, the appellant claimed asylum.

 2. On 28 January 2013, the Secretary of State informed  the  appellant  in
    writing that she considered that s.72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") applied on the basis that  he  had
    been convicted of a "particularly serious crime" (having been sentenced
    to imprisonment of at least  two  years)  and  that  he  constituted  a
    "danger to the community" such that his deportation  would  not  breach
    Art 33 of the Refugee Convention.  The appellant was  invited  to  make
    representations  to  rebut  the  presumptions  that   his   crime   was
    particularly serious and that he constituted a danger to the community.

 3. It would appear that the appellant made  no  representations.   In  any
    event, on 30 April 2013, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
    claim for asylum and under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  Consequently, the
    Secretary of State decided that s.32(5) of the 2007 Act applied as  the
    appellant could not establish an exception under s.33.   The  Secretary
    of State also considered  that  the  appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    presumptions under s.72 of the 2002 Act and issued a certificate  under
    s.72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act that the presumptions applied.

 4. On 26 April 2013, the Secretary  of  State  made  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant pursuant to s.32 of the 2007 Act  and  s.5(1)  of
    the Immigration Act 1991.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed against the decision that s.32(5)  of  the  2007
    Act applied pursuant to s.82(3A) of the 2002 Act.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Trevaskis  and  Dr  J  O  De  Barros)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  having  concluded
    that, as a result of s.72 of the  2002  Act,  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of a particularly serious offence and constituted a danger to
    the community.  However, the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT")  went  on  to
    allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  The first is that the FtT failed properly to consider whether
    the appellant  had  rebutted  the  presumption  that  his  offence  was
    "particularly serious" and that he was a  "danger  to  the  community".
    Secondly, the FtT erred in law by failing to consider  at  all  whether
    the appellant was at risk of serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 of
    the ECHR as a result of his claimed association with the MDC.

 8. In addition, the Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against
    the FtT's decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8  of  the
    ECHR.  First, the grounds argue that the FtT erred in law by failing to
    consider  whether  the  appellant  could  succeed  under  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended),  namely  paras  399  and  399A.
    Secondly, the grounds argue that the FtT failed  properly  to  consider
    the public interest and therefore failed  properly  to  carry  out  the
    balancing exercise under Art 8.2.

 9. On 22 April 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer)  granted  both
    the appellant and respondent  permission  to  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    Thus, the appeal came before us.

Discussion

     The Appellant's Appeal

10. Article  33(1)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  prevents  the  return  or
    refoulement of a refugee to a place where he has a well-founded fear of
    persecution for a Convention reason.  However, Art  33(2)  provides  an
    exception to that prohibition on return or refoulement in the following
    circumstances:

         "The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be  claimed
         by a refugee .... who, having been convicted by a final judgment of
         a particularly serious kind, constitutes a danger to the  community
         of that country."

11. Section 72(1) of the 2002 Act provides that:

         "This section applies  to  the  purpose  of  the  construction  and
         application of Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention (exclusion  from
         protection)."

12. The relevant provision in s.72 for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal  is
    s.72(2) which provides as follows:

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he  is -

         (a)  convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

         (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years."

13. Section 72(6) states that:

         "A presumption under sub-section (2) .... that a person constitutes
         a danger to the community is rebuttable by that person."

14. Although s.72 does not, on its face, provide for the  rebuttal  of  the
    presumption that the conviction of an offence in the UK with a sentence
    of at least two years amounts to a "particularly serious crime", in  EN
    (Serbia) v SSHD [2010] QB 633 the Court of Appeal interpreted  s.72  as
    also creating a rebuttable presumption as to whether the conviction  of
    an offence with a term of imprisonment of two years was a "particularly
    serious crime".

15. The FtT dealt with the certification under s.72 at paras 44-46  of  its
    determination as follows:

         "44. We begin by considering the certification of  the  appellant's
             case under s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002.  The Appellant was  sentenced  to  more  than  2  years'
             imprisonment for a single offence.  We find that  the  offence
             of  wounding  for  which  he  received  that  sentence  was  a
             particularly serious offence.  The sentencing remarks included
             the following:

                  'you struck ... in the  face  with  the  bottle  you  were
                  holding.  You caused him very serious injury indeed to his
                  face, chest and head.  He  received  21  stitches  to  his
                  chest, 7 stitches to his head and the wound  to  his  face
                  required surgery because it full through the thickness  of
                  the skin.  I am told that  he  may  well  require  a  skin
                  graft.

                  I take the view that wounding falls into the most  serious
                  category under the Sentencing Guidelines but  there  is  a
                  higher culpability because a weapon was used  by  you  and
                  there is greater harm because there is long term permanent
                  injury to your victim.'

         45.   With  regard  to  the  danger  which  he  represents  to  the
             community, we note that he was assessed as presenting a medium
             risk  of  causing  serious  harm,  based  on  the  nature  and
             seriousness of the index offence.  The appellant has only been
             out of prison since November  2013,  and  so  there  has  been
             little  time  to  assess  his  commitment  to  rehabilitation.
             Therefore we must be guided by the risk assessment,  which  we
             find leads us to conclude that he still represents a danger to
             the community.

         46.  We therefore find that the Respondent's certification has  not
             been rebutted, and  therefore  Article  33(2)  of  the  Geneva
             Convention applies to the Appellant and he  does  not  qualify
             for a grant of asylum under paragraph 334 of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  Accordingly we have not considered his asylum claim in
             the context of this appeal."

16. Whilst it is clear to us that the FtT did consider that the presumption
    that  his  offending  meant  that  he  constituted  a  "danger  to  the
    community", it is not clear to us that the  FtT  appreciated  that  the
    presumption that  his  offence  amounted  to  a  "particularly  serious
    offence" could be rebutted.  Although the FtT set  out  the  sentencing
    judge's remarks, the phraseology of para 44 of the determination  leads
    us to conclude that the FtT considered that, by virtue of  having  been
    convicted of an offence for which the appellant received a sentence  of
    at least two years' imprisonment, it  had  been  established  that  the
    appellant had been  convicted  of  a  "particularly  serious  offence".
    There was no consideration of whether  the  circumstances  warranted  a
    different conclusion.

17. Whether the appellant had rebutted the presumption in s.72(2) required,
    in our judgment, an assessment of all the circumstances, including  the
    circumstances of the offence and also of  the  appellant's  history  of
    offending (see SB (Cessation and exclusion) Haiti [2005] UKIAT 00036 at
    [72]-[73]).  Whilst the circumstances of the  appellant's  offence  are
    set out from the sentencing judge's remarks at para  44  of  the  FtT's
    determination, we are unable to say that it was inevitable that the FtT
    would conclude that the presumption in s.72(2) had not  been  rebutted.
    As Stanley Burnton LJ noted in EN (Serbia) at [69]:

         "A  sentence  of  two  years'  imprisonment  is   not   necessarily
         indicative of a particularly serious crime."

18. The FtT's misapprehension as to the effect of s.72(2) of the  2002  Act
    was, in our judgment, a material error of law in reaching  its  finding
    to uphold the certification under s.72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act.

19. Further, it is clear that the FtT erred in law in failing  to  consider
    the appellant's claim under Art  3  of  the  ECHR.   The  FtT  made  no
    findings in relation to the appellant's evidence and that of his  other
    witnesses concerning his (and his family's)  claimed  MDC  associations
    and any consequent risk of serious ill-treatment falling within  Art  3
    of the ECHR if he returned to Zimbabwe.  Even if it had been correct to
    uphold the certification under s.72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act, that had  no
    effect upon the appellant's claim under Art 3 based upon his  (and  his
    family's)  claimed   political   association   with   the   MDC.    The
    certification only affected the appellant's asylum claim which, if  the
    certificate was upheld, required the  FtT  to  dismiss  his  appeal  on
    asylum grounds without determining the merits  of  those  grounds.   On
    behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards accepted that this was an
    error  of  law.   That  aspect  of  the   appellant's   claim   remains
    undetermined by the First-tier Tribunal.

20. Given these  two  errors  of  law,  it  is  apparent  to  us  that  the
    appellant's appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    de novo rehearing  of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  (including  the
    application of s.72 of the 2002 Act) and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

21. We do not consider that any of the FtT's findings in respect of Art  33
    of the Refugee Convention and s.72(2) of the 2002 Act should stand.  In
    relation to the FtT's finding that the appellant had not  rebutted  the
    presumption that he was a danger to the community, that  finding  will,
    by the time of a rehearing, be more aged.  In addition, it was, as  the
    FtT noted in para 45, made only four months  after  the  appellant  was
    released from prison in November 2013.  It would, in our  judgment,  be
    wholly artificial and wrong to reconsider  the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and the application of s.72 at some future  point  without  also
    considering afresh whether the appellant has rebutted  the  presumption
    that he is a danger to the community.

    The Respondent's Appeal

22. As regards the Secretary of State's appeal in  relation  to  the  FtT's
    decision to allow the appeal under Art 8, Mr MacKenzie, who represented
    the appellant, accepted that the  FtT  had  failed  to  consider  first
    whether the appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules, in
    particular para 398(b) read with para 399A.  Nevertheless, he submitted
    that was immaterial as the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  para
    399A(b) and therefore his  deportation  was  clearly  disproportionate.
    Paragraph 399A(b) provides as follows:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

         ....

         (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least  half
             of his lifetime living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
             preceding the date of the  immigration  decision  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including
             social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

23. Mr MacKenzie submitted that the appellant had established that  he  had
    "no ties" with Zimbabwe and  he  did  not  accept  that  his  political
    connection with Zimbabwe through his MDC membership meant that he could
    not show that he had "no ties" with Zimbabwe.

24. In assessing whether the appellant's deportation was a breach of Art 8,
    the case law makes clear that the decision maker  must  consider  first
    whether the appellant meets the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    which, for these purposes, include para 399A(b).  If they do not  apply
    then an individual can only succeed in a deportation appeal under  para
    398 if he establishes that there are "exceptional  circumstances"  such
    that the public interest is  "outweighed  by  other  factors"  (see  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192).

25.  Here,  the  FtT  did  not  consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    requirement in para 399A(b) and had established that he had  "no  ties"
    with Zimbabwe.  Whilst the FtT did find at  para  63  that  he  has  no
    family support in Zimbabwe, the FtT made no reference to  that  in  the
    context of the "no ties" issue under para 399A(b) and did not  consider
    whether,  despite  having  no  family  in  Zimbabwe,  nevertheless  his
    political affiliations with the MDC amounted to a continuing connection
    with Zimbabwe and, therefore, amounted to a "tie" of  a  "cultural"  or
    other kind.

26. In our judgment, the FtT failed properly to consider the application of
    Art 8 and, in particular, the issue of proportionality  by  failing  to
    consider whether the appellant's claim  succeeded  under  para  399A(b)
    and, if it did not, whether there were "exceptional circumstances" such
    that the public interest in  deportation  was  outweighed.   For  these
    reasons, therefore, the FtT erred in law in  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision and Disposal

27. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum grounds involved the making of an error of law.

28. Further, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.

29. For the reasons we have given, the First-tier Tribunal's  determination
    cannot stand and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in order to remake de novo the decision on asylum grounds
    and under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
