


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00578/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14 April 2016                            |On 25 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            ALFRED GARETH SUCKOO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, instructed by Dotcom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Following the judgment of the Court of Appeal  issued  on  1  February  2016
setting aside a  previous  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  allowing  the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to deport him from  the
United Kingdom, this case has been remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  for  the
decision in the appellant's appeal to be re-made.

The appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on  16  April  1974.  He  first
entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2002  as  a  visitor  and   was
subsequently given further periods of leave to remain as a student until  30
September 2006. Following his marriage to Marsha Shrien Emanuel,  a  British
citizen, on 24 June 2006, he was given further leave to remain as  a  spouse
until 15 September 2008. Subsequent to that he became an overstayer and  did
not apply for further leave. However prior to the expiry  of  his  leave  he
was arrested for the offences for which he was later convicted.


On 16 July 2009 he was convicted of being concerned in supplying a  Class  A
controlled  drug,  namely  heroin,  and  conspiring/supplying  a   Class   A
controlled drug, namely crack cocaine and heroin. On  11  November  2009  he
was sentenced to 5 years and 5 months' imprisonment. He  was  released  from
prison on licence in April 2011.


On 2 February 2010 the appellant was served with a notice  of  liability  to
automatic deportation and on 22 August 2012 a deportation order  was  issued
against him pursuant to section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.  The
following day a decision was made that section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
2007 applied. The appellant appealed against that decision.

The appeal was heard by a panel in the First-tier Tribunal  on  18  December
2012 and was allowed on Article  8  grounds.  Following  an  appeal  by  the
Secretary of State against the Tribunal's  decision,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
King set aside the decision, on the basis that the Tribunal  had  failed  to
give due weight to the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals.
Judge King then re-made the decision himself  at  a  hearing  on  29  August
2013. He allowed the appeal again on Article 8  grounds.  The  Secretary  of
State then appealed to the Court of Appeal, following a grant of  permission
on 13 May 2014, and the appeal was  heard  before  Lord  Justice  McFarlane,
Lord Justice Vos and Lord Justice Simon on 20 January 2016. The  three  Lord
Justices allowed the Secretary of State's  appeal  in  a  judgment  dated  1
February 2016 ([2016] EWCA Civ 39) and remitted the case back to  the  Upper
Tribunal.


In order to understand the scope of the appeal before me,  it  is  necessary
to set out in some detail the findings made by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King
and the findings subsequently made by the Court of Appeal in  setting  aside
his decision.

Upper Tribunal Judge King's decision


At the time of the hearing before Judge King, the  appellant  and  his  wife
had one child, a daughter Amira who was  four  years  of  age,  born  on  26
January 2009, and his wife was pregnant. The judge heard oral evidence  from
the appellant, his wife and his mother-in-law. The appellant  explained  how
he became involved with drugs due to his limited finances at a time when  he
was unemployed. He was arrested on 16 July 2008 and was in  custody  at  the
time Amira was born and was not with her for the  first  two  years  of  her
life. He was not working but spent his time at home giving  support  to  his
wife and daughter. He obtained several certificates whilst  in  prison,  for
plumbing and engineering and worked as a Samaritan.  The  appellant's  wife,
Marsha Emanuel, in her evidence, explained  that  she  had  previously  been
working but had given up her job in order to look after  her  daughter.  She
had  previously  had  a  miscarriage  in  2008  and  Amira  had  been   born
prematurely. She was having difficulties  in  her  pregnancy  and  found  it
difficult to cope as a virtual single mother, also assisting her mother  who
had health problems. Her brother,  who  lived  with  her  mother,  had  been
diagnosed with a form of psychosis. The  appellant's  mother-in-law,  Marvia
Edwards, explained that she  suffered  from  a  fractured  neck  bone  which
pressed upon nerves in her neck  and  arm  and  was  in  constant  pain  and
depended upon Marsha and her other daughter for  assistance.  The  witnesses
also gave evidence of the close bond between the appellant and his  daughter
Amira. Judge King  went  on  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
offence, which involved the supply of drugs and which operated  from  greed.
He noted that the appellant had been assessed in an OASys report  as  a  low
risk of re-offending. He had not re-offended since being released.

Judge King then identified that the  focus  was  on  paragraph  398  of  the
immigration rules but noted that it was  not  argued  that  there  were  any
exceptional circumstances. He then went on to  consider  Article  8  outside
the rules. He noted that considerations in Zambrano and  Sanade  "come  into
play". He found that there was a marked dynamic  of  dependency  within  the
family unit and that that was linked to the emotional and physical need  for
the appellant being present and for the support he gave to  the  family.  He
found that the presence of the appellant brought  stability  to  the  family
and he found that the removal of the  appellant  would  be  disproportionate
and in breach of Article 8.

Judgment of the Court of Appeal

Before the Court of Appeal it was argued  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
State that Judge King, having referred to SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State
for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,  had  failed  to  apply  the
principles set out in the case and had, furthermore, adopted  the  "two-fold
process" in relation to Article 8 which  was  wrong  in  law.  Lord  Justice
Simon,  giving  his  judgment,  referred  to  various  relevant  authorities
including LC (China) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
EWCA Civ 1310 and The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  AJ
(Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 which made clear that there was  no  two-stage
assessment, and concluded that Judge King's approach was erroneous and  that
he had failed to assess Convention rights  "through  the  lens  of  the  new
rules". He had failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  "very  compelling
circumstances" under paragraph 398  which  were  over  and  above  those  in
paragraph 399 and were over and above the fact  that  it  would  be  'unduly
harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person to be  deported'.
Lord Justice Simon also found that Judge King had embarked  on  an  analysis
of the appellant's offending which was not open to him, wrongly finding  the
offending not to be historic and of "short duration".

At [44] of the judgment, Lord Justice Simon said: "In my judgment, this  was
not, on the Upper Tribunal's present findings, a case in which  the  article
8 rights of the Respondent and his close family were compelling.  The  Upper
Tribunal's failure to look at the case through the lens of Rule 398  led  it
to adopt an insufficiently rigorous approach to article 8, and the  decision
it reached cannot be said to  be  the  only  decision  open  to  a  rational
tribunal on the evidence before it. It follows that the  error  of  law  was
material."

Lord Justice Simon commented further that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  allowed
itself to be drawn into a highly subjective view of the family dynamics  and
he referred in particular to Judge King's observations about  the  closeness
of the family. He said that such observations should not  have  carried  any
weight and, further, that he was far from persuaded that the Zambrano  point
bore the significance that the appellant submitted that it did, although  he
made no further comment on the latter point since  full  arguments  had  not
been heard in that regard. He then allowed the appeal and remitted the  case
to the Upper Tribunal "for a decision to  be  made  in  the  light  of  this
judgment and the other judgments to which I have referred".

Appeal in the Upper Tribunal

The appeal then came before me on 14 April 2016.

Ms Harris requested an adjournment  of  the  proceedings  on  the  following
grounds. She submitted that her instructing  solicitors  had  only  received
the notice of hearing on 11 April 2016, having put themselves on  record  as
representatives on 3 March 2016 and,  having  received  no  reply  from  the
Tribunal, then contacted the Tribunal again on 8 April 2016. There had  been
no case management review hearing for the case since the remittal  from  the
Court of Appeal. There was  no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  post-dating
December 2012 and she had no idea of any change in circumstances  since  the
last hearing. Furthermore, she was in professional difficulties as  she  had
only received the papers the previous evening. Ms Brocklesby-Weller  opposed
the adjournment request, submitting that if the factual matrix remained  the
same, it was just a matter of applying that to the immigration rules.


I gave Ms Harris some time to take instructions from the appellant  and  his
wife and mother-in-law who had just arrived and  to  find  out  whether  the
appellant's circumstances were the same or whether there were changes  which
would  require  further  evidence.  Having  taken  instructions,  Ms  Harris
renewed the adjournment request on the basis that  circumstances  had  moved
on. She explained that the appellant's brother-in-law had been diagnosed  in
June 2013 with psychosis and anxiety and had had several  episodes,  in  May
and September last year and February of this year. He was 17  years  of  age
and was on  medication  and  unpredictable.  The  appellant's  mother-in-law
relied on his wife for assistance in such circumstances and she  would  have
to go to her house and leave the children with him. As  regards  his  wife's
pregnancy at the time of the hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge  King,  she
had lost that child in a miscarriage and had since had a  son,  born  on  17
June 2015.


Ms Brocklesby-Weller again opposed the adjournment request, submitting  that
the appellant's brother-in-law's psychosis had  been  mentioned  previously,
to Upper Tribunal Judge King in August 2013, and therefore she was  prepared
to accept his condition and had no objection to oral  evidence  being  given
as to the effect that had on the family.


I did not agree to adjourn  the  proceedings  but  saw  no  reason  why  the
hearing could not proceed with oral evidence and on the  understanding  that
the appellant's brother-in-law's condition  was  not  challenged.  Whilst  I
sympathised with Ms Harris' position, having only recently been  instructed,
I noted that there was nothing on the Tribunal file  to  indicate  that  her
instructing solicitors had put themselves on record  in  March  2016.  Their
letter of 8 April 2016, if anything, indicated that  that  was  their  first
contact with the Tribunal and that also appeared to be the case  from  email
correspondence on file. I also noted that Dotcom Solicitors were  the  legal
representatives in the Court of Appeal proceedings and would therefore  have
been familiar with the case and aware of the  appellant's  circumstances  as
recently as February 2016. There was no reason, in such  circumstances,  why
they had not been able to prepare themselves fully and provide the  Tribunal
with relevant evidence in time for the hearing.  Indeed  I  note  that  they
were criticised by the Court of Appeal for their  lack  of  preparation  for
that appeal. I advised Ms Harris that I would ensure that she  had  as  much
time as needed to prepare.

The appeal then proceeded and I heard oral evidence from the appellant,  his
wife and his  mother-in-law.  All  three  explained  about  the  appellant's
brother-in-law's condition,  that  his  episodes  were  unpredictable,  that
something would trigger his anxiety and depression and that that would  lead
to an episode where he would have delusional ideas, believing himself to  be
a superhero and to be able to fly. He would run out of the  house  into  the
street. The appellant  explained  that  his  mother-in-law,  with  whom  his
brother-in-law lived, could not cope with him during the episodes as he  was
a tall, well-built and strong boy. She would call them and  his  wife  would
go from their home in Enfield to her mother's house in Stevenage  and  would
leave the children with him. They did not want the children exposed  to  his
brother-in-law's behaviour when he had an  episode.  The  episodes  happened
every three to four months.  His  brother-in-law  received  support  from  a
government  organisation  called  CAMHS,  which  gave  him  counselling  and
monitored his medication. The appellant said that his wife worked  16  hours
a week and he looked after the baby when she was at work. She had  a  sister
who provided some support to their mother but she  worked  full-time.  There
was also a problem with their baby as his neck  muscles  in  one  side  were
weak and he had something wrong with his left leg. He was being  seen  by  a
physiotherapist and doctor.

The appellant's wife, Marsha Edwards, explained that their son  had  a  foot
inversion whereby his left foot went to one side and he could not  stand  or
crawl properly. He also had a weak muscle in his neck and his head  went  to
one side, but the doctor had said that it should  hopefully  correct  itself
with physiotherapy  and  exercise.  With  regard  to  her  brother,  a  male
presence was needed as he was big and strong.  The  appellant  was  able  to
calm him down as sometimes her brother did not want her and would only  calm
down with her husband. CAMHS provided assistance but they were  often  short
of beds. Her brother attended a normal school and was in the sixth form.


The appellant's  mother-in-law,  Marvia  Edwards,  explained  that  she  had
several medical conditions affecting her arm and neck and back, which  meant
that she could not bend easily and was often in pain. Her  daughters  helped
her a lot. She found it hard to cope alone with her son as he was  very  big
and strong and would throw things around and break things  when  he  had  an
episode. CAMHS provided help but often had no beds and so she would have  to
call on her daughter and the appellant to help her. The  appellant  was  the
one who would run after him and calm him  down.  He  had  been  hospitalised
three times and sectioned once. At such times a nurse  would  come  to  give
him medication. Her son saw the doctor every two months and  a  psychiatrist
every week. His episodes were unpredictable.  He  was  able  to  look  after
himself on a daily basis usually and would go to school, but then  he  would
do something like leaving the fridge door open when  he  made  something  to
eat and sometimes she would find the floor all wet.


I heard submissions from both parties. Ms Brocklesby-Weller  relied  on  the
case of BL (Jamaica) v The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2016] EWCA Civ 357 which had a  similar  factual  matrix,  as  well  as  LC
(China) involving British children and  the  case  of  PF  (Nigeria)  v  The
Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  251.  She
submitted that the interests of the appellant's children  did  not  outweigh
the public interest.  His  brother-in-law  had  the  support  of  government
agencies as well as family members who were able to  assist  his  mother-in-
law. His mother-in-law was the primary carer and the  appellant's  departure
would not have a compelling impact. There was nothing to tip the  scales  in
the appellant's favour.


Ms Harris submitted that all matters should be  considered  cumulatively  in
assessing whether compelling circumstances existed. The appellant's role  in
caring for his children and his helping with  his  brother-in-law  took  his
case further than it was before Upper Tribunal Judge King.  There  would  be
consequences if the appellant was not there as his wife would  not  be  able
to go to help her mother so  easily.  The  public  services  were  stretched
thinly and could not always assist. The appellant's wife would not  be  able
to continue working if he was not here. The appellant was a low risk of  re-
offending and had completed his rehabilitation. This was now an  exceptional
case.

Consideration and Findings

It  is  for  the  appellant  to  show  that  there   are   very   compelling
circumstances, over and above those in paragraph 399 and  399A,  outweighing
the public interest in his deportation, for the purposes  of  paragraph  398
of the immigration rules.  Having been sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment
of over four years, there is no dispute that  he  cannot  benefit  from  the
exceptions to deportation in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

When  the  appellant's  appeal  came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   King,
paragraph  398  was  expressed  in  terms  of  "exceptional   circumstances"
outweighing the public interest  in  deportation  rather  than  the  current
version of "very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
paragraphs 399 and 399A".  On  the  facts  and  circumstances  before  Upper
Tribunal Judge King it was not  argued  that  there  were  such  exceptional
circumstances. That is recorded at  [58]  of  his  decision.  The  Court  of
Appeal  found  at  [44]  of  their  judgment,  on  those  same   facts   and
circumstances,  that  "this  was  not,  on  the  Upper  Tribunal's   present
findings, a case in which the article 8 rights of  the  Respondent  and  his
close family were compelling".


Accordingly, in order for the appellant now to succeed  in  his  appeal,  he
has to show that the change in his circumstances since  the  hearing  before
Judge  King  takes  his  case  into   the   realms   of   "very   compelling
circumstances". Clearly, even when considering all matters cumulatively,  he
is unable to do so.

With regard to the appellant's family, I accept, as did Judge King, that  it
is a close unit and that the appellant has a  close  relationship  with  his
children. He now has a son as well as his  daughter  Amira  and  clearly  he
plays an important role in both children's lives, with his wife  working  16
hours a week. There can be no doubt  that  it  is  in  the  children's  best
interests for the appellant to remain in the UK and that the  family  remain
together as a unit. However, whilst the  children's  best  interests  are  a
primary consideration, they are not decisive and  must  be  weighed  against
the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals.


The appellant's children are both young, with the eldest, Amira, being  only
seven years of age. Without overlooking the significance of  the  fact  they
were both born in the UK and that residence of seven years as a child  is  a
significant landmark, it is still the case that they are both  young  enough
to adapt to a new  environment.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
appellant's son's medical condition is serious. It has  not  been  diagnosed
and the evidence is that  it  is  currently  hoped  that  the  problem  will
rectify itself with physiotherapy. The fact that the  children  are  British
citizens, and are entitled to the enjoyment of the  rights  that  flow  from
their citizenship, does not mean that they cannot  accompany  the  appellant
to Jamaica. That is the choice of the family. They are  not  being  required
to leave the UK if the appellant is deported but are  able  to  remain  here
with their mother  in  the  UK.  It  would  clearly  be  difficult  for  the
appellant's wife to relocate to Jamaica as she has  her  close  family  ties
here and provides considerable assistance to her mother and brother. She  is
a British citizen and her life is in the UK. However she has a  sister  here
who is able to provide support to her mother and  brother.  Her  brother  is
also receiving  assistance  from  government  agencies.  For  all  of  these
reasons, whilst accepting the difficulties that would arise from the  family
relocating to Jamaica with the appellant I do not consider that it would  be
"unduly harsh" to expect them to do so in the circumstances.

In any event, the focus of the case was on the situation of the  appellant's
wife and children remaining in the  UK  whilst  the  appellant  returned  to
Jamaica. The deportation of appellants involving the separation of a  family
including a British spouse and children has been the subject of recent  case
law where particular emphasis has been placed  on  the  recognition  of  the
significant weight to be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting
foreign criminals, particularly in cases where there has been a sentence  of
more than four years imprisonment.


In LC (China) the Court of Appeal held at [23]:
    "It follows that neither the fact that the appellant's children enjoy
    British nationality nor the fact that they may be separated from their
    father for a long time will be sufficient to constitute exceptional
    circumstances of a kind which outweigh the public interest in his
    deportation. The appellant's children will not be forced to leave the
    UK since, if she chooses to do so, their mother is free to remain with
    them in this country."


In the case of BL, the Court of  Appeal  considered  a  case  in  which  the
circumstances were similar  to  those  of  the  appellant's  insofar  as  it
concerned a similar criminal offence, a family including a  British  partner
and children and a close family  unit  in  which  the  appellant  played  an
important role. Reliance was placed by the appellant, in that case,  on  the
family's inability to cope  without  him.  So,  too,  in  this  case  it  is
submitted that the appellant's presence is required to  provide  support  to
his wife in looking after the children whilst she is at work  and  when  she
is called to assist her mother when her brother  has  a  psychotic  episode,
and is required to assist directly in calming down her  brother.  Whilst  it
is the case that the appellant's wife had to cope with the  family  when  he
was in prison, I accept that at that time she had only one  child  and  that
her brother had not yet been diagnosed with psychosis. I  also  accept  that
the  appellant's  absence  will  be  very  difficult  for  his  wife,   both
emotionally and in coping physically with the demands of her  children,  her
mother and her brother. However, it is her mother who is the main  carer  of
her brother and her mother has the assistance of her sister. Her brother  is
in any event able to cope on a daily basis  for  the  most  part,  attending
school and looking after himself, with  his  episodes  occurring  only  once
every few months.  He  has  a  network  of  support,  from  his  doctor  and
psychiatrist and from CAMHS. Although the support offered by  CAMHS  is  not
without its limits, it is nevertheless there. The  information  provided  to
me from Ms Brocklesby-Weller about CAMHS also mentions  that  once  a  child
reaches the upper age limit and still needs support, they will  be  referred
to other appropriate services for adults. The Court of Appeal emphasised  in
BL that the role which government agencies play in providing assistance  has
to be given weight. The Court said at [53]:

    "The UT were entitled to work on the basis  that  the  social  services
    would  perform  their  duties  under  the  law  and,  contrary  to  the
    submission of Mr Rudd, the UT was not bound in these  circumstances  to
    regard the role of the social services as irrelevant."

Accordingly I  do  not  accept  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
appellant's wife and children to remain in the UK without him following  his
deportation. However even if it  was,  and  even  taking  into  account  the
passage of time since the offending and the low risk of re-offending,  which
the Court of Appeal in any event considered at [43], and taking  account  of
the  public  interest  considerations  in  section  117B  and  117C  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, it cannot be  said  that  the
circumstances over and above that fact are "very  compelling  circumstances"
so as to outweigh the public interest in the appellant's  deportation,  when
considering the nature of his offence and the length of  his  sentence.  The
appellant has family members remaining in Jamaica. He has worked in  Jamaica
and spent his formative years there, having left at the age of 28 years.  He
will therefore be able to reintegrate into life in that  country.  His  wife
and children will be able to visit him there or can elect to relocate  there
as a family. Should circumstances with his family become more compelling  it
will be open to him to apply for the deportation  order  to  be  revoked  so
that he can re-join his family.

 I find, accordingly, that the appellant has failed  to  establish  that  he
falls within the exceptions set out at section 33  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
2007 and his appeal must be dismissed under the  immigration  rules  and  on
human rights grounds.

DECISION

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal on all  grounds.













                               Signed   [pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
