
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00542/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 August 2017                     |On 17 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Silveria Costa da Freitas
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr C Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.   The
    claimant is  a  citizen  of  Portugal  and  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 therefore apply to her removal.

 2. The claimant was born in 1970 and claims to have lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1999.  On 8 October 1998, she was convicted in the Jersey
    Magistrates' Court of  3 counts of importing controlled drugs  resulted
    in the claimant being  bound  over  for  6  months  to  attend  a  drug
    awareness course, put on probation for a  year,  and  sentenced  to  50
    hours of community  service  and  the  confiscation  of  the  drugs  in
    question.  All of these orders were revoked in December 1998  when  the
    sentence was varied.

 3. The Secretary of State's decision to remove the claimant was  taken  on
    30 June 2015 on the basis of her conviction for an offence committed in
    Toxteth in December 2014.   On 6 May 2015, the claimant  was  convicted
    at Liverpool Crown Court  on  charges  of  robbery  and  possession  of
    imitation firearms with intent to cause fear of violence, and sentenced
    to 3 years' imprisonment, to run concurrently. The  judge's  sentencing
    remarks reflect a reduction in sentence for an early guilty  plea,  and
    the claimant's previous good character and lack  of  convictions.   The
    claimant did not appeal against either  conviction  or  sentence.   For
    immigration purposes her conviction will never be spent.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 4. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy who  allowed
    the appeal.  He accepted that this  claimant  has  been  in  a  durable
    relationship with a Portuguese man, also  an  EEA  national,  since  at
    least 1999 and that her partner has been exercising  Treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom since 2006. The couple  have  3  children,  born  20
    August 2000, 16 October 2003, and 16 December 2009,  all  of  whom  are
    Portuguese citizens but have spent all of their  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The eldest child is now 17, the middle one  is  14,  and  the
    youngest is 8 years old.

 5. The judge treated the claimant as a family  member  of  her  Portuguese
    partner, within the meaning of Regulation 21(3) of the 2006 Regulations
    and gave weight to her personal and family circumstances, as Regulation
    21(6)  requires.  He  found  that  the  claimant's  removal  would   be
    disproportionate, that the claimant no longer posed a  medium  risk  to
    the public and known adults, and that any risk she did  pose  was  much
    reduced because she had support structures in place and was  no  longer
    dependent on drugs or methadone, such that she now posed a low risk  of
    reoffending.  The judge held that the claimant's  personal  conduct  no
    longer  posed  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society  and  that  her
    deportation would be disproportionate.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   6. The Secretary of State appealed.  She argued that the claimant was not
      the family member of her partner since she had never held a valid  EEA
      family  permit,  registration  certificate  or  residence   card,   as
      Regulation 7(3) of the 2006 Regulations required.   For  that  reason,
      she could not progress to permanent residence status after 5 years  in
      the United Kingdom.  As regards the claimant's link with her  partner,
      the Secretary of State argued that the claimant could not rely on  the
      relationship to give her permanent residence since she had not  sought
      a residence card as his partner and the grant of a residence card  was
      subject to the exercise of the Secretary of State's  discretion  under
      Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.




   7. It did not appear that the claimant had ever been a  qualified  person
      in her own right.  The Secretary of State accepted that the removal of
      the Regulation 19(3) protection might not make a  material  difference
      to the outcome of the appeal but could do so were she to re-offend  in
      future.   There was a public interest in the  correct  decision  being
      maintained.



   8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there was a  public
      interest  in  the  correct  decision  being  maintained,  despite  the
      likelihood that Regulation  19(3)  protection  would  not  affect  the
      outcome.



   9. The claimant, who represents herself, did not file a Rule 24 Reply  to
      the grant of permission.

Regulation 7:  EEA family members

10. The definition of EEA family member is at  Regulation  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations:



        "Family member

          7.-(1) Subject to paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
        Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
        members of another person-

             (a)  his spouse or his civil partner; ...

                  (d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of
             that other person under paragraph (3). ...

          (3)     Subject to paragraph (4), a person  who  is  an  extended
        family member and has been issued with  an EEA family  permit,  a
        registration certificate or a residence card shall  be  treated  as
        the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long  as  he
        continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or
        (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or
        card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked. "


11. This claimant cannot qualify as a family member under  that  provision.
    She has never held an EEA family permit,  registration  certificate  or
    residence card. The grant of a residence card  is  discretionary  (Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal : Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC)) and  therefore
    the claimant cannot show that  she  has  been  living   in  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for any period.

Regulation 19(3) and Regulation 21

12. The removal regime under the Regulations  is  set  out  in  Regulations
    19(3) and 21.  By Regulation 19(3):

         19.-... (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5),  a  person  who  has
         been admitted to, or acquired a right  to  reside  in,  the  United
         Kingdom under these Regulations may  be  removed  from  the  United
         Kingdom if-

             (a)he does not have or ceases to have a right to reside  under
             these Regulations; or

             (b)he would otherwise be entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary of State has
             decided that his removal is justified on the grounds of public
             policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
             regulation 21."

    The exceptions in sub-paragraphs 19(4) and (5) are  not  applicable  to
    this claimant.

13. Regulation 21 sets out the basis on  which  removal  decisions  may  be
    made:

             "Decisions taken on public policy, public security and  public
             health grounds

             21.-(1)  In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)      A  relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  to  serve
             economic ends.

             (3)      A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a
             person with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.
             ...

             (5)      Where a relevant decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
             public policy or public security  it  shall,  in  addition  to
             complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

             (6)      Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of
             public policy or public security in relation to a  person  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."

  14. That is  the  statutory  basis  on  which  this  application  must  be
      considered.








Upper Tribunal hearing




  15. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr Bates for  the  respondent  did  not
      challenge the judge's findings of fact but argued  that  nevertheless,
      the incorrect 'serious grounds' threshold had been  applied  and  that
      such a finding would be important, if  the  claimant  were  to  offend
      again.




  16. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

17. It is clear that the claimant cannot demonstrate 5 years' residence  in
    accordance with the Regulations, as it is not her  case  that  she  has
    worked for 5 years or that she has ever held a document enabling her to
    be treated as a family member pursuant to Regulation 7(3) of  the  2006
    Regulations.  Only the basic level of protection therefore  applies  to
    this claimant.



  18. Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Regulations, a decision to deport  an
      EEA national is a 'relevant decision' and the Secretary of  State  may
      make such a decision only on the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
      security or public health.  This decision was made on that basis.


  19. The respondent is not  entitled  to  rely  solely  on  the  claimant's
      conviction, in reaching a decision on this application.   The  judge's
      finding that the claimant now poses a low risk to the public, based on
      her present circumstances,  is  not  challenged.   Nor  is  there  any
      challenge to his finding that her removal would be disproportionate.


  20. On the basis of those  findings,  it  is  appropriate  to  remake  the
      decision in this appeal in the claimant's favour.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision.  I  re-make
the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Signed:      Judith A J C Gleeson                Date: 16 August 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

