


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00581/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Birmingham Magistrates' Court      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 5 November 2014                          |On : 11 November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               ALI OSMAN HIRSI
                            (NO aNONYMITY oRDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before us following a grant of permission to appeal on  16
September 2014.

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 2 February 1993.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom together with his three brothers on 18  June  2003  to
join their father who was already settled here. He was ten years of  age  at
the time. He and his brothers were granted indefinite leave  to  enter  upon
entry although, as was later confirmed to his  solicitors,  not  by  way  of
family reunion as refugees. From 2008/9 the  appellant  committed,  and  was
convicted of, various criminal offences.

On 5 January 2009 he was convicted of  attempt/robbery,  for  which  he  was
made the subject of a referral order for 12 months and was  ordered  to  pay
compensation and costs.   On  6  July  2010  he  was  convicted  of  assault
occasioning actual bodily harm for which he was sentenced to  a  four  month
detention and also convicted, on the same day, of theft from  a  person  for
which he was sentenced to a detention and training order for four months  to
run  concurrently.  On  29  December  2011  he  was  convicted  of   assault
occasioning actual bodily harm for which he was sentenced to 18 weeks  in  a
young offenders institution.

On 4 May 2012 and 3 July 2012 the appellant was convicted on two  counts  of
robbery for which  he  was  sentenced  on  15  August  2012  to  12  months'
detention in a youth offenders institution for  count  one  and  received  a
concurrent  sentence  of  12  months'  detention  in   a   young   offenders
institution for count two. He did  not  appeal  against  his  conviction  or
sentence. On 5 September 2012 he was served with a notice  of  liability  to
deportation to which he responded and claimed  asylum.  He  was  interviewed
about his asylum claim on 4 December 2012. His asylum claim was  refused.  A
decision was made on 13 August 2013 that section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders
Act 2007 applied and a deportation order was signed  against  him  the  same
day. He appealed against that decision.

The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he  feared  returning  to
Somalia because he had no-one there and that he would  be  at  risk  as  his
clan was not welcome there. He claimed that all  of  his  family,  including
his father, three brothers, three step-brothers and two step-sisters,  lived
in the United Kingdom. His mother had died in 1998. His uncle  was  shot  in
Mogadishu and all of his family left the  country.  He  was  from  the  Habr
Younis clan. His main reason for wishing to live in the United  Kingdom  was
that he wanted to go to college and get a job and have a  better  life.  All
of his family was here and there was nothing for him in Somalia.

With respect to the  deportation  decision,  the  appellant  relied  on  the
exceptions in s33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007,  specifically  the  risk  on
return to Somalia and his human rights  including  his  lack  of  family  in
Somalia and the fact that he had lived in the United Kingdom since  the  age
of ten.

The respondent, in making the decision on 13  August  2013,  considered  the
appellant's asylum claim and noted  that  his  father,  in  his  own  asylum
claim, had claimed to be from the Ashraf clan, sub-clan Rer  Sharif  Hassan,
a minority clan. The Habr Younis clan, however, was a sub clan of the  Isaaq
clan which was one of the majority Somali clans. The  respondent  considered
that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on  the  basis  of  either  clan
membership. As a  member  of  the  Habr  Younis  clan,  he  would  have  the
protection  afforded  to  members  of  a  majority  clan.  With  regard   to
membership of the Ashraf  clan,  consideration  was  given  to  the  country
guidance in AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 and it was concluded that  he  would  not  be  at
risk. The respondent considered  that  the  situation  in  Somalia,  and  in
particular Mogadishu, had changed  considerably  since  AMM,  and  concluded
that there was no longer a general  risk  of  Article  15(c)  harm  for  the
majority of those returning to the city and  that  the  appellant  would  be
able to work and  avoid  the  Internally  Displaced  People's  (IDP)  camps.
Accordingly he was not entitled to asylum  or  humanitarian  protection  and
his removal would not breach Article 3 of the ECHR. It  was  considered,  in
any event, that the appellant  was  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection
under paragraph 339D(i) of the immigration rules, on the grounds that  there
were serious reasons for considering that he had committed a serious  crime.


With regard to Article 8, the  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  fell
within paragraph 398(ii)  of  the  immigration  rules  but  that  paragraphs
399(a) and (b) did  not  apply  to  him  as  he  was  not  in  a  subsisting
relationship and did not have any children. With respect to paragraph  399A,
it was considered that he had not spent half  of  his  life  in  the  United
Kingdom (taking  account  of  periods  of  imprisonment)  and  that  he  had
retained ties to Somalia. Accordingly he could not meet the requirements  of
that  provision.  It  was  considered  that  there   were   no   exceptional
circumstances that would outweigh the public  interest  in  his  deportation
and it was therefore not accepted that his deportation would breach  Article
8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal, by a panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frankish
and Mr G Getlevog. The panel heard oral evidence from the appellant and  his
brother and cousin/brother-in-law and considered a  witness  statement  from
another brother. It was noted that a reference by  the  respondent,  in  the
reasons for deportation letter, to the appellant having been born and  lived
in Kenya before coming to the United Kingdom was in error and  that  he  had
in fact lived in Somalia from birth until the age of  ten.  The  panel  made
particular observations about the limited support afforded to the  appellant
in his appeal by family members, with only two family members attending  but
no attendance by or letters of support from his father, his  sister  or  his
elder brother. They noted the contradictory evidence of  the  appellant  and
his witnesses as to the reasons for the absence of his  father  and  brother
and concluded that that, together with his denial of responsibility for  the
criminal offence, indicated that  he  had  "mendacious  propensities".  They
also concluded that the appellant's ties  with  his  family  in  the  United
Kingdom, other than the witnesses, were tenuous and that  they  appeared  to
have washed their hands of him. The  panel  noted  that  the  appellant  was
claiming before them to be from the Ashraf clan, as opposed to his  previous
evidence that he was from the Habr Younis clan, but they rejected  that  new
claim. They also rejected his claim to know nothing of  the  Somali  culture
and little of the language. With regard to the appellant's criminal  history
and risk of re-offending, they concluded that he remained a continuing  risk
to the public.

Having made those findings of fact the panel  then  considered  the  country
guidance in AMM and noted the improvements in the  country  situation  since
the guidance was issued. They concluded that the appellant was not  in  need
of refugee status and that his Article 3 and humanitarian protection  claims
fell with his asylum claim. They noted that in any  event  he  was  excluded
from humanitarian protection. With regard  to  Article  8,  they  considered
paragraph 398 and 399A, concluding  that  he  could  not  benefit  from  the
latter as he had not spent half of his life in the  United  Kingdom  outside
prison and  that  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances  insufficiently
considered outside the rules. The appeal was accordingly  dismissed  on  all
grounds.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  the  grounds  that
the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to apply the  country  guidance
in AMM, in that it had failed to explain why the appellant would not  be  at
risk on return considering his vulnerability, having arrived in  the  United
Kingdom at the age of  ten  years;  and  that  it  had  not  given  adequate
consideration to Article 8, in that it had failed adequately to  assess  the
appellant's particular circumstances and why he would have  ties  to  return
to in Somalia and had failed to give reasoning as to why  his  circumstances
were not compelling and exceptional.

Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  following  a  renewed
application on the same  grounds  was  granted  on  16  September  2014,  in
particular on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had  arguably  failed
to give adequate consideration  to  the  question  of  Article  3  risk  and
Article 15(c) harm in the light of the decision in AMM.

Appeal hearing and submissions

At the hearing we raised the point that, whilst permission was given  partly
in relation to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of  risk  under  Article
15(c), the panel had in fact concluded that the appellant was excluded  from
humanitarian protection. Mr Howard was invited to address the point  in  his
submissions if that part of the grounds was being  pursued.  He  advised  us
that the finding at paragraph 21 of the determination,  that  the  appellant
remained a danger to the public, was not challenged  and  that  the  grounds
did  not  challenge  the  finding  that  the  appellant  was  excluded  from
humanitarian protection. He did not seek to amend the  grounds  and  pursued
the appeal in relation to Articles 3 and 8, although we had  to  remind  him
from time to time of the remit of the  challenge  when  he  appeared  to  be
relying upon those parts of the country guidance  relating  to  humanitarian
protection.

Mr Howard submitted that the First-tier Tribunal gave  no  reasons  for  its
findings in relation to Article 3 and failed to consider  and  undertake  an
assessment of the appellant's vulnerability  pursuant  to  the  findings  at
paragraph 595 of AMM. He submitted that the Tribunal's error in  failing  to
consider the relevant country guidance at that time was material, since  the
more recent guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return  to  Mogadishu)  [2014]  UKUT  442
also required a detailed assessment of a person's circumstances  on  return,
as set out in paragraphs 407(h) and 408 of that decision. The  Tribunal  had
had no regard to the fact that the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  as
a child of ten years of age. His lengthy absence from Somalia  was  relevant
to the question of vulnerability.  With  regard  to  Article  8,  Mr  Howard
accepted the Tribunal's findings at paragraph 25 of  its  determination  and
accepted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
399A. However he submitted that there was no proper  assessment  of  whether
or not there were compelling circumstances, considering  in  particular  the
appellant's claim to have no family in Somalia, and no proper  reasons  were
given for concluding that his circumstances were not compelling.

Mr Mills submitted that  it  was  clear  from  the  Tribunal's  findings  at
paragraph 23 of its determination that it had the respondent's position,  as
set out in the refusal letter, in mind,  in  concluding  that  circumstances
had  changed  in  Mogadishu  since  AMM.  The  Tribunal  therefore  properly
considered that it was not bound to follow  the  guidance  in  AMM.  However
even if it was  bound  to  follow  AMM,  the  Tribunal  made  clear  adverse
credibility findings against the appellant and concluded that  he  had  made
up his claim as to the risk on return to Mogadishu. The panel  rejected  his
claim to be from the Ashraf clan and implicitly found that he was  from  the
Habr Younis clan, part of  a  majority  clan,  and  as  such  would  not  be
returning as a vulnerable individual but as a member of a powerful clan  who
could provide him with  support.  The  only  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
appellant in claiming to be vulnerable was the age  when  he  left  Somalia,
but that was not a category referred to in the  country  guidance  as  being
vulnerable. The appellant would not end up in an IDP camp  as  he  would  be
able to work. Any error in failing to  specifically  consider  vulnerability
was not in any event material, given the new guidance in  MOJ.  With  regard
to Article 8, the Tribunal had considered all  relevant  matters  and  there
was nothing that they had overlooked in terms of compelling circumstances.

Mr Howard, in reply, reiterated his earlier submissions, in particular  that
the Tribunal was required to make findings on the appellant's  vulnerability
and likelihood of having to go into an IDP camp but failed to do so.

We asked Mr Howard to clarify, in the context of considering materiality  of
any arguable error by the panel, whether there was any evidence before  them
of vulnerability other than the fact that the  appellant  had  been  in  the
United Kingdom since the age  of  ten.  He  advised  us  that  the  evidence
consisted of the accounts given by the appellant and the witnesses, that  he
been in the United Kingdom since the age of ten, that all his family was  in
the United Kingdom and that his ability in the Somali language was  limited.
He confirmed that there was no documentary evidence and no medical  evidence
relevant to the question of vulnerability.

After careful deliberation, we advised the parties that we  did  not  accept
that the Tribunal had made any errors of law such that  its  decision  ought
to be set aside. Our reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

As clarified at the hearing, the grounds relating to Article  15(c)  of  the
Qualification Directive were not pursued, given the Tribunal's  unchallenged
finding that the appellant was excluded  from  humanitarian  protection.  As
such the references made by Mr Howard to paragraphs 357 and 594 of AMM  were
of no relevance, they being related to the question of  Article  15(c)  risk
in Mogadishu.

It was Mr Howard's submission that the Tribunal  had  erred  by  failing  to
follow the country guidance in AMM in relation to an assessment  of  Article
3 risk, as set out at paragraph 595, which states as follows:

    "The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not, however, pose a real risk of
    Article 3 harm in respect of any person in  that  city,  regardless  of
    circumstances. The humanitarian crisis in southern and central  Somalia
    has led to a declaration of famine in IDP camps  in  Mogadishu;  but  a
    returnee from the United Kingdom who is fit  for  work  or  has  family
    connections may be able to avoid having to  live  in  such  a  camp.  A
    returnee may, nevertheless, face a real risk  of  Article  3  harm,  by
    reason of his or her vulnerability."

Mr Howard's submission was that the Tribunal  ought  to  have  undertaken  a
detailed consideration of the appellant's circumstances on return  in  order
to assess his vulnerability and that it had not done so.

Whilst, in light of paragraph 407(h) of MOJ, we  do  not  necessarily  agree
with the submission that the new country guidance  does  away  with  such  a
requirement and thus renders any such omission immaterial, we consider  that
the Tribunal did in fact take into  account  all  factors  relevant  to  the
appellant's circumstances. We agree that it could have done  so  in  clearer
and  more  organised  and  detailed  terms.  Nevertheless,  there   was   an
assessment.

The panel were plainly aware of the age at which the appellant came  to  the
United Kingdom and his period of absence from Somalia, but they  noted  that
he had spent his entire life in a Somali household and  amongst  the  United
Kingdom expatriot Somali community. They rejected his claim to know  nothing
of the Somali culture and little of the language,  concluding  that  he  was
immersed in the Somali culture and that the first language of his  household
was Somali. They considered the appellant's clan and rejected his  claim  to
be from the minority Ashraf clan, concluding implicitly at paragraph  18  of
its determination that he was from the Habr Younis clan. That clan,  as  the
respondent has clarified in the reasons for deportation letter, is  part  of
the powerful majority Isaaq clan and is connected to another majority  clan,
the Dir clan. The  Tribunal's  conclusion  in  that  respect  has  not  been
challenged in the grounds. The panel found the appellant's  family  ties  in
the United Kingdom to be largely tenuous.  Whilst  they  did  not  make  any
specific findings in regard to family ties to Somalia, it is  apparent  from
their findings at paragraph 27 that they did not accept  the  uncorroborated
evidence of the appellant and his witnesses as to the  lack  of  such  ties,
considering them to  be  unreliable  witnesses  and,  in  the  case  of  the
appellant,  to  be  "mendacious".  There  has  been  no  challenge  to   the
Tribunal's adverse credibility  findings.  The  Tribunal  also  plainly  had
regard to AMM and the guidance therein and furthermore, on the basis of  the
background evidence before them, noted at paragraph 23 of its  determination
that the situation in Somalia  had  improved  since  the  decision  in  AMM,
having particular regard to reports of economic prosperity returning to  the
country. Again, that conclusion has not been challenged and indeed has  been
supported by the new country guidance in MOJ. Accordingly it is  plain  that
the  Tribunal  did  undertake  an  assessment  of   relevant   factors   and
circumstances, both particular to the  appellant  and  in  general,  in  the
United Kingdom and on return to Mogadishu.

It is the case that the  Tribunal  did  not  address  the  question  of  the
appellant's vulnerability on return to Somalia in specific  terms.  However,
when asked to clarify what evidence had been before the First-tier  Tribunal
to support the submissions now made  in  regard  to  his  vulnerability,  Mr
Howard accepted that, other than the fact of his age on entry to the  United
Kingdom and length  of  absence  from  Somalia,  there  was  only  the  oral
evidence of the appellant and the  witnesses  as  to  the  lack  of  family,
linguistic and cultural ties. The claim in  those  respects,  in  particular
the latter two, had, however, been rejected by the Tribunal.  We  note  that
there was no documentary or other evidence before the  Tribunal  to  suggest
that the appellant had any medical or other problems which could  give  rise
to particular difficulties in Somalia and neither were any reasons given  as
to why he would be unable to find employment, other than  his  claim  as  to
his limited ability in the Somali language, which the  panel  had  rejected.
On the contrary, the evidence produced demonstrated  that  he  had  acquired
some  qualifications  which,  together  with  his  ability  to  converse  in
English, would no doubt assist him in finding employment in Somalia. It  was
also apparent from the evidence before the Tribunal that far  from  being  a
vulnerable character, the appellant's criminal  history  suggested  that  he
was a particularly robust character.

In the circumstances, it seems to us  that  there  was  nothing  before  the
Tribunal to demonstrate that  the  appellant  would  face  a  real  risk  of
Article 3 harm in Somalia by  reason  of  vulnerability.  In  terms  of  the
guidance in paragraph 595 of AMM, even if he had no  family  connections  in
Somalia, there was no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that he  would
have to live in an IDP camp, given his employment prospects and ability,  as
a member of the Habr Younis clan, to access majority clan support. The  same
would apply to the terms of the relevant assessment at paragraph  407(h)  of
MOJ,  which  is,  significantly,  qualified  by  the  requirement  for   the
potential returnee to provide an explanation  why  he  would  be  unable  to
access the economic opportunities produced by the  'economic  boom'  in  the
country. As already stated, the appellant provided no such explanation.

Accordingly we find no error of law in the Tribunal's Article  3  assessment
and conclusions.

Turning to the second ground,  in  the  absence  of  any  challenge  to  the
Tribunal's findings under paragraph 399A of the immigration  rules  -  which
we  consider  were  properly  made  -  the  only  issue  is  the  Tribunal's
assessment of compelling or exceptional circumstances for  the  purposes  of
paragraph 398. In that respect we agree with Mr Mills' submission  that,  on
the available evidence, there was nothing that the Tribunal  could  be  said
to have overlooked by way of compelling circumstances.  As  we  have  stated
above  the  panel  gave  careful  consideration  to  the  appellant's   clan
membership and cultural and linguistic ties  to  Somalia  and  rejected  the
claims that he made to be at risk on the basis of  clan  membership  and  in
regard to a lack of relevant cultural and linguistic ties. Whilst  they  did
not make any specific finding in regard  to  family  ties  to  Somalia  they
noted that his family ties in the United Kingdom were limited in so  far  as
it appeared that many of his family members had washed their  hands  of  him
and they were not prepared to place  weight  upon  his  own  unsubstantiated
claim as to a lack of ties in Somalia. In any event they found that  he  was
a member of a majority clan and that he was immersed in his  Somali  culture
and language. There was no reason for them to consider his  age  on  arrival
in the United Kingdom and the period of time spent in the United Kingdom  as
amounting to compelling circumstances, given the many other adverse  factors
to which they referred in detail. Accordingly we find no  error  of  law  in
the Tribunal's consideration of Article 8 and  the  conclusions  reached  in
that regard.

For all of these reasons we conclude that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any  errors  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's  decision  requiring  the
decision to be set aside.


DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. We do not  set  aside  the  decision.
The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  deportation  appeal  therefore
stands.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. However, we  do
    not consider that there is any need for such an order to  continue  and
    accordingly, having regard to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008), we decline to continue that order.





                               Signed   Date 11 November 2014


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
