

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00963/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 May 2014                                |On 20th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     H N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         Background

    1. This appeal comes before me following the  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal to the Secretary of State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes
       on 26 March 2014. For continuity, however, I shall refer to H  N  as
       the appellant and to the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Burundi born on 7 July 1981.
       He initially entered the UK  illegally  in  February  2003,  claimed
       asylum thereafter but, due to non compliance,  his  application  was
       refused on 1 July 2003. The claim was  subsequently  resurrected  on
       the basis that the appellant had not been  aware  of  the  scheduled
       asylum interview but was refused again on 15 January  2004  and  his
       appeal was dismissed on 12 May 2004. The appellant then  voluntarily
       returned to Burundi.


    3. On 17 December 2006, he then came back to  the  UK,  using  a  false
       passport and having travelled  from  Norway  where  he  had  claimed
       asylum.  Another  claim  was  made  in  the   UK.   Prior   to   its
       determination, the appellant was convicted of possession of a  false
       identity document and received a 15  month  prison  sentence.  On  2
       August 2007 he was served with a  notice  of  intention  to  make  a
       deportation order and on 4 March 2008 his asylum claim was  refused.
       His appeal against that decision was dismissed on 26 June  2008  and
       on 12 August 2008 a deportation order was signed. Removal directions
       were set and the appellant was deported with escorts on 8  September
       2008. On 5 October 2008 the appellant was returned to  the  UK.  The
       Secretary of State was informed this was because he had  claimed  to
       be from the DRC and subsequently claimed to be  from  Mali.  Various
       attempts were then made to document the appellant  but  he  remained
       uncooperative. He initially claimed at an interview that he had been
       released from detention in Burundi after a few days but  then  later
       changed his mind and maintained he  did  not  remember  anything.  A
       language analysis concluded that his Swahili was spoken in  Tanzania
       and not Burundi. On 25 February 2010 he  claimed  he  was  not  from
       Burundi but refused to provide any further information. He  was  re-
       interviewed in respect of his asylum  claim  on  15  September  2011
       following a  fresh  application  made  on  30  March  2010.  Further
       evidence was sought by the Secretary of  State  in  respect  of  the
       appellant's  claimed  mental  health  issues.  On  7  May  2013  the
       respondent refused to revoke the deportation order.


    4. The appeal against the refusal to revoke the deportation order  came
       before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dineen  and  Mr  P  Bompas  on  25
       October 2013 but, regrettably, the determination  was  not  prepared
       until 6 March 2014  and  was  promulgated  on  14  March  2014.  The
       Tribunal allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds.  It
       took the previous two determinations as the starting point, accepted
       the appellant was Burundian and had had involvement  with  the  FNL,
       considered the medical evidence submitted  and  concluded  that  the
       appellant had been persecuted in 2006.  "Against  that  background",
       it then considered the warrants submitted by the appellant (actually
       translated as "wanted notices") were genuine but concluded that that
       even if they were not, that was immaterial given the findings on the
       other evidence. That decision was challenged by the  respondent  and
       permission to appeal was granted.






    Appeal hearing


    5. I heard submissions from Mr  Duffy  and  Ms  Walker.  Mr  Duffy  was
       hindered by the absence of a complete file  but  was  able  to  make
       submissions from the documents  he  had.  He  sought  to  amend  the
       grounds to argue  that  there  had  been  a  lack  of  reasons  from
       departing from the two  earlier  determinations  particularly  as  a
       medical report  had  been  before  the  Tribunal  at  one  of  those
       hearings. He submitted  this  was  a  Robinson  obvious  point.   He
       accepted that the panel had probably meant to allow the appeal  only
       on  Article  3  grounds  (and  asylum)  given  the  observations  at
       paragraph 73 on Article 8 but argued that the conclusion should have
       been put in a clearer way. He submitted  that  the  main  issue  was
       whether there was a risk to FNL supporters at the present  time  and
       that had not been engaged with.  The  determination  should  be  set
       aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


    6. Ms Walker opposed the application to amend the grounds. With  regard
       to the main issue, she argued that it  was  not  necessary  for  the
       panel to consider the background evidence in this case  due  to  the
       appellant's circumstances. The assessment of risk had been  adequate
       if the starting point was that the appellant was at risk because  of
       what had happened when he was returned in 2008. Additionally,  there
       were outstanding  warrants  which  would  place  him  at  risk.  The
       appellant was vulnerable because of his mental health  problems;  he
       suffered from PTSD and was on anti depressants.


    7.  In  a  brief  response  Mr  Duffy  submitted  there  had  been   no
       consideration of the background  evidence,  the  findings  were  not
       adequately reasoned and the determination was therefore unsafe.


    8. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that I would be setting
       aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. I now give  full
       reasons for that decision.


    Conclusions


    9. I  have  considered  the  determination,  the  submissions  and  the
       skeleton argument to which I was referred.


   10. There is no merit in the second of the two arguments advanced in the
       grounds for the respondent and in fairness, Mr Duffy did not seek to
       pursue it. It was argued by the respondent that the panel's findings
       on Article 8 were flawed and that no reasons were given for allowing
       the appeal on that basis.  In  fact,  as  may  be  clearly  seen  at
       paragraph  73  of  the  determination,  the  panel  found  that  the
       appellant would not be entitled to protection under  Article  8  for
       the reasons set out therein. The decision to  allow  the  appeal  on
       human rights grounds (which I agree could have been more clearly put
       in the decision  paragraph)  was  under  Article  3  only  and  that
       decision flowed from the decision on the asylum  claim,  both  being
       based on the same claimed facts.


   11.  There is, however, merit in the first ground. The premise on  which
       the analysis of risk was based (see paragraph 54) takes  no  account
       of the changes in Burundi since the appellant's  detention  in  2006
       when he was found to have conducted a business transaction  with  an
       FNL rebel (he had to pay them to allow safe  passage  of  his  goods
       which  were  being  imported  from  Rwanda)  and  was  suspected  of
       association with them. As such, it  is  flawed.  The  respondent  is
       right  to  complain  that  the  panel  failed   to   undertake   any
       consideration of the current country evidence on Burundi.


   12. Extracts from relevant reports and relevant events are  set  out  at
       length in the refusal letter. These refer to changes over  the  last
       several years and certainly since the appellant's claimed arrest for
       contact with the FNL in 2006. The evidence shows that  the  FNL  and
       other rebel groups integrated into the government, that a peace pact
       was signed, that the FNL disarmed  and  registered  as  a  political
       party in  2009,  that  3,500  FNL  combatants  integrated  into  the
       government  and  the  police  force,  that  thousands  had  received
       assistance and that 24 of the group's leaders had been  assigned  to
       senior civil service positions.  It  may  be  seen  that  the  panel
       allowed the appeal on the basis of the  appellant's  claim  to  have
       been arrested and tortured in 2006 because of his FNL  links.  There
       was no consideration at all of how the changes summarised above  may
       have impacted upon the risk to the appellant were he to be  returned
       at the current time. In the context of these changes  it  cannot  be
       said, as the panel found, that if the appellant  was  persecuted  in
       2006, he would "again be subject to such  persecutory  treatment  on
       account of his past history, upon his  identity  being  ascertained"
       (at  paragraph  54).   That  is  plainly   a   material   error   as
       consideration of the evidence could well have  led  to  a  different
       outcome. I cannot speculate on whether the  delayed  preparation  of
       this determination had anything to do with the failure  to  consider
       all the evidence but the bundles are on file  and  therefore  should
       have been taken into account in the assessment of risk.


   13. The panel also found that the appellant would be at risk of  similar
       treatment on return to that which he was subjected to  upon  removal
       in 2008. That alleged persecution consisted of being ill treated  by
       UKBA enforcement officers who escorted him to Burundi and  allegedly
       mistreated him there and his subsequent detention, interrogation and
       beatings.  The findings in respect of this risk are at paragraphs 69
       and 70.  However,  the  panel  fails  to  address  the  respondent's
       rejection of the alleged ill treatment by the UKBA (for reasons  set
       out at paragraphs 56-57 of the refusal letter).  It  also  fails  to
       take account  of  the  appellant's  inconsistent  accounts  of  what
       transpired on his return with regard to detention (at paragraphs 13,
       53 and 58) and appears to assume, without any factual basis, that he
       would have been held in order to be returned to the  UK.  The  panel
       does not consider the option of the appellant being asked to  report
       back for removal, such as often occurs in the UK or his evidence  at
       interview that he had been released after a few  days  in  detention
       (paragraph 13). The panel found that if returned, his identity would
       be ascertained and he would be at risk because of the 2006  incident
       but, as already explained, that is a flawed finding as that risk was
       assessed without consideration for the changed situation in Burundi.
       Further, if, as is argued by Ms Walker in her skeleton argument,  it
       must be accepted that the appellant cannot be  expected  to  conceal
       his identity on return, then it cannot also be argued that he  would
       the same treatment he did when last returned when he lied about  his
       nationality and claimed both to be Congolese and from Mali. And,  it
       cannot automatically be assumed that he would be at risk because  of
       the 2006 incident because of the reasons I have already  set  out  -
       the failure to engage with the background evidence. Ms  Walker  also
       argued that the appellant would be at risk  nonetheless  because  of
       the warrants but  the  panel  did  not  engage  with  that  evidence
       adequately and made no clear finding as to their reliability one way
       or another. Further, even if the warrants were  genuine,  the  panel
       should still have engaged with whether they would be enforced  given
       the changes that had occurred in Burundi and with the FNL since  the
       appellant's departure.


   14. For all these reasons, I find that  the  panel  erred  in  law  when
       making its decision on asylum and Article 3.


   15. I have considered whether there are  any  findings  that  should  be
       preserved. The main positive findings were that  the  appellant  was
       from Burundi, that he had been detained in 2006 and again on  return
       in 2008.  Despite the contradictory evidence from the  appellant  as
       to his nationality and the language report  suggesting  his  dialect
       was from Tanzania, the respondent  has  not  directly  disputed  the
       claimed nationality and indeed sought to remove him to Burundi after
       he lost his asylum and deportation appeals. There was thus  no  need
       to specifically make a finding on nationality as the panel did given
       that it had not been challenged in the refusal letter and it follows
       that there is no need to preserve that finding.


   16.  The panel found that the appellant's account of the 2006  detention
       was credible  because  of  the  medical  evidence  which  showed  he
       suffered from episodes of depression, had scarring and that he could
       clasp his hands  behind  his  back  and  bring  them  forward  which
       supported his claim of being handcuffed. However, the panel did  not
       give adequate reasons for departing from the decisions  of  the  two
       previous  judges  who  had  found  his  claim  to  be   lacking   in
       credibility. As Mr Duffy pointed out, there had  also  been  medical
       evidence before at least one of them. For  that  reason,  I  do  not
       preserve that finding.


   17.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside
       in its entirety. It is not suggested  that  the  appellant  has  any
       Article 8  claim  and  it  is  unlikely  that  he  can  develop  any
       compelling  claim  in  the  period  that  has   passed   since   the
       determination of his appeal in March, but the determination has been
       set aside and so it follows that  all  matters  are  to  be  decided
       afresh.






    Decision


   18. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and the decision  is  set
       aside in its entirety. The decision shall be  re-made  at  a  future
       hearing before another judge or panel of the First-tier Tribunal.




    Anonymity


   19. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  That
       order is continued (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).








       Signed:


       [pic]


       Dr R Keki?
       Upper Tribunal Judge


       Date: 19 May 2014


