
                                                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: DA/00487/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 October 2015                             |On 2 November 2015                |
|                                              |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S STOREY

                                  Between:
                                  N--- T---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    Respondent. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. We make this order because  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has made a similar order and we do not want there to be any  possibility
    of the Respondent being put at risk on return  by  reason  of  publicity
    about this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the  respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of State  that  he
    be deported.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal gave  a  very  thorough,  careful  and  measured
    Decision.  The First-tier Tribunal looked into all of the  circumstances
    raised on the claimant's behalf and took note particularly of  the  fact
    that the claimant has been in the United Kingdom since  he  was  only  7
    years old or thereabouts and was  25  years  old  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

 4. The Tribunal also took note  of  his  personal  circumstances  and  made
    reasoned and clear findings about his relationship with his partner  and
    his child and his protestations about his future behaviour.

 5. The claimant is subject to a deportation order because of  his  criminal
    record.  Most recently he was sent to prison  for  seven  years  for  an
    offence of wounding.  As is implicit in a sentence of that length it was
    a very nasty incident.  Its relevance for these proceedings is  that  it
    was a sentence of four years or more  and  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    recognised it is very difficult to allow appeals in those circumstances.
    They can only be allowed if there are compelling circumstances over  and
    above the exceptions recognised in  Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The precise legal test is set  out  at
    section 117C(6) which states:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

 6. All the things that might have constituted very compelling circumstances
    were aired  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who  found  against  the
    claimant in all but one very important respect.

 7.   The First-tier Tribunal was aware of the decision of the High Court in
    The Queen v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte P (DRC)
    and R v SSHD, ex parte R (DRC) [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin) where Phillips J
    was presented with very cogent evidence that anybody returned to the DRC
    who had been imprisoned in the United Kingdom would be  of  interest  to
    the authorities in the DRC so that they risked serious ill-treatment  by
    prolonged confinement in internationally unacceptable conditions. If  we
    may respectfully comment, that decision  was  wholly  justified  on  the
    evidence before the court.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal thought it had to follow that decision.   We  do
    not know why the judge thought that.  The decision of the High Court was
    clearly fact-specific and the First-tier Tribunal's task was to  make  a
    decision on all of the evidence before it which included the fact of the
    High Court's finding  but  also  additional  evidence  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State.

 9. At paragraph 36 of its Decision the First-tier Tribunal showed  that  is
    considered itself obliged to follow the decision of the High  Court.  It
    was wrong to think that, not because High Court decisions are not to  be
    respected but because findings of fact in the High  Court  do  not  bind
    subsequent findings  made  on  different  evidence.   We  found  this  a
    surprising error in what is otherwise a very thoughtful  and  considered
    decision.

10. As the First-tier Tribunal expected, the  decision  was  challenged  and
    permission to appeal was given. Since then we  have  the  benefit  of  a
    country guidance decision which is reported as BM and Others  (returnees
    - criminal and non-criminal)  (CG)  [2015]  UKUT  00293  (IAC)  where  a
    division of this Tribunal (the  President,  Mr  Justice  McCloskey  with
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan)  looked  very  carefully  at  the  evidence
    relating to returning someone to the DRC and was wholly unpersuaded that
    there is any general risk as a consequence of  criminal  convictions  in
    the United Kingdom.

11. Paragraph 119 of the  decision  in  BM  could  hardly  be  clearer.   At
    paragraph 119(i) it says:

         "DRC nationals who have been convicted of offences  in  the  United
         Kingdom are not at real risk of  being  persecuted  for  a  Refugee
         Convention reason  or  serious  harm  or  treatment  proscribed  by
         Article 3 ECHR in the  event  of  returning  to  their  country  of
         origin."

12. We therefore have no hesitation in setting aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and remaking the decision.

13. The claimant is clearly distressed at his predicament but  he  conducted
    himself with dignity before  us  this  morning  and  we  appreciate  his
    conduct before us.  Nevertheless he cannot  get  around  the  fact  that
    anything that he might have wanted to have said has been considered  and
    analysed properly by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  only  material
    point of dispute is the decision that he could not be  deported  safely.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong to find that he  had  to  follow
    the High Court decision. Further,  we  are  satisfied  on  the  evidence
    before us, particularly the  Country  Guidance  case,  that  he  can  be
    returned safely.

14. We follow the country guidance.  We rule that there is no risk  to  this
    claimant in the event of his return.

15. It follows therefore that although he has spent  a  large  part  of  his
    life in the United Kingdom he is not entitled to remain  here  he  is  a
    national of the DRC.

     Decision

16. We allow the Secretary of State's appeal. We set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal for error of law and we  substitute  a  decision
    dismissing the claimant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 October 2015                |


