

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00622/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|6 July 2016                                   |On 29 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DANA OLAHOVA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Ms Olahova is a national of the Czech Republic.  She  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  on  13
    November 2015 to make a deportation order against her.  The deportation
    order was said to have  been  made  with  regard  to  reg.  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, and was based on
    her history of offending: she had  been  convicted  of  seven  offences
    between March 2013 and March 2015, and had served a  number  of  prison
    sentences.
 2. Ms Olahova's history is not  fully  known.   She  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006 and apparently worked illegally at some stage.  She has
    two children, who are not said to have lived with  her,  but  with  her
    mother.  The younger was  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  was  a
    prostitute in the Czech Republic and it is said that  her  offences  in
    the United Kingdom were committed in order to fund a drug habit.

 3. Her appeal came before Judge Juss, who heard oral  evidence  from  her.
    Noting the date of her  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Judge  Juss
    concluded that she counted as a person who had resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of at least ten years prior to the decision  under
    challenge, and that in accordance with reg. 21(4) she  could  therefore
    not be the subject of deportation  "except  on  imperative  grounds  of
    public security".   He  applied  that  test  in  conjunction  with  the
    requirements set out in reg. 21(6).  In  relation  to  the  latter,  he
    applied the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Essa  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1718 and concluded that deportation would prejudice  the  prospects  of
    her rehabilitation.  Thus, Judge Juss allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  sought  and  obtained
    permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal.   She  raises  two  principal
    points.  The first is that the "imperative grounds of public  security"
    test was not applicable; the second is that the Essa grounds  were  not
    made out on the evidence.  Ms Olahova has been removed from the  United
    Kingdom.  She has not put in any notice under  Rule  24,  nor  has  she
    indicated either a wish  to  attend  the  hearing  or  any  grounds  of
    opposition  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal.    We
    determined that this was an appropriate case in which to proceed in her
    absence.

 5. So far as concerns the "imperative grounds of public  security"  issue,
    there is no doubt that the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  are
    amply made out.  It is indeed impossible to tell the basis  upon  which
    Judge Juss thought that  the  appellant  before  him  even  might  have
    resided in United Kingdom "for a continuous  period  of  at  least  ten
    years prior to the relevant decision", as required by reg. 21(4).   Her
    evidence was that she arrived in  2006.   The  decision  identified  by
    Judge Juss as that against which he was hearing an appeal was  made  on
    13 November 2015, as we have said.  The period of  time  between  those
    dates is incapable of being as long as ten years.

 6. Further, there was before  the  judge  no  evidence  of  continuity  of
    residence in the United Kingdom between those two  dates.   Ms  Olahova
    produced material showing that she  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 2006 and perhaps 2008, and it is clear that she had been in the
    Untied Kingdom during the period of her offending  from  2013  onwards.
    But there was no documentary evidence, and the judge does not refer  to
    any oral evidence, of her presence in the United Kingdom  between  2008
    and 2013.  There was accordingly no evidential basis for  Judge  Juss's
    conclusion that her arrival in the United Kingdom was ten years  before
    the relevant decision, no evidential basis for his conclusion that  she
    had been in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  ten  years
    before the decision, and, further, as it happens, no  evidential  basis
    even for a conclusion that she had been in the United Kingdom for  long
    enough to obtain a permanent right of residence under reg. 15.

 7. So far as concerns the ground based on Essa,  the  Secretary  of  State
    points out that there was no evidence that  Ms  Olahova  had  made  any
    attempts  to  rehabilitate  herself,  that  she  was   in   course   of
    rehabilitation, or that any appropriate  rehabilitation  could  not  be
    continued in the Czech Republic.  Those points also seem to  us  to  be
    well made.  It follows that there is really nothing to set against  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision.   Ms  Olahova's  record  of  criminal
    offences is clearly such  as  to  demonstrate  that  she  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society: indeed, nobody has suggested to us that  that  is
    not the case.  In the circumstances there is no basis for  saying  that
    the removal decision was unlawful.

 8. It is perfectly clear that Judge Juss's determination, having been made
    apparently in defiance of the lack of evidence that might  support  it,
    cannot stand.  We set it aside.  The truth of the matter  is  that  the
    grounds upon which Ms Olahova might properly have resisted  deportation
    are  imperceptible.   We  substitute  a  determination  dismissing  her
    appeal.














                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 25 July 2016
