
[pic]




                               UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Birmingham
On: 21 July 2014
                                             Decision Promulgated:

On: 22 July 2014

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                     SFC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born in 1978.

This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 14  May  2014  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge North and Ms V  S  Street  JP  which  refused  the
appellant's appeal against the automatic deportation order made against  him
on 5 February 2014 by the respondent.

The background to this matter is very sad. The appellant came to the  UK  in
2001 and has remained unlawfully  ever  since.  He  has  become  a  prolific
offender since then. Many of the offences related to dishonesty  or  use  of
false identities. At times he has failed to report for  bail  and  absconded
from immigration control. The most recent offences led to a prison  sentence
of 20 months on 17 July 2013. Meanwhile, he had formed a  relationship  with
a woman from Zimbabwe in 2003. They married and had  a  son  on  25  October
2005. The appellant and his partner are both HIV positive. The partner  also
has mental health problems. She has now  been  granted  British  citizenship
but the child remains a citizen of Zimbabwe.  This  appears  to  be  because
whilst the appellant was serving one of his prison sentences,  as  a  result
of her mental health problems, the mother was unable to care for  the  child
and he is now under special guardianship with another couple.

The First-tier Tribunal did not find that paragraphs 399(a) or  (b)  of  the
Immigration Rules were met. That must be right and no material error  arises
there from. It was not correct to state at [6] that the child had  not  been
in the UK for 7 years but that cannot be material where he can be cared  for
by the couple who are his special guardians, appointed by the Family  Court,
so paragraph 399(a) could not be met.

 The child has not been living with his parents  for  some  time.  The  fact
that his best interests lie in remaining with his guardians in the  UK  does
not form the basis of  insurmountable  obstacles  to  his  mother  going  to
Zimbabwe with the appellant. The special guardianship order will  remain  in
place unless an application is made to discharge it. The  Family  Court  has
seen that as the most appropriate way to protect the welfare of  the  child.
That is how the specialist court  view  his  best  interests  and  how  they
should be promoted. No application to discharge the guardianship  order  has
been made by either parent. They consented to the child  being  placed  away
from them. The oral evidence referred to visits by the parents  to  see  the
child and the child's letter suggests this is so. There is nothing  to  show
how often those visits take place or under what conditions. The evidence  of
the child's involvement with his birth parents was very  limited  therefore.
As indicated by  the  panel  at  [6],  despite  the  involvement  of  social
services, there was nothing from an appropriate third party to suggest  that
his birth parents living abroad would be detrimental to  him.  Even  if  the
"insurmountable obstacles" requirement  were  met,  the  appellant  has  not
lived in the UK for 15 years, a further reason why paragraph 399(b)  is  not
met here.

I have indicated above that I appreciate the  difficult  circumstances  that
this family have had to face. It remains the case that only a  "very  strong
case indeed" can succeed where an automatic deportation order  is  made;  SS
(Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550  applied.  The  appellant's  length  of
unlawful residence, his health, his relationship with his wife,  her  mental
health problems and the situation on return to  Zimbabwe  simply  could  not
meet that test. This appellant's offending history  is  very  extensive  and
continued even after earlier steps to deport him  were  pursued,  after  his
child was born and so on. His immigration history is appalling  and  further
weighs against him.

The Tribunal found at [10] that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
that could lead to the appeal being allowed. It was manifestly open to  them
to do so where the potentially most serious factor, that of the child  being
separated from one or both birth parents, was vitiated by  his  being  found
to be best placed living with  another  couple  and  there  was  nothing  to
indicate that not to be in his best  interests  and  nothing  to  show  that
either parent had done anything to attempt  to  persuade  the  Family  Court
otherwise.

The challenge to the  findings  on  the  appellant's  refugee  claim  cannot
succeed. He has shown himself to be a person  of  a  significant  degree  of
dishonesty. He did not appeal a first refusal of asylum some years  ago.  He
claimed again only after deportation  proceedings  commenced.  The  evidence
adduced to show that he would be  identified  as  being  in  opposition  was
weak. The Tribunal's findings at [13] to [17] are  eminently  well  reasoned
and sustainable. No possible error arises from them.

For all of these reasons, I did not  find  that  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, his partner or minor child. I make this decision  on
the basis of the  nature  of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,  his  medical
condition and that of his partner and the best interests of their child.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 21 July 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


