
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00241/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th April 2018                           |On 04th May 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ROBERT JURCZEWSKI
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Poland born on 16 June 1978.  His  appeal  against  deportation  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Walters on 12 February 2018 on
    human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    on 8 March 2018 on the following grounds:

         "2.  The judge found that the  Appellant  had  acquired  the  right
         permanent residence in the UK the judge  reviewed  the  Appellant's
         extensive criminal record  in  Poland  and  the  UK  and  that  the
         Appellant had not taken steps to  deal  with  his  alcoholism.  The
         appeal was allowed as it would be disproportionate with  regard  to
         the effect on his family in the best interests of the children.


         3.   The grounds argue that the judge  erred  in  the  findings  on
         family life, the letter relied on pre-dated the Appellant's release
         and his wife did not attend the hearing of the appeal. There was no
         evidence of a very strong Article 8 claim and no proper  assessment
         why the family could not relocate to Poland.


         4.   The judge gives no reason why the children would not  be  able
         to adapt to life in Poland, children move between countries without
         speaking the new language on a daily basis and  in  time  make  the
         necessary adjustments, it is not clear why this family could not do
         so. More troubling is that the Appellant's wife did not attend  the
         hearing to give oral  evidence  when  the  hearing  took  place  in
         central London. In the circumstances it is arguable that the  judge
         place significantly more weight on the  family  circumstances  than
         the  evidence  justified   and   overlooked   the   public   policy
         considerations  given  the  Appellant's  lengthy   and   persistent
         criminal record."

3.   The Appellant did not attend the hearing. He  had  been  released  from
    prison and was not held in immigration detention. The notice of hearing
    was served on him at his home address. There was no correspondence from
    him or his wife indicating that the Appellant had  changed  address.  I
    was satisfied that the appeal notice was properly served  and  I  heard
    the appeal in the Appellant's absence.

Submissions

4.   Mr Bramble relied on the grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    evidence before the judge was insufficient to support his findings that
    the Appellant had established family life in the UK and  it  could  not
    continue on return to Poland. The judge failed to give reasons why  the
    Appellant's human rights outweighed the public interest in deportation.



Discussion and Conclusion

5.   The appellant was 39 years old at the date  of  hearing.  He  committed
    his first offence at the age of  20  in  Poland  in  1997.  He  has  11
    convictions  for  14  offences  including  indecent  assault,   assault
    occasioning actual bodily  harm,  affray,  robbery,  threats  to  kill,
    burglary,  threatening   behaviour,   destroying   properly,   battery,
    committing an offence during the  operational  period  of  a  suspended
    sentence and possessing a class B controlled drug.  The  Appellant  has
    been imprisoned on numerous occasions  for  these  offences.  His  last
    conviction was on 17 February 2017 for possessing a controlled drug and
    common assault. He was sentenced to 18 weeks imprisonment.

6.   The Appellant was released from prison in  October  2017.  He  did  not
    attend the CMR hearing on 18 October 2017 and he  did  not  attend  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing on 22 December 2017. Neither the  Appellant
    nor his wife attended the hearing before me and no further evidence has
    been submitted.

7.   The Appellant responded to the notice of deportation  by  letter  dated
    29 March 2017 which stated: "As every time when I cause trouble I  have
    been drinking alcohol  we  decided  also  to  sort  this  issue.  After
    previous experience we already know that help  which  I  can  get  from
    Probation Office will be limited to attending some groups which did not
    change lots, we decided to seek for medical treatment in relation to my
    alcohol problem. After research, we found contact to  medical  services
    which are offering an Esperal implant and I am desperate to get one and
    it will be priority to sort it immediately after  release."  He  stated
    that he had been attending anger management courses and courses against
    alcohol and drug addiction whilst in prison.

8.   In relation to family life, the Appellant stated:  "I  have  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with my children.  They  are  live
    permanent in the UK. Two of them were born here and United  Kingdom  is
    the country where is their home. They do not  even  speak  Polish,  and
    their first language is English. They are attending school  in  the  UK
    and are achieving a high level of learning. As a  confirmation,  please
    find enclosed school report an official letter from  school  confirming
    above statement.
    They are sending me drawings and letters daily along with a photographs
    and daily emails from my wife. Our family connection is very strong and
    despite the incident which happened we are sure that with a little help
    I can change my behaviour because I do not want to lose my family. I am
    sure that my eventual  deportation  will  harm  children  because  even
    currently when I am in prison, they miss me so much,  they  are  crying
    and asking when I will be back home. When they visit me,  they  do  not
    want to go back  home  without  me.  My  wife  informed  me  that  this
    situation is upsetting them a lot and every evening  is  difficult  for
    them as before we had a daily bedtime stories together before they fell
    asleep. We cannot even imagine living separate. In accordance to above,
    my eventual deportation will break not only mine right to have a family
    live, but my wife's and children's as well, as I mentioned above,  they
    are not able to  move  to  Poland  in  case  of  eventual  deportation.
    Together with my wife we decided that after release  from  the  HMPS  I
    will be back to work. We already make arrangement with  my  contractor,
    who I had worked for, and immediately after release  date  I  can  come
    back to work"

9.   In  addition  to  this  letter,  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  of  the  Appellant's  family  life  consisted  of  the  birth
    certificates of his three children, a letter dated 29 March  2017  from
    Hounslow Town Primary School and a school report for his eldest son for
    the year 2016/2017. His eldest son was born in Poland on 19 April 2009.
    His daughter was born in the United Kingdom  on  6  May  2011  and  his
    youngest son was born in the United Kingdom on 11  December  2014.  The
    letter from  school,  where  the  elder  two  children  were  currently
    educated, stated that their attendance had been  very  good  and  "both
    parents were involved in bringing  and  collecting  the  children  from
    school, but due to the recent change in the  family  circumstances  the
    children's mother, Mrs DJ, has been the main carer." The letter  stated
    that the children's mother in particular was extremely  supportive  and
    proactive. The letter concluded that the children are a credit to their
    parents and the school.

10.  The  judge  found  that  this  letter  was  strong  evidence  that  the
    Appellant lives together with his wife and children and has  an  active
    involvement with the older two  children.  He  found  that  their  best
    interests were to remain living with both parents. At  [44]  the  judge
    stated: "O, dob 10.01.09, arrived in the UK with his parents when  only
    a few months old. In reality (except for some  holidays)  he  knows  no
    other country but the  UK.   He  is  now  17  and  still  in  full-time
    education."

11.  The judged found that the elder two  children  would  not  be  able  to
    adapt to life in Poland or to such a drastic change in  the  medium  of
    instruction of education. He accepted that there was no evidence as  to
    whether or not the children spoke Polish, but he found, on the  balance
    of probability, it was likely to be less than the fluency  required  to
    be educated in that language.

12.   At  [46]  the  judge  considered  the  private  life  rights  of   the
    appellant's wife. He found she  had  committed  no  crime  and  was  an
    admirable parent. She could not be expected to abandon her life in  the
    UK where she has been for 17 years in order to settle  in  Poland  with
    her children and husband.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and children.

13.  The judge concluded:

         "47. I found that the Appellant's previous  convictions  and  their
         nature are such that he has the propensity to reoffend.  There  was
         no evidence before me that he has taken adequate steps to deal with
         his alcoholism. On the other hand, it is only a few weeks since  he
         has been released from prison.


         48. I would therefore have found that the Respondent was  justified
         in deporting the Appellant on serious grounds of public policy  and
         security despite the fact that the Appellant has a right  permanent
         residence.


         49. The only matters which 'save' the  Appellant  from  deportation
         orders family. Looking at all  the  evidence,  I  find  that  their
         rights render it disproportionate to deport the Appellant."

14.  I find that the evidence before the  judge  was  insufficient  to  show
    that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  wife  and
    with his  children.  The  letter  from  Hounslow  Town  Primary  School
    predated the Appellant's release from prison. The  assertions  made  in
    the Appellant's letter of 29 March 2017 were not  support  by  evidence
    which the Appellant ought to have been able to produce.  The  Appellant
    and his wife failed to attend the hearing to give oral evidence.  There
    was no witness statement or other evidence from the Appellant's wife.

15.  The Appellant entered the UK on  26  August  2009  with  his  wife  and
    eldest son who was then four months old. His wife  and  child  had  not
    been residing in the UK for 17 years as stated by the judge at [44] and
    [46]. This error of fact is significant such  that  it  amounts  to  an
    error of law. The Appellant's oldest son has been living in the UK  for
    nine years not 17. There was insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  it
    would not be reasonable for him to return to  Poland  as  part  of  the
    family unit. The judge's assessment of  proportionality  was  based  on
    incorrect facts.

16.  Accordingly, I find that the judge erred in law in  his  assessment  of
    Article 8. There was insufficient evidence to support his finding  that
    family life existed at the date of hearing and that the Appellant had a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and his  children.  I
    set aside the decision and remake it.

17.  There is insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his  wife  or  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental  relationship  with  his  children.  There  was  no
    evidence before me post-dating the Appellant's release from prison. His
    assertions  in  his  letter  was  unsupported  by  evidence  which  the
    Appellant ought to have been able to produce. He refers to drawings and
    letters, but none  were  submitted  in  support  of  this  appeal.  The
    Appellant has failed to attend the hearing and there  was  no  evidence
    from his wife. The letter from the school indicates that  the  children
    were, at that  time,  being  cared  for  by  their  mother.  There  was
    insufficient evidence before me to show that the Appellant had  resumed
    his parental responsibilities on release from prison.

18.  The Appellant's eldest son had been living in the UK  for  nine  years.
    Although the Appellant asserts that he does not speak Polish, there was
    no other evidence to support this  assertion.  Both  parents  are  from
    Poland and there is no mention in the school report or otherwise of the
    language spoken at home. The  Appellant's  son  has  been  educated  in
    English and is doing well at school. He is of an  age  where  his  best
    interests are to remain with his  parents  and  there  is  insufficient
    evidence to show that he could not adapt to a new school on  return  to
    Poland. I find that there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

19.  The Appellant's daughter is not  a  qualifying  child.  She  is  nearly
    seven years old. Although she was born in the UK and has been  educated
    here, there was insufficient to show that she  would  not  be  able  to
    adapt to a new school in Poland. Her best interests are to remain  with
    her parents. The Appellant's youngest son is three years  old  and  his
    best interests are to remain with his parents.

20.  The Appellant's wife is Polish.  There  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    show that she had a right of residence in the  UK  or  that  separation
    from her husband would be unduly harsh. There were no very  significant
    obstacles to re-integration  on  the  evidence  before  me.  There  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the  Appellant's  deportation  would
    give rise to consequences of such gravity to amount to an  interference
    with family life.

21.  The Appellant is a serious threat to one of  the  fundamental  interest
    of  society.  This  finding  was  not   challenged.   The   Appellant's
    deportation under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016  is  justified
    on grounds of public policy. On the evidence before me, he  has  failed
    to show that he has established family life or that family  life  could
    not continue in Poland. In any event, I  find  that,  on  the  evidence
    before me, the public  interest  outweighs  the  Appellant's  right  to
    family and private life  and  any  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights, and those of his family, would be proportionate.


Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The decision of 12 February 2018 is set aside.

The  Appellant's  appeal  against  deportation  is   dismissed   under   the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




