
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00374/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 1 August 2016                     |On 28 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                  Gabor [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, instructed by John McCaffrey & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Hungary, born on 22 September  1978.   He
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in, or around, 2007. Prior
    to his arrival he served a prison sentence of  six  years  in  Hungary,
    having been convicted of indecent assault, blackmail, theft and assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm.

 2. Not deterred by his lengthy prison sentence in Hungary,  the  appellant
    continued his criminal behaviour in the United  Kingdom,  resulting  in
    convictions for  entering  into  an  arrangement  to  acquire  criminal
    property, transferring criminal property and VAT Fraud,  which  led  to
    two periods of imprisonment - the first, for 4 months in December  2012
    and, the second for 10 months in December 2013.

 3. On 4 August 2015 the respondent made a deportation  order  against  the
    appellant.  A lengthy letter setting out the reasons for such  decision
    was served on the appellant on 10 August 2015.

 4. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") was heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox on 23 February 2016 and  dismissed  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and on Article 8 ECHR grounds in
    a decision promulgated on 29 March 2016.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nightingale in the following terms, in a decision of  20
    April 2016:

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge failed to state, at paragraph 6,
             the standard of proof applied.  It is also arguable  that  the
             judge fell into error in finding that the appellant was not  a
             jobseeker notwithstanding the fact that he was, at the date of
             the hearing, in  receipt  of  jobseeker's  allowance,  instead
             speculating about a future withdrawal of benefits.  It is also
             arguable that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
             finding that the appellant presented a  risk  of  reoffending.
             The grounds are arguable and  permission  is  granted  on  all
             grounds pleaded."

 6. Thus the matter came before me.

Discussion and Decision

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal are lengthy, but  can  be  summarised
    thus:

          i) The FtT erred in failing to identify, and apply,  the  correct
             burden and standard of proof;

         ii) The FtT's  conclusion  that  there  is  a  high  risk  of  the
             appellant reoffending is irrational  and  is,  in  any  event,
             inadequately reasoned;

        iii) The FtT's conclusion that the appellant is not a jobseeker  is
             irrational,  given  that  he  is  in  receipt  of  jobseeker's
             allowance.  In any event, the FtT unlawfully speculated as  to
             what a decision maker in the  relevant  SSA  department  would
             conclude in the future;

         iv) The FtT ignored the evidence given by both the  appellant  and
             his partner as to the involvement of social services in  their
             family affairs;

          v) The FtT erred in failing to take  into  account  the  lack  of
             links that the appellant has with his home country when coming
             to its conclusion under  regulation  21(6)  of  the  2006  EEA
             Regulations;

         vi) The FtT erred in failing to take into account the  appellant's
             family life when assessing the issue of proportionality  under
             the EEA Regulations;

        vii) The FtT's conclusion on Article 8 is legally flawed by  reason
             of: (a) a failure to determine  whether  the  appellant  is  a
             foreign  criminal;  (b)  irrationally  concluding   that   the
             appellant has no family life in the UK; (c) a failure to  have
             regard to the interests of the appellant's eldest child;  and,
             (d) misdirecting itself in paragraph 48 of its decision.

 8. Turning to the first of these grounds, in relation to which  I  allowed
    the parties to make further written submissions after the hearing.

 9. In paragraph 6 if its decision the FtT directed itself that the  burden
    of proof lies on the appellant to demonstrate that his  deportation  to
    Hungary would lead to a breach of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006. In their respective written submissions  both  parties  recognise
    this to be a misdirection in law.

10. In his submissions Mr Matthews, in  explanation  for  SSHD's  position,
    drew the Tribunal's attention to following passage from  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA 1245:

          1. It is convenient to consider first the extent to  which  wider
             factors, such as the public interest  in  deterrence  and  the
             need  to  demonstrate  public  revulsion  at  the   offender's
             conduct, are factors that can properly be taken  into  account
             when deciding whether the removal of an EEA national  who  has
             acquired a  permanent  right  of  residence  is  justified  on
             serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security.  RU
             (Bangladesh), on which Ms Chan placed  some  emphasis,  was  a
             case involving the deportation of  a  foreign  criminal  under
             section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  In  such  cases  the
             statutory scheme envisages that the person facing  deportation
             bears the burden of showing that his removal would not  be  in
             accordance with the law, usually because of  the  interference
             with his fundamental rights that it would entail.  In  such  a
             case it is well established  that  the  need  to  deter  other
             potential wrongdoers and to reflect public  revulsion  at  the
             offence in question are aspects  of  the  public  interest  in
             deportation and as such are important factors for the decision-
             maker to take into account. Miss Chan submitted that they  are
             equally important in a case falling within regulation  21.  In
             my view, however, that fails to recognise the  very  different
             context in which the question of deportation arises.

          1. One important purpose of  the  Citizenship  Directive  was  to
             protect and support the  Treaty  right  of  free  movement  of
             nationals of Member States and,  by  extension,  nationals  of
             other EEA states. The origin and purpose  of  the  Regulations
             are, therefore, both fundamentally  different  from  those  of
             section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act,  which  is  directed  to
             removing from this country aliens who have no right to be here
             other than in accordance with leave to remain granted  by  the
             Secretary of State. Leaving aside whatever protection  against
             removal the European Convention on  Human  Rights  may  afford
             them, their position in law is  inherently  less  secure  than
             that of EEA nationals who  are  entitled  to  exercise  Treaty
             rights. In a case where the removal of an EEA  national  would
             prima facie interfere with the exercise of his  Treaty  rights
             it is for the member state to justify its action.  It  is  for
             this reason that I am unable to accept  Ms  Chan's  submission
             that in a case of the present kind the burden of showing  that
             the decision is not in accordance with the  law  lies  on  the
             person who is to be deported.

11. Following the decision in Straszewski, it is clear that the  burden  of
    proof in demonstrating that  deportation  of  an  EEA  national  is  in
    accordance with the law rests firmly with the Secretary  of  State  and
    thus that the FtT's decision is  accordingly  legally  flawed  for  its
    failure to recognise this.

12. Despite Mr Matthews concession as to the error to be found in the FtT's
    decision it is, nevertheless, submitted that the decision should  stand
    because the FtT "would inevitably have come to the same conclusion  had
    they appreciated that the  burden of proof was on the Respondent.  That
    is because the First-tier Tribunal were satisfied on the evidence  that
    the appellant demonstrated a high risk of re-offending (paragraph  12),
    that he hadn't learned any lessons (paragraph  13),  that  he  was  not
    rehabilitated (paragraph 13) and that he failed to acknowledge the full
    role in his offending which undermined his claim  that  he  had  turned
    over a new leaf (paragraph 22)."

13. I reject this submission. In my view it cannot be  said  that  the  FtT
    would inevitably have come to  the  same  conclusion  had  it  lawfully
    directed itself that it was for the SSHD to justify  her  decision.  If
    the  FtT's  decision  is  read  as  a  whole,  it  is  plain  that  its
    misdirection infects not only the  conclusion  but  the  core  findings
    therein. An example of this is found in paragraph 19 of the decision in
    which the FtT states:

         "...I find that the Appellant has failed to demonstrate that he has
         mended his ways. He presents with a genuine assessment of threat to
         reoffending thereby affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
         society. His personal conduct is such that he cannot be relied upon
         not to reoffend."

14. The reasoning leading to the conclusion set forth in  this  passage  is
    clearly underpinned by a misunderstanding that it was for the appellant
    to demonstrate that he is not a threat to the fundamental interests  of
    society. In addition, I find that when the relevant factual  matrix  of
    the appellant's case is considered in the round it cannot be said  that
    a Tribunal would not be entitled to come to a conclusion favourable  to
    the appellant. In short, I have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the
    identified error in the FtT's decision is one which  is  material  i.e.
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. For this reason, I  set
    aside the FtT's decision.

15. Although it is not necessary for me say any more than that which I have
    said above, I further observe that the FtT's consideration of the issue
    of proportionality under the 2006 EEA Regulations is also  vitiated  by
    legal error, in that it is wholly deficient of reasoning. The  fact  of
    such  deficiency  cannot  be  countered  by  the  submission  that  the
    rationale deployed by the FtT on the  issue  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8 ECHR can be readily be imported into  such  assessment  under
    the EEA Regulations -  there  are  different,  and  additional,  public
    interest considerations in  play  in  the  former  (see,  for  example,
    paragraph 14 of Straszewski).

16. For the reasons given above, I find that the FtT's decision contains an
    error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and  it  is
    set aside. Given  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  errors  I  further
    conclude that it is appropriate for the appeal to be  remitted  to  the
    FtT to be considered afresh by a judge other than judge Fox.

Notice of Decision

The FtT's decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted back to  the  FtT
to determine afresh.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
8 September 2016































