
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00243 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Victoria Law Courts, Birmingham      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2013                                |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCKEE

                                   Between

                                  A--- V---
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
    We direct that the appellant be identified only by the initials  AV  in
    connection with these proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo.  He  was
    born in October 1993 and so is now 19 years old.   He  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal the decision of the respondent on 22 January 2013 to
    make him the subject of a deportation order.  It is plain from the  face
    of the Notice of Decision that  the  decision  was  made  under  Section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 because the Secretary of  State  has
    deemed that the appellant's deportation is conducive to the public good.
     This is not a case of "automatic deportation" under the UK Borders  Act
    2007.   Automatic  deportation  does  not  apply  to  this   appellant's
    circumstances because the reason for making the appellant the subject of
    the order is that he was convicted of a criminal offence whilst still  a
    minor and Section 33(3) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  provides  that  a
    foreign criminal cannot be subject to "automatic deportation" by  reason
    of a conviction sustained when he was under the age of 18 years.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  allege  that  removing
    the appellant would be contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under Articles 3 and 8 and contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
    under the 1951 Refugee Convention.

 3. According to ground 2(b):

         "consequently, the appellant faces indefinite imprisonment, torture
         degrading treatment and death, if returned, and for these  reasons,
         the Certificate under Section 72 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 should be set aside and not upheld."

 4. We find this puzzling.  A person who would otherwise  be  a  refugee  is
    excluded from the protection of the Convention if he is convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and constitutes a danger to the community  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   Rebuttable   statutory   presumptions   identify
    circumstances when a person will  be  presumed  to  be  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and constitute a danger to the  community  of
    the United Kingdom but we know of no means by  which  a  person  who  is
    excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention can bring himself
    within the scope of that Convention purely by showing that he  would  be
    at risk in the event of return even if he faced a high degree of risk of
    the very worst kind of ill-treatment.  Such a person may  very  well  be
    entitled to rely on Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    but that is a different point.

 5. It has long been the appellant's case that he entered the United Kingdom
    in June 2005 with his sister.  His mother  was  already  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His mother had claimed asylum, unsuccessfully, and  an  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed in 2004.  The appellant applied  for
    asylum shortly after arrival.  The application was refused and an appeal
    against that decision  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge  Cheales  in  a
    determination promulgated on 2 October 2007.  The appellant did not give
    evidence in this appeal (he was then still not quite 14 years  old)  and
    the judge dismissed the appeal largely because of the  unreliability  of
    the appellant's mother's evidence.

 6. Notwithstanding this history the appellant and  his  mother  and  sister
    were all given indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom in about
    February 2008.

 7. On 14 March 2011 the appellant was involved  in  a  criminal  enterprise
    that led to his pleading guilty to offences committed jointly  with  two
    others of aggravated burglary and possessing an imitation firearm.   The
    aggravating feature of the burglary is that the  three  defendants  were
    armed with a knife. Additionally they had in their joint  possession  an
    imitation firearm was described as a "BB  gun".   On  15  July  2011  Mr
    Recorder Nicholas Cartwright sentenced the older of the  two  co-accused
    to four years eights months' detention at a young  offender  institution
    and sentenced the appellant and a co-accused, who were both 17 when they
    committed the offences, to three and a half years' detention.

 8. We set out below the opening two paragraphs of the Recorder's sentencing
    remarks.   It  is  important  that  anyone  reading  this  determination
    understands that we appreciate fully just what was involved.  He said:

         "Z- R-, A- V-, A- N- ,  this  was  a  well-organised  offence  with
         professional hallmarks.  The three of  you  obviously  planned  the
         offence together before it was committed.   You  targeted  a  house
         where you expected there to be  valuable  items  for  taking.   You
         expected the house to be occupied  otherwise  you  would  not  have
         taken the knife, the imitation firearm and  worn  balaclavas.   You
         had obviously obtained the knife and the imitation firearm with the
         purpose  of  committing  this  offence.   You  wore  masks  and  or
         balaclavas.  You wore gloves plainly to avoid leaving fingerprints.
          The window of the front door was  broken  and  the  three  of  you
         entered during the hours of darkness.

         You, A- V-, had the imitation firearm.  You,  N-,  a  knife.   Some
         violence was used, pushing  over  one  of  the  occupant  into  the
         television but it was the presence  of  the  weapons  that  plainly
         deterred further resistance from the two people left inside after R-
          - B- - had run out and call the police.  Whilst you took turns  to
         guard  the  victims  for  about   20   minutes,   the   house   was
         comprehensively ransacked by those  who  were  not  keeping  guard;
         anything of  value  was  collected  ready  to  be  taken.   L-   H-
         originally was terrified, although the fact that no actual violence
         was used led her to become less frightened to the extent  that  she
         expressed in her statement.  R- - K- was scared at first; by that I
         infer that she became less frightened because  no  actual  violence
         was used beyond pushing him over.  But R- N- is now afraid to  even
         sit in his own house, quite  understandably  given  what  happened.
         The offence was only thwarted because the police did turn up  after
         20 minutes and  caught  the  three  of  you  re-handed  inside  the
         property, although you, A- V-, tried to blag your  way  out  of  it
         with some lies."

 9. The appellant was informed by  immigration  officials  that  deportation
    action would be taken against him and on 19  March  2012  the  appellant
    made written submissions explaining why he should not be  deported.   He
    sent a letter on 26 February 2012 and, by letter of 19 March  2012,  his
    representatives, Fadiga & Company, sent something entitled  "SUBMISSIONS
    THAT EXCEPTIONS TO AUTOMATIC  DEPORTATION  APPLY  ON  GROUNDS  OF  HUMAN
    RIGHTS CONVENTION, ARTICLES 2, 3 AND 8 AND THE REFUGEE CONVENTION".

10. On 22 January 2013 (the  letter  is  dated  2012  but  that  must  wrong
    because it refers to correspondence in August 2012  -see  paragraph  33)
    the respondent wrote  to  the  appellant  a  letter  under  the  heading
    "Application of 33(2) to an asylum claim/reasons for deportation."

11. This letter is not an entirely satisfactory  document.  We  consider  it
    more carefully below. It includes at paragraph 20 the  rather  startling
    conclusion that that appellant had not "established a  genuine  fear  of
    return to Iraq". Nevertheless it is clear that the  respondent  did  not
    believe the appellant's core case and in particular did not believe that
    the appellant's mother is  of  Hema  ethnicity.  The  asylum  claim  was
    formally refused at paragraph 41.

12. The part of the letter beginning at paragraph 32 is  under  the  heading
    "Liability for exclusion from Convention protection".  It  is  pertinent
    not only for that  reason  but  for  illuminating  to  some  extent  the
    respondent's decision to deport  the  appellant.   It  asserts  that  by
    reason of Section 72(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 it was open to the appellant  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  he
    constituted a danger to the community but he had  not  done  that.   The
    letter noted that the appellant had  been  able  to  show  that  he  had
    behaved responsibly in prison  and  had  been  commended  for  some  his
    conduct as a prisoner. However at paragraph 34 the writer drew attention
    to the appellant's comments in an "undated" letter  (it  is  the  letter
    that the appellant sent on 26 February 2012) where he said:

         "I  understand  my  conviction  may  seem  serious".   The   letter
         continued, "it considered that you have failed to take ownership of
         the seriousness of the crimes you have committed."

13. It went on to say that the appellant had provided no  evidence  to  show
    that he was rehabilitated or had begun  the  rehabilitation  process  by
    attending courses and so on. We consider this below at paragraph 40.

14. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

15. Before considering the First-tier  Tribunal's  Determination  there  are
    two comments we need to make.

16. Firstly, the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  suggest  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was wrong to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  a
    "medium risk of re-conviction".   The  most  recent  evidence,  being  a
    letter dated 20 March 2013, suggested that the risk  of  conviction  was
    low.  This is correct but the grounds should have made it plain that the
    letter relied on to support that contention was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It was dated after the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  and
    whatever can be said  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  cannot  be
    criticised for not considering a letter that had not even  been  written
    when it heard the case.

17. Secondly, the grounds refer to the case of Maslov v Austria [2008]  ECHR
    546.  According to the Secretary of State's Response to the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008:

         "the appellant did not fall within Maslov as he was not  a  settled
         migrant who had spent the majority of his adult life in the UK with
         leave to remain but an illegal entrant who committed a very serious
         crime".

18. This assertion is wrong.   The  appellant  is  a  settled  migrant.   He
    appears to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  but  he  had
    unconditional leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  since  2008.   The
    Response was misleading and impacted wrongly on our initial preparation.
    The Response was settled by a Senior Presenting Officer whom  we  regard
    as experienced and conscientious.  This  misleading  observation  should
    not have been made and we suspect it was an example of the  consequences
    of the Secretary of State's officers having to respond  to  grounds  for
    permission to appeal  without  seeing  the  whole  file.   It  does  not
    encourage us to have confidence in the Secretary of State when  mistakes
    like this happen.

19. Further, as we explain when we consider Maslov, it is not  determinative
    of the appeal that the appellant did not spend the majority of his adult
    life in the UK.

20. Before us Mr Smart for  the  respondent  conceded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.  The First-tier Tribunal treated  the  appeal
    as if it was an appeal against automatic deportation.   In  fairness  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, both parties had produced  material  suggesting
    that this was an appeal against "automatic deportation" but it  is  not.
    This  erroneous  classification  of  the  appeal  is   not   necessarily
    irredeemable but it makes it very difficult to sustain an argument  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had read the papers and considered the arguments
    properly when it could not identify accurately the kind of appeal it was
    determining.

21. Further, the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  refer  to  the  decision  in
    Maslov or, much  more  importantly,  show  proper  appreciation  of  its
    significance. In a case of this kind the omission is irredeemable.

22. We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

23. Mr Smart reminded us of the decision in Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability  to
    deport) [2012]  UKUT  00196(IAC).  We  have  to  ask  ourselves  if  the
    appellant is liable to deportation. Clearly he is a foreign criminal who
    has committed a serious offence. We are not aware  of  any  policy  that
    would exclude him from deportation. It was the appellant's  case  before
    us the she should not be deported, rather than could  not  be  deported,
    and, although we recognise the importance in a  case  such  as  this  of
    deciding if the appellant is liable to deportation it has not added much
    to our deliberations to answer the question affirmatively.

24. That being so, it is for the appellant to show that he  is  entitled  to
    international protection or that removing him would be contrary  to  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights but it is sufficient for him to show that there is real  risk  of
    his being ill treated in the event of his removal. To the extent that  a
    burden and standard of proof is relevant when balancing the consequences
    of removal  to  the  appellant  and  those  close  to  him  against  the
    imperative to remove him in the public good it is for the respondent  to
    show that removal is justified.

25. We  confirm  that  we  have  not  made  any  findings  of  fact  without
    considering first the evidence as a whole. This Determination  has  been
    made by two judges. There have been several drafts. If, for example, the
    order in which points are considered or the  place  where  comments  are
    made on the evidence, creates  the  impression  that  points  have  been
    decided piecemeal then the impression is wrong.

26. This is clearly not a case where the appellant  can  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules. Although he has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    2005 when was aged 11 years he has not lived in the United  Kingdom  for
    more than half of his life. However we do not accept  that  the  amended
    immigration rules can serve as a substitute for a full consideration  of
    the appellant's claim under article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (except, probably, in rare cases that will be obvious  when
    they occur, see Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)) (see, for example,
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).

27. We heard submissions from the parties.

28. It was not argued vigorously before us that the appellant is  a  refugee
    because of his ethnicity and, for the avoidance of  doubt,  we  make  it
    plain that the appellant  has  not  shown  that  he  risks  serious  ill
    treatment for  a  reasons  that  could  qualify  him  for  international
    protection as a refugee under the Refugee Convention, the  Qualification
    Directive, or at all.

29. It was also argued before us  that  the  appellant  cannot  be  returned
    because, by reason of his conviction, he can expect to be  detained  and
    thereby incur a risk of really serious ill-treatment in the event of his
    return. We do not accept that this would amount  to  persecution  for  a
    reason known to the Refugee Convention or  the  Qualification  Directive
    but it could lead to the appeal being allowed on  human  rights  grounds
    with reference to article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

30. There is clearly considerable evidence to support this contention.   The
    appellant exhibited a letter  from  His  Excellency  Barnabe-Kikaya-Bin-
    Karubi who is the Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of Congo in  the
    United Kingdom.  The letter is dated 16 August 2012 and is addressed  to
    Mary Glindon MP. It corrects a  misunderstanding  arising  from  remarks
    attributed to the Ambassador that were either  made  unintentionally  or
    misreported.  However the letter continued:

         "nevertheless, people who are being deported for  having  committed
         crimes in the UK are held in custody for a period of time to  allow
         the Congolese justice system to clarify their situation".

31. We have paid particular attention to a Report of Fact  Finding  Missions
    DRC between 18 and 22 June 2012 in the appellant's bundle.  We  do  have
    concerns about the fate of a person detained in  the  Congolese  justice
    system. There are  reports  of  detainees  being  ill  treated  and  the
    concerns are compounded by the  difficulties  associated  with  visiting
    prisoners. However we  recognise  that  the  government  of  France  has
    provided evidence of returning people successfully although none of  the
    examples  given  where  people  who  had  been  convicted  of   criminal
    activities in France.

32. We accept that the United Kingdom authorities  would  not  identify  the
    appellant as an offender to the  authorities  in  the  DRC  but  we  are
    impressed with the contention in the grounds that the appellant's  voice
    and manner would identify him as a person who has been away from the DRC
    for some years. We find that the authorities would be likely to question
    him and that the reason for his  return  would  become  clear.  We  have
    decided not to investigate this further because,  for  reasons  that  we
    will explain with more care below, we have decided to allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds with reference to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights because of his circumstances  in  the  United
    Kingdom and his lack of experience of the DRC rather than because of any
    risk of his being detained on arrival.

33. It is convenient to explain here our  reasons  for  directing  that  the
    appellant be identified only by his initials. We recognise that the  may
    well be public interest in this decision. It would be an unwelcome irony
    if we are wrong and the case has to be looked at again if the  appellant
    could say that his need for international protection had been  increased
    significantly because of the publicity that his case had attracted.

34. No oral evidence was called before us. We have looked at  the  documents
    in the appeal.

35. The appellant said in his asylum interview (Concluding Questions) that:

         "I've got all my life here. I have no contact with  anyone  in  the
         Congo or know anyone there. I have nothing there,  no-one  to  look
         after  me,  like  a  different  planet.  Depend  on  my   Mum   for
         everything."

36. His mother said in her  statement  that  she  was  "distressed"  at  the
    thought of the appellant living on his own in the DRC.

37. The respondent's case is somewhat  equivocal.  The  respondent  did  not
    believe that the appellant had left the DRC because his father was taken
    away. However the letter of  22  January  2012,  although  superficially
    impressive, contains paragraphs that are not, or should not be, relevant
    to the decision. For example  there  are  passages  explaining  why  the
    appellant cannot rely on rules that preserve some relationship with  his
    children or partner but it has never been the appellant's case  that  he
    has such relationships. One of the paragraphs under the heading "Private
    Life" explains how he can maintain contact with his  wife.  Again,  this
    shows no appreciation of the appellant's case. He does not have a wife.

38. There is no reason to doubt the appellant's claim  to  have  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2005 or to find that he has returned  to  the  DRC
    after he left. We are therefore surprised to read (on  page  11  of  the
    letter):

         Furthermore, it  is  considered  that  you  retain  ties  with  the
         Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although you have  been  resident
         in the United Kingdom for 7 years, you spent your  formative  years
         in the Democratic Republic of Congo,  where  you  have  established
         your first social relationships and there are no grounds to suggest
         that you are estranged from the culture of the Democratic  Republic
         of the Congo.

39. Put simply we completely disagree with this observation  in  almost  all
    respects. We have no idea what "ties" are thought to have been  retained
    or what evidence supports such a view. We do not accept that  the  first
    11 years of life are the "formative years" for a young man. He will  not
    remember much before he was aged 5 years and hardly anything  before  he
    was aged 3 years.  His  formative  years  were  not  in  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo but in the West Midlands where he  grew  up,  went  to
    school and has friends. We do not accept that any  social  relationships
    that he established before he came to the United Kingdom are  likely  to
    be of any use to him now. We acknowledge that he obtained  an  A*  grade
    GCSE in French. This is relevant  to  life  in  the  DRC  but  does  not
    undermine our finding that by reason of an absence of 8 years  and  only
    childhood memories before then, the  appellant  is  estranged  from  the
    culture of the DRC. If this paragraph  in  the  respondent's  letter  is
    intended to justify the appellant's removal then it fails.

40. As indicated above, the appellant wrote a letter on  26  February  2012.
    This is where he said that "I understand that  my  conviction  may  seem
    serious". That is not all that he said in this letter. We set out  below
    the entire paragraph from which the respondent quoted  selectively.  The
    appellant is entitled to have his comments  considered  in  context.  We
    have emboldened the phrase that was highlighted by the respondent. We do
    not think that paragraph 34 of the respondent's  letter  of  22  January
    2013 summarises fairly the appellant's case. The appellant said:

         "I am aware that the UK Border Agency presumed that I pose a danger
         to the public because  of  my  conviction  and  the  length  of  my
         sentence.  I would like to rebut that presumption and give evidence
         to why I believe that I do not pose any danger to  the  public.   I
         understand that my conviction may seem serious and I am surely(sic)
         sorry for the victims and regretful of my actions.   I  have  never
         been  involved  in  crimes  before,  this  is  my  first  and  only
         conviction, it was a big mistake and I regret it every day.  I  had
         just turned 17 at the time of the offence and I was under a lot  of
         peer pressure from the other people involved.  I am  no  longer  in
         contact with the other people  involved  and  I  have  kept  myself
         distant from the troublemakers and bad company."

41. Thus it is plain  that  the  appellant  began  by  apologising  for  his
    actions, which is clearly a reference to his  criminal  activities,  and
    "the effect it may have had on the victims".  He wished he could go back
    in time and do the right thing.   He  claimed  that  he  was  young  and
    immature and acted under peer pressure.  He  described  his  conduct  as
    "out of character and not something he would  have  ever  thought  about
    doing".  He pointed out that the offence was committed about  two  years
    before he wrote the letter and that he had grown up in the interim.   He
    claimed to have addressed  issues  that  led  him  to  offend  and  drew
    attention to his good behaviour in prison in support of  the  contention
    that he had re-organised his life.

42. He then went on to say how the Sandwell Youth Offenders' Team  had  made
    a pre-sentence report recommending community service because  they  felt
    he was not at risk to the public.

43. The letter is carefully written in legible manuscript.  No doubt he  had
    ample opportunity to consider its contents extremely carefully and quite
    possibly had advice about what he should so but he said what he did.

44. The appellant supported his account with an unsigned statement.   It  is
    not dated.  It essentially repeats things said elsewhere and so  we  are
    able to give it some weight.  He says how he missed his  family  in  the
    United Kingdom when he was in prison.

45. He said:

         "This is my first and only conviction, I have acknowledged that  my
         actions were wrong and I have done everything I have been asked to,
         I have complied with Rules and I am  willing  to  comply  with  the
         probation and any condition opposed [sic] on me in  the  community.
         I want to be a normal hardworking good citizen  and  contribute  to
         the UK and have my life back and finally put this horrid experience
         in the past."

46. He then went on to say how his whole life was  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He came to the United Kingdom when he was aged 11, after his father  had
    been arrested and taken away.  He had grown up in the United Kingdom and
    was educated in the United Kingdom and had made ties and friendships  in
    the United Kingdom and he was frightened of returning to the DRC.

47. He said that if he was allowed to stay in the United  Kingdom  he  would
    continue his education and hoped to study at university.

48. We note that the appellant gave evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and was cross-examined.  He answered questions then  confirming  he  had
    spent some time in Kinshasa with his father.

49. There is a statement from his mother, Mrs O-  S-.   This  confirms  that
    she and the appellant's brother and sister are now  naturalised  British
    citizens.   According  to  her  statement  the  appellant  passed   GCSE
    examinations in English, Mathematics, Science and French and obtained  a
    BTEC First Certificate Level 2 in Travel and Tourism and had enrolled at
    a local college to study BTEC  National  Diploma  in  Business  and  had
    completed a one year of a two year course when he was arrested.

50. She described the appellant as a "good hardworking and helpful boy"  and
    that she was shocked about his arrest because he had never been involved
    in "crime or bad company".  She had visited the appellant in prison and,
    understandably, he was finding life hard.  She gave an  example  of  how
    her other son, D, was struggling without his big brother.  D  could  not
    discuss with his mother his plans to join a football team in the way  he
    could with the appellant.

51. Paragraph 8  of  the  statement  is  particularly  telling.   There  the
    appellant's mother said:

         "The offences that A- V- has committed are inexcusable, but, he has
         served his prison sentence as a punishment for his acts.  A further
         punishment to A- V-, by removing him from  the  UK,  where  he  has
         lived for the past 8 years, to the DRC, a country he left as an  11
         year old child, would be too harsh a punishment.   That  would  not
         only be too harsh a punishment to A- V- but one to the rest  of  us
         his family members, particularly his younger siblings, S-  and  D-,
         who have readjusted in this country after  our  separation  in  the
         DRC."

52. She too gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and  in  answer  to
    questions in cross-examination said she had sent money to Kinshasa after
    she had left.

53. There is then correspondence from  other  family  members  and  friends.
    These are printed letters that are substantially similar to points  made
    in manuscript to the Secretary of State.   These  are  not  particularly
    helpful.  It is very hard to know the extent to which  the  writers  are
    expressing their own views and the extent to which they are saying  what
    they think they ought to say.  The description of the appellant  by  his
    sister as someone who is "a very caring and  kind  person,  he  wouldn't
    even hurt a fly" would not be recognised by the  unfortunate  women  who
    had him intrude in their home, masked and armed.   The  fact  that  they
    were not actually physically hurt helps to the extent that the situation
    would have been even worse if they had attacked  them  but  this  hardly
    makes for a good point.

54. A letter from a friend of the appellant's mother expressing the  opinion
    that the appellant is "not dangerous  to  the  community"  is  again  of
    limited value because it seems to be a theme in this case  that  no  one
    expected the appellant to commit the offence that he did  so  that  fact
    that  those  close  to  him  do  not  expect  him  to  reoffend  is  not
    particularly reassuring.  We do not regard these letters as particularly
    well-informed or objective but we do note that the appellant  has  close
    friends or family members who will stand up for him and that is to their
    credit, if not to his.

55. We do find that it is in the best interests of the  appellant's  younger
    brother and sister that  he  remains  in  the  United  Kingdom  because,
    notwithstanding his  criminal  conviction,  he  is  a  stabilising  male
    influence and we do give weight to their  interests  because  Parliament
    says that we must, but this element in the case adds  little  weight  to
    the balancing exercise. It is not a weighty point here.

56. We have considered the Pre-Sentence Report dated  5  July  2011  by  the
    Senior Court Officer Mr Jim Pearson which includes a version  of  events
    in which the appellant seeks to play down his responsibility.  There was
    no trial of the issue or any basis of plea entered before the  court  as
    far as we are aware.

57. Nevertheless, we find paragraph 2.6 of the  report  dated  5  July  2011
    more helpful where the Mr Pearson says:

         "Despite A- V-'s different version of  events  to  those  from  the
         Crown Prosecution Service documents he is still  very  upset  about
         being involved in this offence.  He stated that he felt awful about
         the impact that his actions would have had on the victims.   A-  V-
         made it clear that he was ashamed about what he had  done  and  was
         upset that he would now be viewed as a criminal.  He was also  able
         to express significant and comprehensive remorse  for  his  actions
         and was seriously concerned about the long-lasting  trauma  he  has
         caused.  These levels of  victim  empathy  are  very  positive  and
         indicate a clear potential for A- V- to comply  and  learn  from  a
         Community Order.

58. There is also a report from one Vicky Simmons, a Court Officer with  the
    Sandwell Youth Offending Service.  Her report is  not  dated.  We  think
    that it has to be read with the Pre-Sentence Report. She  concludes  her
    report by saying:

         "A- V- has demonstrated the ability to comply and work well  within
         the community.  Furthermore he has demonstrated  a  high  level  of
         commitment and co-operation throughout  his  involvement  with  the
         Bail Support Programme.  He is an articulate young man who is  able
         to comprehend the seriousness of his  offence  and  the  express  a
         desire academically achieve in life [sic].  He has been a  pleasure
         to supervise and has always been polite and well-mannered to  Youth
         Offending Officers."

59. There is a bundle from the  appellant  under  the  heading  "Appellant's
    Prison Records Bundle".

60. The report by the Offending Supervisor, Mr Rhys  Thomas  dated  5  March
    2013 is helpful.  He had supervised the  appellant  for  fifteen  months
    during his incarceration.  He said:

         "Please note due to A- V-'s limited  involvement  in  the  Criminal
         Justice System he did not  meet  the  criteria  for  any  Offending
         Behaviour  Programmes  (e.g.  Thinking  Skills  Programme)  TSB  or
         Controlling Anger and Learning to Manage it (CALM)."

61. The clear implication is that these limited resources would  go  to  the
    people  who  clearly  needed  such  training  and  it  was  not  to  the
    appellant's discredit that he was not qualified to take such  a  course.
    The report concluded by saying that the  appellant  had  been  compliant
    throughout his time in custody. His conduct had reached the point  where
    he was trusted to work and supervise others in the prison grounds.

62. The OASys Report of 10 January  2012  is  in  many  ways  very  similar.
    Section 2.11 under the heading "Does the offender accept  responsibility
    for the current offence?" is answered in the  affirmative  and  includes
    the following comment:

         "Despite A- V-'s differing version of events to the  police  report
         he is still very upset about being involved in  this  offence.   He
         stated that he felt "bad" about the impact his actions  would  have
         had on the victims".  In the interview A- V- made it clear that  he
         was ashamed about what he had done and that  he  had  felt  coerced
         into the offence.

63. A cautionary note is sounded under the heading "Section  7  -  lifestyle
    and associates".  It acknowledges that the appellant claimed that  since
    he had been in trouble his lifestyle had changed significantly and  that
    he no longer spent time hanging around in public places associating with
    whoever presented themselves.  Nevertheless, he was still on good  terms
    with one of his co-accused.  The appellant said that he trusted the  co-
    accused and that had got him into trouble. He was  determined  to  learn
    from his mistake.

64. The report also records  how  the  appellant  recognised  that  his  own
    criminal behaviour was unacceptable and that he was ashamed of  what  he
    had done.

65. There are then reports confirming the appellant  had  acted  responsibly
    and even creditably in prison.

66. The conclusion in the letter of 22 February 2013 that the appellant  was
    "assessed as a medium risk of harm to the public  from  robbery"  and  a
    "medium risk of reconviction" seems to arise  from  a  weighting  system
    that  acknowledges  the  previous  offences  and   weaknesses   in   the
    appellant's character.  It has to be read with  the  document  dated  20
    March 2013 from Mr Rhys-Thomas assigning the  appellant  firmly  to  the
    "low" band of risk for likely re-offending.

67. Of course we do not know what the appellant will do in the  future.   We
    know that he is a  young  man  apparently  capable  of  benefiting  from
    education who insists that he  has  learnt  the  consequences  of  being
    easily led or not standing up to peers who suggest bad things.

68. We know that those with experience who interviewed  him  found  that  he
    was able to appreciate the nature of the wrong that he  had  done.   The
    rather derogatory observation in the Reasons for Refusal Letter based on
    a partial reading of a detailed letter prepared by  the  appellant  does
    not stand up when assessed with the observations of  independent  people
    and experienced people with a professional obligation to give an  honest
    and reasoned opinion.

69. We recognise that the ability to keep out of trouble at a  time  when  a
    person's conduct  is  under  the  highest  degree  of  scrutiny  is  not
    particularly revealing but it is to the appellant's credit that  he  has
    not been in trouble since he has been released.

70. Much more importantly we give considerable weight  to  the  opinions  of
    those who have seen him in  custody  and  seen  his  reaction  to  their
    enquiries about his attitude to offending.  We think it is unlikely that
    he will be in trouble again.

71. It follows therefore that the evidence  before  us  suggests  that  this
    offence, bad as it was, is unlikely to be repeated.

72. We remind ourselves of paragraph 75 of  the  decision  in  Maslov  which
    states:

         "In short, the court considers that for a settled migrant  who  has
         lawfully spent all or the major part of his or  her  childhood  and
         youth in the host country very  serious  reasons  are  required  to
         justify expulsion.  This is  all  the  more  so  where  the  person
         concerned committed the offences underlying the  expulsion  measure
         as a juvenile."

73. The appellant has clearly spent a major part (but  not  a  majority)  of
    his childhood and youth in the United Kingdom.  He has  not  always  had
    permission to be in the United Kingdom but he  introduced  himself  soon
    after arrival. He was brought to the country at  the  age  of  11  years
    cannot be criticised for the conduct of those who brought  him.  He  has
    had unconditional leave to remain since 2008.

74.  The  clear  point  is  this  is  a  young  man  whose   attitudes   and
    understanding has been shaped largely by British society.

75. We also find that he has  no  particular  aptitude  for  living  in  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo.  It is not easy to get a clear picture  of
    what would await him there because it has not been possible to  rely  on
    things that he has said but there is no reason to think he has  been  in
    the DRC since coming to the United Kingdom in 2005.

76. Further, the Democratic Republic of Congo is a difficult  country  where
    life is not lived as it is in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  would  be  an
    enormous wrench for him to establish himself there.  We avoid the use of
    the phrase "re-establish" because he has no adult experience  of  living
    in that country.

77. The quotation from Maslov is not statute law. It is,  we  find,  a  fair
    summary of the reasoning in an authoritative decision to  which  we  are
    obliged to have regard. It ruled on the approach to take  when  a  young
    person's private and family life had to be balanced against  the  public
    good in his being removed.

78. The clear meaning of Maslov is that removing a young  foreign  criminal,
    such as the appellant, would usually be disproportionate to  any  proper
    purpose.  The requirement that "very serious  reasons  are  required  to
    justify expulsion" should be well-known to immigration practitioners and
    Home Office decision makers and should be clear  when  reasons  for  the
    decision are given.  We have looked for the "very  serious  reasons"  in
    the respondent's decision and we have found none.  We found the  history
    of a young person convicted of a very serious offence.  We do not accept
    that he is still a danger to the United Kingdom.   The  evidence  points
    the other way. He is intent on living industriously and there  are  good
    reasons to think that he will achieve that.  It  is  well-recognised  in
    European and United Kingdom law that it is wrong to treat a child as  if
    he were an adult and the appellant was not an adult  when  he  committed
    the offence that has led to all this trouble.

79. Nothing we say  here  should  be  seen  by  anyone  as  diminishing  the
    seriousness of his criminal activity.  It is unusual to start a criminal
    career with anything as serious as aggravated burglary and possessing  a
    firearm but there is no evidence that  this  appellant  was  in  trouble
    before and he was sentenced  on  the  basis  that  this  was  his  first
    experience of criminal activity.   The  punishment,  although  no  doubt
    wholly justified for what he did, was a condign  sentence  for  a  young
    person, which, if we may  respectfully  observe,  is  no  more  than  he
    deserved.  The evidence suggests that he has learned his lesson.

80. We are quite unpersuaded that it is proportionate  to  remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom now that he has completed his sentence.

81. It follows therefore that having set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal we allow the appeal on human rights grounds.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 July 2013                   |








