
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00213/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined On the Papers at Field    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 13 March 2019                     |On 26 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                mr Jan Gajdos
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, who was born  on  26th  March  1974,  is  a  citizen  of
    Slovakia.  He seeks to appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 27th March 2017 to issue a deportation order pursuant to  Section
    5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and Regulations 19(b) and  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chana  on  21st  June
    2018.  The appeal was dismissed.  On that occasion  the  appellant  did
    not attend the hearing and that was taken against him by the Judge.  He
    had been  removed  to  Slovakia  on  3rd  May  2017  but  had  made  no
    application to return  to  the  UK  for  his  hearing  or  to  instruct
    solicitors.

3.    Representing  himself  in  the  appeal  against  that  decision,   the
    appellant raised a number of matters of concern  which  were  found  by
    Judge Page to be arguable.  Thus, it was  that  on  7th  November  2018
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

4.   The matter came before ourselves to determine whether or not there  was
    an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.   The  hearing  on
    that matter was on 22nd January 2019.

5.   At the hearing we were represented with a  letter  from  the  appellant
    explaining that he would like to  excuse  himself  from  attending  the
    hearing because of health problems and requesting us to  determine  the
    appeal on the arguments written in a previous letter to the Tribunal.

6.   We were concerned as  a  matter  of  fairness  in  the  proceedings  to
    understand clearly what was meant by the letter.  It was not  clear  to
    us whether the appellant would have wished to have been present at  the
    appeal or whether he was content for the matter to be dealt with in his
    absence.

7.   Following the adjournment we set out our reasons for doing  so  and  we
    also set out our concerns as we saw it as to the nature of the decision
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana which was the subject of the appeal.



8.    A number of directions were issued in our decision.

9.   The appellant in an e-mail of 6th March 2019 indicated  that  he  would
    like to attend the hearing regarding to his appeal, explaining that  he
    has changed his address in Slovakia.  He did not  however  engage  with
    the other matters set out in the directions.

10.  It is to be noted that the respondent was also invited  to  consider  a
    number of matters and whether or not he would resist the setting  aside
    of the decision to be  remade  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    directions indicated that after 28 days  the  matter  would  be  placed
    before  Judge  King  for  further  directions  as  to  its  listing  or
    alternatively for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  The fundamental issue of concern in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    was the finding by the Judge that the  appellant  enjoyed  the  highest
    level of protection.  This was in the face of the contention,  made  on
    behalf of the respondent, that he had not acquired any permanent  right
    of residence under the EEA  Regulations.   We  found  it  difficult  to
    understand how the Judge had come to that conclusion.   It  was  not  a
    matter that had been analysed with particular accuracy in the decision.



12.   The appellant had been involved with a serious offence  of  production
    of a class B drug cannabis, for which offence he was convicted on  14th
    July 2016 and sentenced to one year and six  months'  imprisonment.  If
    indeed he was entitled only to be  removed  from  the  jurisdiction  on
    imperative grounds of public policy, it is arguable that  that  offence
    would not reach that threshold.

13.  We note  also  that  the  Judge  seemingly  held  the  absence  of  the
    appellant from the hearing against him.  We  noted  that  the  Rule  24
    response, filed on behalf of the respondent, would seem to support  the
    unsatisfactory nature of the decision, rather than to preserve it.

14.  It seems to us to be unnecessary to  hold  a  further  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal because we are quite clear that this is a decision  that
    cannot fairly stand and accordingly is to be set aside to be remade.

15.  Having regard to the Senior  President's  Practice  Direction  we  find
    that the appropriate venue for a rehearing is the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The matter will be remitted  for  a  full  rehearing  of  the  relevant
    issues.

16.  It will be for that Tribunal to  issue  the  necessary  directions  and
    provide to the appellant the appropriate advice in  order  for  him  to
    make  a  proper  application  to  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Regulation 38 to present his case before the Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date   22 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


