
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00122/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 January 2020                  |On 23 January 2020                  |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                          ABDIRAHIM ABDULLAHI ELMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr.  A.  Bandegani,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Duncan
                    Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of  Belgium.  He  was  born  in  Mogadishu,
    Somalia, on 5 July 1997 and is presently aged 22.

 2. He appeals against a decision  of  the  respondent  to  deport  him  to
    Belgium, dated 2 February 2018. His appeal is under  regulation  36  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ('the  2016
    Regulations'). The respondent has not issued a section  120  notice  to
    date and so no  human  rights  appeal  arises:  Munday  (EEA  decision:
    grounds of appeal) [2019] UKUT 00091 (IAC)

 3. This matter was initially considered by JFtT Cameron, who dismissed the
    appeal by a decision dated 21  March  2019.  By  means  of  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 August 2019 I found the Judge had materially erred in
    law and  so  set  aside  his  decision,  though  for  the  purposes  of
    reconsideration the Judge's findings of fact identified at  [54],  [55]
    and [65] continued to stand:

         "54.     Given my acceptance that Mrs Hamid was a qualified  person
             from 2005 she clearly meets the requirements of regulation  15
             in that she has resided  in  this  country  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in accordance with  the  regulations  and
             was therefore entitled to permanent residence.  The  appellant
             as her EEA national dependent and being  a  minor  would  also
             therefore be entitled to permanent residence as the  five-year
             period clearly was completed prior  to  his  first  period  of
             detention on 23 October 2014.

         55.      It is not disputed that the appellant  has  been  in  this
             country in excess of 10 years and in view of my above findings
             I accept that his mother has  been  exercising  Treaty  rights
             since 2005. This is evidence that she has worked  or  been  in
             receipt of jobseeker's  allowance  throughout  the  period  up
             until 2018.

         ...

         65 I am therefore satisfied on  the  evidence  available  that  the
             appellant can meet the continuity of residence.

 4. The latter finding is concerned with a period of time the appellant was
    absent from this country between 2011 and 2012.

 5. This matter was listed before me on 17 January  2020  for  the  resumed
    hearing.

Background

 6. The appellant's parents travelled to Belgium in  1998  and  the  family
    were subsequently granted refugee status in  that  country.  After  the
    death of his father he entered the United Kingdom in 2003  and  resided
    here with his mother and siblings, attending local schools.

 7. Since 2011 he has  accumulated  thirteen  convictions  for  twenty-five
    offences. These include  five  convictions  for  offences  against  the
    person, two for theft and kindred offences and one for a  public  order
    offence.

 8. Whilst a minor the appellant  was  absent  from  this  country  on  two
    occasions, the first being from December 2011 to  March  2012  when  he
    travelled to Kenya. He was aged 14 at this time. He  returned  to  this
    country and underwent an operation. The second period was in 2012 where
    for approximately six months he initially resided in Sweden and then in
    Kenya. During this time, he was recovering  from  his  operation.  JFtT
    Cameron accepted that these periods of absence did  not  exceed  twelve
    months in total and did not adversely impact  upon  his  continuity  of
    residence. This is  a  preserved  finding  of  fact  consequent  to  my
    decision of 23 August 2019.

 9. The appellant was sentenced to  a  four-month  detention  and  training
    order on 23 October 2014 for possession of a bladed article and  for  a
    failure to comply with a youth rehabilitation order.

Index offence

10. Between 8 July 2015 and 27 October 2015, a time when the appellant  was
    aged 18, there was a well organised system of the  supply  of  class  A
    drugs to drug users in Hastings and nearby towns on the south coast  of
    England. Along with the  appellant  there  were  twelve  other  persons
    involved in the conspiracy to deal drugs on  the  streets.  During  the
    period of  the  conspiracy,  undercover  test  purchase  officers  made
    contact with the conspirators and made no fewer than 30 test  purchases
    from a number of different premises where wraps of small quantities  of
    class A drugs were supplied both for cash and in other  cases  property
    in lieu of cash. Officers who observed this activity also saw  numerous
    other occasions of supply of drugs to others. A telephone  line  called
    the 'Bugsy' line was used to order drugs and a rendezvous was  arranged
    in some place in town or a location where the drugs could be  collected
    in one form or another.

11. During the arrest phase police officers searched  houses  connected  to
    the conspiracy. A number of wraps of class A drugs were  located:  22.6
    grams of cocaine, 52.28 grams of  crack  cocaine,  and  38.9  grams  of
    heroin. They were also found to be of high purity: the cocaine was 73%;
    the crack cocaine varied between 70 to 75%; and the heroin, 63 to  69%.
    A number of the other wraps that had been supplied during the period of
    the conspiracy had also been found to be of higher than  normal  purity
    for street supply.

12. One of the conspirators, Abid Rizaq Hussein ('Hussein') was  identified
    by the prosecution as the senior figure in  this  conspiracy,  and  the
    appellant  was  his  immediate  subordinate   lieutenant.   Under   the
    definitive guidelines for drug offences,  their  roles  were,  however,
    described by the prosecution as 'significant', rather  than  'leading',
    because there were undoubtedly others higher up the chain  who  ensured
    that the drugs that were to be distributed  on  the  south  coast  were
    being supplied to Hussein. Both Hussein and  the  appellant  came  from
    London to sell drugs in the Hastings area.

13. The appellant was sentenced on 24 June 2016 by  HHJ  Tait,  sitting  at
    Lewes Crown Court, on two counts of conspiracy to  supply  respectively
    heroin and cocaine, to which he had  earlier  pleaded  guilty.  He  was
    sentenced to seven and a half years'  detention  in  a  young  offender
    institution. His sentence was reduced to six years  concurrent  by  the
    Court of Appeal on 3 March 2007: [2017] EWCA Crim 230.

Decision to deport

14. On 2 February 2018 the respondent issued a deportation order under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ('the  2016
    Regulations') and the Immigration Acts 1971 and 1988, providing reasons
    for this decision by way of a letter of the same date.

Hearing before this Tribunal

15. The appellant attended the  resumed  hearing  and  was  accompanied  by
    family members. I was informed  by  the  representatives  that  it  was
    agreed that the matter could proceed by means of brief submissions.

16. In his usual fair and careful manner, Mr. Walker accepted on behalf  of
    the respondent that on the particular facts arising in this matter  the
    period of imprisonment following the appellant's conviction in 2016 did
    not break the appellant's integrative links with this country and so he
    enjoyed the  higher  level  of  protection  rights,  namely  imperative
    grounds of public  security.  Mr.  Walker  confirmed  that  though  the
    respondent was not conceding this appeal, it was accepted that she  had
    'quite a high hurdle' to cross in light of the  evidence  and  relevant
    facts that arise in this matter.

Decision

17. Whilst the appellant's conviction in 2016 means that he is  a  'foreign
    criminal' in terms of sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders'  Act  2007,
    as an EEA national his position is very different to a non-EEA  foreign
    criminal.  Directive  2004/38,  the  citizens'  rights  directive,   as
    transposed  into  domestic  law  by  the  2016  Regulations,   provides
    additional protections against expulsion where an EEA national has long
    residence in a host state. By virtue of regulation 23(6)  of  the  2016
    Regulations an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom  may  be
    removed if the respondent has decided that such removal is justified on
    the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
    accordance with regulation 27.

18. The present hierarchy of levels of protection,  based  on  criteria  of
    increasing stringency, is identifiable as:

         1) a general criterion  that  removal  may  be  justified  'on  the
         grounds of public policy, public security or public health';

         2) a more specific criterion, applicable to  those  with  permanent
         rights of residence, that  they  may  not  be  removed  'except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security';

         3) the most stringent criterion, applicable to a  person  'who  has
         resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at  least
         ten years prior to the relevant decision', who may not  be  removed
         except on 'imperative grounds of public security'.

19. Regulation 27(4)(a) of the 2016 Regulations provides that a decision to
    deport may not be taken except on imperative grounds of public security
    in respect of an EEA national who has a right  of  permanent  residence
    under regulation 15 and who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of at least ten years prior to the decision. This  is
    the 'imperative grounds'  threshold.  A  step  below  this  protection,
    regulation 27(3) establishes that a relevant decision to deport may not
    be taken in respect of a person with a  right  of  permanent  residence
    under regulation 15 except on serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and
    security: 'serious grounds threshold'.

20. Regulation 27(5)(c) requires that the decision to expel  the  appellant
    must be based exclusively on his  personal  conduct  and  his  personal
    conduct must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. The  onus
    is placed on the respondent to establish such  serious  threat:  Arranz
    (EEA Regulations- deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC) at [81].

21. JFtT Cameron found that both  the  appellant  and  his  mother  secured
    permanent residence on an unknown date in 2010  and  further  that  the
    appellant's sojourns in Kenya and Sweden when aged 14 and  15  did  not
    break his continuity of residence in this country. The  respondent  did
    not contest before me that the appellant's detention  in  October  2014
    failed  to  break  his  integrative  links  with  this   country.   The
    respondent's position was appropriate as by this date the appellant had
    been in this country for some 11 years, since the age of 5, and  served
    no more than 2 months in detention.

22. By the time the decision to deport was issued, the  respondent  accepts
    that the appellant had been present in this country for some 15  years.
    In order to decide whether the  appellant  enjoys  the  most  stringent
    level of protection, the Tribunal is required to decide as  to  whether
    his three-year period of imprisonment from 2015 to 2018 interrupts  the
    continuous nature of his residence so as to deny him  such  protection.
    In C-400/12 Secretary of State for the Home Department v. MG (Portugal)
    EU:C:2014:9, [2014] 1 W.L.R. 2441 the CJEU observed that  a  period  of
    imprisonment has the effect of interrupting the continuity of residence
    for the relevant purpose; but that in order to decide whether the  non-
    continuous nature of the period of  10  years  preceding  the  decision
    prevents the person  concerned  from  enjoying  the  highest  level  of
    protection, it is necessary to carry out an overall assessment  of  the
    person's situation at the time when the question  of  expulsion  arose,
    see [33]-[35]. The Court added,  at  [36],  that  although  periods  of
    imprisonment interrupted the continuity of residence:

         '... such periods may - together with the other  factors  going  to
         make up the entirety of relevant considerations in each  individual
         case - to  be  taken  into  account  by  the  national  authorities
         responsible for applying article 28(3) of that directive as part of
         the  overall  assessment  required  for  determining  whether   the
         integrating links previously forged with the host Member State have
         broken,  and  this  determining  whether  the  enhanced  protection
         provided for in that provision will be granted.'

23. The Grand Chamber of the  CJEU  held  in  C-316/16  B  v.  Land  Baden-
    Wurttemberg; Vomero v. Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    EU:C:2018:256; [2019] QB 126, at [70 and operative part,  paragraph  2]
    that article 28(3)(a) must be interpreted as meaning that, in the  case
    of an EEA citizen who has served a custodial sentence and against  whom
    an expulsion decision is adopted, the condition of having  'resided  in
    the host Member State for the previous ten years'  laid  down  in  that
    provision may be satisfied where an overall assessment of the  person's
    situation, taking into account all the relevant aspects, leads  to  the
    conclusion that, notwithstanding that detention, the integrative  links
    between the person concerned and the host Member State  have  not  been
    broken. Those aspects were identified at [72]: 'It is necessary to take
    into account, as regards the integrative links forged  by  B  with  the
    host Member State during the period of residence before his  detention,
    the fact that, the more those integrative links  with  that  State  are
    solid - including from a social, cultural and  family  perspective,  to
    the point where, for example, the person concerned is genuinely  rooted
    in the society of that State, as found by the referring  court  in  the
    main proceedings - the lower the probability that a period of detention
    could have resulted in those links being broken  and,  consequently,  a
    discontinuity of the 10-year period of residence.' The more  solid  the
    integrative links to a host state, including from  a  social,  cultural
    and family perspective, the lower the probability those are  broken  by
    imprisonment. At [73] the Grand Chamber observed: 'Relevant factors  in
    that overall assessment  may  include,  as  observed  by  the  Advocate
    General in points 123 to 125 of his Opinion, first, the nature  of  the
    offence that resulted in the period of imprisonment in question and the
    circumstances in which that offence was committed, and,  secondly,  all
    the relevant factors as regards the behaviour of the  person  concerned
    during the period of imprisonment.'

24. The Upper Tribunal held  in  Essa  (EEA  -  Rehabilitation/Integration)
    [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 980, at [28] that the longer the
    residence the greater the degree of integration was likely to be.

25. By working backwards from the  date  of  the  notice  of  expulsion  in
    February 2018, when the appellant was aged 20, the Tribunal is required
    to consider the relevant period of imprisonment over the  preceding  10
    years and  to  evaluate  whether  the  integrative  links  between  the
    appellant and this country have been  broken.  This  is  an  evaluative
    assessment. The appellant was born in Somalia and lived in Belgium  for
    a limited period of time before relocating to this country when aged 5.
    He attended primary and  secondary  school  in  this  country  and  his
    primary social influences are British. At the time  of  his  arrest  in
    2015 he was aged 18. I observe the conspiracy commenced days  after  he
    turned 18 and  I  am  satisfied  that  he  was  previously  engaged  in
    criminality as a minor. I am further satisfied that he was  subject  to
    adverse adult criminal influences whilst a vulnerable minor,  observing
    that  Hussein,  who  was  aged  approximately  26  when  arrested,  was
    directing the appellant in  the  conspiracy.  I  am  satisfied  to  the
    requisite standard that Hussein was directing the appellant in criminal
    enterprises before he turned 18.  The  appellant  accepted  during  his
    OASys assessment that at the time of his arrest in 2015  he  was  using
    cocaine and such use was causing significant problems.  Therefore,  the
    appellant was engaged in serious criminality, but such behaviour was in
    significant  part  influenced  by   adult   criminals   targeting   his
    vulnerability as a minor.

26. In considering as to whether the  appellant's  integrative  links  have
    been broken by his time in prison, I commence with the  length  of  his
    sentence. Three years is a significant  period  of  time,  but  not  so
    significant that contact with society is  automatically  diminished  or
    lost. I further note the seriousness of the offences.  However,  though
    such criminality is not excused by the  appellant's  young  age,  I  do
    factor into my assessment the fact that the appellant had just  reached
    majority and was significantly influenced by adult criminals. Whilst in
    prison he enjoyed enhanced  status,  earned  privileges  and  undertook
    several vocational courses. Upon considering the evidence in the  round
    I am satisfied that whilst the appellant's integrative links with  this
    country may have been under some strain for a period of time, adversely
    influenced by adult criminals whilst he was a  vulnerable  minor,  they
    did not break. I note the improvement in behaviour  whilst  in  custody
    and away from adverse adult influences, such behaviour underpinning his
    present pro-social attitude. I also observe the significant strength of
    his connection to this country, his home since the age of 5, as well as
    the continued support he received  from  his  family  who  visited  him
    regularly  whilst  he  was  in  prison.  In  such  circumstances,   the
    continuous nature of his residence was not  interrupted  by  his  being
    placed on remand in 2015 and sentenced to a  term  of  imprisonment  in
    2016 so as to deny him the most stringent level of protection.

27. In C-348/09 PI v. Obergurgermeisterin der Stadt Remscheid [2012] QB 799
    the Grand Chamber confirmed  the  concept  of  'imperative  grounds  of
    public security' presupposed not only the  existence  of  a  threat  to
    public security, but also that such a threat was of a particularly high
    degree of seriousness. The Grand Chamber confirmed that although Member
    States retain the freedom  to  determine  the  requirements  of  public
    policy and public security in accordance with  their  varying  national
    needs, these requirements are to be interpreted strictly,  particularly
    where it is sought to justify a derogation from the principle  of  free
    movement of persons. The issue of any expulsion measure is  conditional
    on  the  requirement  that  the  personal  conduct  of  the  individual
    concerned represents a genuine, present threat  affecting  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society or of  the  host  Member  State.  That
    generally implies the existence of a propensity to act in the same  way
    in  future.  The  host  Member  State  also  has  to  take  account  of
    considerations such as the length of residence of  the  individual  and
    his age, state of health, family and  economic  situation,  social  and
    cultural integration into the host state and the extent  of  his  links
    with the country of origin.

28. Imperative grounds of public security presuppose not only the existence
    of a threat to public security, but also  that  such  threat  is  of  a
    particularly  high  degree  of  seriousness:   C-145/09   Land   Baden-
    Wurttemberg v Tsakouridis EU:C:2010:708, [2011] 2 C.M.L.R. 11

29.  The  Upper  Tribunal  confirmed  in  GW  (EEA  reg  21:   'fundamental
    interests') Netherlands [2009] UKAIT 00050; [2010] Imm AR 269 that  the
    'fundamental interests' of a society is a question to be determined  by
    reference to the legal rules governing the society in question, for  it
    is unlikely that conduct which is subject  to  no  prohibition  can  be
    regarded as threatening those interests. The 2016 Regulations, Schedule
    1, paragraph 7 sets out what the fundamental interests of  society  are
    in the United Kingdom.

30. Deterrence, in the sense of measures  designed  to  deter  others  from
    committing similar offences, has  of  itself  no  part  to  play  in  a
    decision to remove an individual offender  and  does  not  fall  to  be
    considered in the proportionality assessment.

31. The appellant relies upon two psychological assessments. The  first  is
    authored by Deborah Kelland, BSc  (Hons),  MSc,  C.Psychol,  registered
    consultant forensic psychologist, dated 3 September 2018. The second is
    authored  by  Elaine   Deighton   B.SC.   MSc.   C.Psychol,   chartered
    psychologist and dated 29 September 2019. The respondent did not object
    to the appellant relying upon the second report  and  made  no  adverse
    observations  upon  either  report.  Ms.  Kelland  observes  that   the
    appellant has demonstrated a sustained period of positive behaviour and
    self-control. He has worked on addressing substance misuse. She  opines
    at [6.3.6 - 6.3.7]:

         'Risk scenarios are hypothetical situations  for  consideration  of
         risk management and intervention needs. For [the appellant]  a  key
         risk situation would be if he were to have no money to  look  after
         his needs or wants. In such a situation he might be at risk  of  an
         acquisitive crime such as robbery. This would equate to a  risk  of
         instrumental aggression. An example  of  a  scenario  for  risk  of
         reactive aggression would be if he felt physically threatened, e.g.
         by someone being in his space.

         I  assess  that  the  risk  of  serious  physical  harm  from  [the
         appellant] is low. In the community the risk of  imminent  violence
         would be low. While he is still in a young  offender's  institution
         the risk of imminent violence is moderate as he  is  amongst  other
         criminally minded young men in  a  volatile  environment.  However,
         with the information available there is no evidence of  him  having
         engaged in violence in the past nine months.'

32. Ms. Deighton opines that the appellant presents  at  the  current  time
    with a low level of risk, detailing, inter alia:

         'It  is  extremely  positive  that  [the  appellant]  has  made   a
         commitment to manage his risk since his release in  November  2018.
         Looking to the future, it is my clinical opinion  that  Mr.  Elmi's
         risk remains manageable in the community and that  his  risk  would
         remain low if he was to remain residing in the UK.'

33. I further note that the appellant is presently in the early  stages  of
    running his own business. He has  received  support  from  the  Princes
    Trust and is investigating the  development  of  another  business.  He
    enjoys close support from his immediate family.

34. The appellant is therefore assessed to be of low risk of offending  and
    such risk is manageable in the community. He has been proactive in  the
    community for over 12 months and has commenced self-employment. He  has
    addressed the issue of drug consumption. He has  removed  himself  from
    peer pressure and the group of people he previously  spent  time  with.
    His present pro-social behaviour strongly suggests  that  he  does  not
    have a propensity to sell drugs or use violence in the same way in  the
    future.

35. Having conducted an overall assessment I find that that  the  appellant
    throughout the relevant period enjoyed, and continues to  enjoy,  solid
    links to the United Kingdom through his  social,  cultural  and  family
    life and the continuity of the appellant's  10-year  residence  at  the
    date of decision was not broken  by  his  imprisonment.  Therefore,  he
    enjoys  imperative  grounds  protection.  The  index  offence,   though
    concerned with the sale of drugs, is not such as to give  rise  to  the
    present existence of a high degree of serious threat to public security
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  The  respondent
    has not been able to satisfy the burden placed upon  her  to  establish
    that the conduct of the appellant meets the relevant imperative grounds
    threshold. The appellant therefore succeeds on his appeal  against  the
    decision to deport.

Notice of decision

36. By means of a decision dated 23 August 2019 this Tribunal set aside the
    Judge's decision promulgated on  21  March  2019  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCE').

37. The decision is re-made, and the appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 January 2020



To the Respondent
Fee Award

No fee was paid or was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 January 2020
