
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00125/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30th October 2018                 |On 8th November 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ARJAN [F]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Dirie, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT')  dated  19  April  2018,  in  which  it
         allowed the respondent's appeal against the SSHD's  decision  dated
         19 January 2018 to deport him pursuant to the Immigration (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regs').



Background

      2. The respondent is a citizen of Albania.  He entered the UK in  2002
         and remained unlawfully until he was granted a residence card on  7
         September 2016, on the basis of his relationship with his unmarried
         partner, a citizen of Lithuania (and  therefore  an  EEA  citizen).
         They have a child, born in 2015.

      3. On 24 August  2017  the  respondent  was  sentenced  to  18  months
         imprisonment for actual bodily harm against his partner.

      4. In light of this offence, the respondent was served with notice  of
         deportation on 19 January 2018.

FTT proceedings

      5. The FTT heard evidence from the respondent, his partner and brother
         but concluded that the SSHD had not displaced the burden  upon  him
         to demonstrate  that  the  respondent's  removal  is  justified  on
         grounds of public policy / security, pursuant to regulation  23  of
         the 2016 Regs.

Appeal to the UT

      6. The SSHD appealed to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') in  lengthy  grounds
         which overly focus on  articulating  disagreement  with  the  FTT's
         decision.  When read as a whole, the grounds do however submit that
         the FTT failed to take into account relevant evidence  when  making
         its findings on the seriousness of the index offence and the  risks
         posed by the respondent.

      7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the FTT, before being
         granted by the UT.

      8. At the hearing Mr Bramble relied upon the grounds  of  appeal.   He
         argued that the FTT applied  the  elevated  threshold  of  "serious
         grounds" when the respondent did not have permanent residence.   He
         also relied upon the second ground of appeal to the effect that the
         FTT failed to take relevant evidence into account.

      9. We asked Ms Dirie to clarify aspects of the chronology, which  were
         unclear to us.  She explained that  the  respondent  completed  his
         custodial sentence on 2 January 2018 but  remained  detained  under
         immigration powers until he was granted bail later  on  in  January
         2018.  The respondent was detained again with  a  view  to  removal
         shortly after this and not released until after the FTT hearing, on
         12 May 2018.  Ms Dirie therefore acknowledged that as at  the  date
         of the FTT decision, the respondent remained in detention.

     10. Ms Dirie invited us to find that the FTT took into account all  the
         relevant evidence, even if this was not expressly referred to,  and
         invited us to dismiss the appeal.

     11. After hearing from both representatives, we reserved our decision.

Error of law discussion

     12. The FTT properly directed itself that the burden of proof was  upon
         the SSHD to demonstrate that the respondent represented a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat justifying his  deportation
         on public  policy  /  security  grounds.   The  FTT  also  properly
         directed itself to SSHD  v  Robinson  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  85,  which
         provides guidance on the relevant factors to be taken into  account
         when determining this issue.

Risk assessment

     13. The FTT's findings on risk are inconsistent and mischaracterise the
         evidence available.  At [30] the FTT observes an absence of  police
         intelligence to suggest the respondent is  at  risk  of  committing
         other  further  offences  but  fails  to  resolve  this  with   the
         conditions for his  licence  period  expiring  on  3  October  2018
         expressly prohibiting approach or communication  with  his  partner
         and child either directly or indirectly,  without  prior  approval.
         Although the FTT refers to the licence conditions at [31], this  is
         done in the context of the partner having taken steps and  obtained
         approval to have contact with him whilst he remains  in  detention.
         The partner's own willingness to have contact with  the  respondent
         (who has been so violent toward her as recently as 2017 that he was
         sentenced to a lengthy period of imprisonment) of course  does  not
         in itself mean that that his risk has been lowered.

     14. The FTT appears to find at [33] that the respondent  is  no  longer
         considered by the probation service to be a danger to  his  partner
         and child.  This is based upon a misunderstanding of the email from
         the probation service dated 29 March 2018 referred to at [32].  The
         probation service agreed to permit visits in the  detention  centre
         and if the respondent is bailed within the community "on a  stepped
         up basis" in order for him "to provide the  necessary  reassurances
         that he is no longer a risk to his  partner".    Probation  service
         has not assessed the respondent not to be a danger to his  partner.
         Far from it.  They have assessed that contact can safely take place
         within the confines of detention for obvious reasons.   As  to  the
         community, there was no assessment that the respondent is no longer
         a danger or can return to live with  his  partner  and  child,  but
         rather that he will  need  to  be  assessed  step  by  step  before
         probation can be reassured he is no longer a risk.

Seriousness of offence

     15. The FTT has referred in  some  detail  to  the  judge's  sentencing
         comments but has focused upon the aspects that show the  respondent
         in a more  benevolent  light  without  considering  the  sentencing
         comments as a  whole  or  placing  the  more  positive  aspects  in
         context.

     16. First, the FTT drew attention to the basis of the plea accepted  by
         the sentencing judge as being limited to the respondent pushing his
         partner down the last few stairs (and not involving  any  punching,
         kicking or slamming her head in the manner  alleged)  at  [19]  and
         [34] but has omitted to take into account important  considerations
         relevant to the plea, as identified by the  sentencing  judge:  the
         respondent only pleaded guilty on the day of  trial  (to  a  lesser
         charge) and maintained from the date of offence in  April  2017  to
         June 2017 at least, that his partner was drunk and he found her  at
         the bottom of the stairs in that state;  the  prosecution  did  not
         accept the basis of  the  plea  but  were  not  in  a  position  to
         challenge it as the partner did not attend the  trial  even  though
         she was the subject of a witness summons; the  basis  of  the  plea
         accepted in any event is a "serious one" involving an act that  was
         "extremely dangerous"; there are aggravating features including the
         presence of  the  couple's  young  child,  evidence  of  gratuitous
         degradation through insults the respondent was hurling  during  the
         assault and his past driving offences.

     17. Second,  it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  the  judge's  sentencing
         comments, which forms the proper basis of the circumstances of  the
         relatively recent index offence, with the FTT's apparent acceptance
         of the partner's evidence that she  attempted  to  make  withdrawal
         statements and did not support the  prosecution  case  against  the
         respondent.

     18. Third, the FTT did  not  accept  the  SSHD's  submission  that  the
         respondent caused his partner physical, psychological and emotional
         harm at [37].  However, it is difficult to see how  this  could  be
         disputed given the judge's sentencing comments that the  respondent
         was taken by ambulance to hospital having  sustained  a  number  of
         injuries and fractures to her collarbone,  nose  and  finger.   The
         psychological and emotional harm involved in such an assault  by  a
         partner are inevitable.  In any event, the  sentencing  judge  also
         referred to the partner having gone for  some  time  to  a  woman's
         refuge in an undisclosed location.

     19. Fourth, the emphasis at [37] that the respondent showed remorse  at
         the scene of the  offence  and  contacted  the  emergency  services
         himself was not placed in its proper context:  the  respondent  did
         not plead guilty until the day of the trial on 24 August  2017  and
         maintained from the date of offence in April 2017 to June  2017  at
         least that his partner was drunk and he found her at the bottom  of
         the stairs in that state.

     20. For the reasons set out above, the  FTT  failed  to  take  material
         matters into account when assessing whether the respondent presents
         a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to  the  requirements  of
         public policy / security.  This renders its factual findings unsafe
         and the decision must be set aside.

Disposal

     21. We have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and have  decided  that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  This  is  because
         completely fresh findings of fact in relation to the assessment  of
         risk in light of the updated evidence are necessary.

Decision

     22. The FTT decision contains a material error of law and is set aside.

     23. The appeal is remitted to the FTT.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
31 October 2018

