
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00407/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham             |Decision Promulgated            |
|on 28 November 2016             | on 9 January 2017              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             JOSE MANUEL SEMEDO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Barfield instructed by Cartwright King
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

         On 10 August 2016 it was found the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
         law such that its decision was set aside and needed to  be  remade.
         Directions were provided and  the  matter  returned  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal today for the purposes of a Resumed hearing.

         An  updated  bundle   has   been   provided   by   the   appellants
         representative. The appellant was removed  in  September  2015  and
         there was no attendance by his  sister  or  partner  to  give  oral
         evidence, even though they are in the United Kingdom.   Before  the
         First-tier Tribunal they failed to attend and sought to rely upon a
         written statement and letter.



Background

 3. The reasons for finding a material error of law are as follows:

             "14. Regulation 21(5) of  the  2006  Regulation  states  that,
             where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;  (b)   the   decision   must   be   based
                  exclusively  on  the  personal  conduct  of   the   person
                  concerned;  (c)  the  personal  conduct  of   the   person
                  concerned  must   represent   a   genuine,   present   and
                  sufficiently  serious  threat   affecting   one   of   the
                  fundamental interests of  society;  (d)  matters  isolated
                  from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which  relate  to
                  considerations of general prevention do  not  justify  the
                  decision; (e) a person's previous criminal convictions  do
                  not in themselves justify the decision.

             15.  Regulation 21(6) states that  before  taking  a  relevant
             decision on the grounds of public policy or public security in
             relation to a person who is resident in the United Kingdom the
             decision maker must take account of considerations such as the
             age, state of health, family and  economic  situation  of  the
             person,  the  person's  length  of  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration into the
             United Kingdom and the extent of the person's links  with  his
             country of origin.

             16.  By virtue of Regulation 21(3) a decision  to  remove  may
             not be taken in respect of a person with a permanent right  of
             residence under regulation 15 except  on  serious  grounds  of
             public policy or public security. The Judge failed  to  assess
             the nature of the protection Mr Semedo is entitled to.  It  is
             asserted that five years qualifying residence has been  proved
             such that he is entitled to be  viewed  as  a  person  with  a
             permeant right of residence  and  therefore  entitled  to  the
             higher level of protection. Whether this is a  material  error
             depends upon the sustainability of the  Judges  assessment  of
             there being no real risk of re-offending.

             17.  The burden of proof falls upon Mr  Semedo  to  prove  his
             case. In LO (Portugal) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 199 it was held that the burden  of
             proof was upon the Claimant to show that the decision  of  the
             Respondent to deport an EEA national  was  not  in  accordance
             with the EEA Regulations. In stating  that  the  decision  was
             finely balanced, it had conducted the balancing  exercise  for
             itself as opposed to deciding  whether  or  not  the  Claimant
             could establish that the Secretary of State was wrong to  find
             that his deportation was justified on the  grounds  of  public
             policy or security.

             18.  The Tribunal had to decide whether there  was  a  present
             serious threat and if so the extent of that threat.  Expulsion
             was conditional on the requirement that the  personal  conduct
             of the person concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,  present
             threat affecting one the  fundamental  interests  of  society,
             which implied, in general, the existence in the individual  of
             a propensity to act in the same way in the future.

             19.  The Judge refers to the evidence of Mr  Semedo's  partner
             [30] that he was doing well in his sessional  work  and  would
             not re-offend "as he had too much to lose"  but  also  to  the
             lack of evidence of any formal assessment or report  from  the
             Probation Service [31]. The offences for which Mr  Semedo  was
             convicted are of exposure on two occasions.  This  offence  is
             defined as being committed where a man or woman exposes  their
             genitalia  with  intent  to  cause  alarm  of   distress.   No
             explanation for such conduct or indicator of work  being  done
             to  address  the  root  cause  was  provided.  The   rate   of
             reconviction of those who have committed  sexual  offences  is
             recognised as being disappointedly high. The  comment  by  the
             Secretary of State that the passage of time is not  sufficient
             to prove that Mr Semedo poses not risk is arguably made out.

             20.  The finding there is no risk of re-offending is  arguable
             insufficiently reasoned purely by passage of time. A low  risk
             means there is still a risk. The  finding  in  [35]  that  the
             Secretary of State has failed to establish the  case  arguably
             reverses the burden of proof which is upon Mr Semedo - see  LO
             (Portugal) above. The decision is infected by  arguable  legal
             error material to the decision to allow the appeal  and  shall
             be set aside."

 4. In relation to the nature of  the  level  of  protection  to  which  Mr
    Semedo,  as  an  EEA  national  is  entitled,  the   parties   are   in
    disagreement. Mr Barnfield on behalf of the appellant submits that  the
    appellant is entitled to a right of permanent residence following  five
    years working in the United Kingdom exercising treaty rights, Ms  Aboni
    submits it is the lower level of protection that is applicable.

 5. Mr Semedo is national of Portugal who entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2006. In the appellants bundle is a letter from Clifton Packaging Group
    LTD stating that they employed the appellant from 20 November  2006  to
    17 April 2008 and again from 8 September  2008  to  7  August  2009.  A
    period of three years bar the small gap of four and a  half  months  in
    2008.

 6. A number of other documents have been  provided  in  relation  to  this
    issue the next in time being a  letter  from  Manpower,  an  employment
    agency, and bank statements showing payment of wages from Manpower  for
    the period December 2012 to March 2014. The appellant then  appears  to
    have been self employed between May and July 2014 and in receipt of Job
    Seekers Allowance from July 2014 to January 2015. From  July  2015  the
    appellant was again employed by Manpower until  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom on 28 September 2015.

 7. There is a gap in  the  employment  history  between  August  2009  and
    December 2012. There is no evidence  that  the  appellant  was  in  the
    United Kingdom or, if he was, that  he  was  exercising  treaty  rights
    during this period.  This is fatal to the  appellants  claim  for  even
    though the second  period  of  employment  from  December  2012  to  28
    September 2015 of two and three quarter years when added to the initial
    period exceeds a five year period, regulation  15  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulation 2006 (as amended) provides "(1) The
    following persons shall acquire the  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom permanently- (a) an EEA national who has resided in the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
    five years; ..."

 8. The appellant has not made out that he has exercised treaty rights  for
    such a continuous period. I find the appellant is only entitled to  the
    lower level of protection, i.e. that his removal is  justified  on  the
    grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health   in
    accordance with regulation 21. The public health issue is not  relevant
    on the facts.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recorded  details  of  the  appellants
    criminality and reason for the decision which are not facts in  dispute
    before me.  The error of law finding, when referring to the background,
    reads;

             "2.  Mr Semedo was born in Portugal on 9 November  1977  where
             he remained until entering the UK in or about 2006. The  Judge
             records  a  number  of  convictions  Mr  Semedo  received   in
             Portugal, in paragraph 22 and  23  of  the  decision,  in  the
             following terms:

                  22. In the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  Respondent
                  refers to the Appellant's offending in Portugal and a copy
                  of the UK PNC has been  provided.  The  Respondent  states
                  that the Appellant had two convictions in  Portugal  which
                  resulted in a prison sentence of 8 years and 6  months  in
                  May 2015. The Appellant has provided translated records of
                  his convictions  and  it  is  fair  to  say  that  he  was
                  convicted of the following offences:

                      19.05.1998 Theft, robbery x 2

                      23.05.1998 Robbery

                      03.07.1998 Theft, receiving

                      27.12.1999 Robbery

                  23. For these  offences  there  are  a  number  of  prison
                  sentences imposed  but  from  the  Appellant's  letter  it
                  appears he  was  held  in  custody  and  not  finally  and
                  cumulatively sentenced until 13th  May  2005  when  the  8
                  years and 6 months was imposed. He was granted  parole  in
                  7th April 2006 and given that this was just under  a  year
                  after the cumulative sentence it is  consistent  with  him
                  having being in custody for some time.

             3. The Judge finds  in  paragraph  28  that  after  Mr  Semedo
             entered the UK  in  2006  there  is  no  evidence  of  similar
             offending being committed and was therefore not satisfied that
             the conduct of Mr  Semedo  in  relation  to  the  offences  in
             Portugal  represents  a  present,  genuine  and   sufficiently
             serious threat to the UK.

             4. The Judge thereafter considered the nature of  Mr  Semedo's
             offending in the UK. The two key convictions are for exposure,
             offences committed on the 20th March 2013 and 30th April  2013
             for which he was convicted on the 28th October 2013 at  Market
             Harborough and Lutterworth Magistrates Court and sentenced  on
             26th November 2013 to a community order with a  programme  and
             supervision requirement and required to register  on  the  Sex
             Offenders Register for five years."



Discussion

10. Regulation 21(5) states that, where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on
    grounds of public policy or public security it shall,  in  addition  to
    complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in
    accordance with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
         of the person concerned; (c) the personal  conduct  of  the  person
         concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society; (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or
         which relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify
         the decision; (e) a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not
         in themselves justify the decision.

11. Regulation 21(6) states that before taking a relevant decision  on  the
    grounds of public policy or public security in relation to a person who
    is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take  account
    of considerations such as the age, state of health, family and economic
    situation of the person, the person's length of residence in the United
    Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration into  the  United
    Kingdom and the extent of  the  person's  links  with  his  country  of
    origin.

12. As noted in the error of  law  finding,  the  Tribunal  had  to  decide
    whether there was a present serious threat and if so the extent of that
    threat. Expulsion is conditional on the requirement that  the  personal
    conduct of the person  concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,  present
    threat affecting  one  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  which
    implies, in general, the existence in the individual of a propensity to
    act in the same way in the future.

13. Sex offences of the nature of those committed by the appellant affect a
    fundamental interest of society as such acts have been made illegal for
    the protection of the public.

14. The appellants partner, Ms Mytych is a Polish national who entered  the
    United Kingdom in July 2007. Ms Mytych separated from her husband, also
    a Polish national, in 2010 and they divorced  in  September  2011.  The
    appellant met Ms Mytych in 2011 who she describes as being a great help
    to her during the time of her own relationship  problems  and  who  was
    "fantastic" with Ms Mytych's daughter from her marriage who was born in
    March 2006.

15. Ms Mytych gave birth to a son in February 2012 of who the appellant  is
    the father. As a result of intervention  following  behavioural  issues
    the child is said to be on the autism disorder pathway although no full
    diagnosis can yet be made as the child is to  young.  At  [26]  of  her
    latest statement Ms Mytych writes:

         "26. Jose has served his sentence and he was doing very well in his
         sessional work with the probation team and I know that he would not
         reoffend.  He was working with others and the probation  team  were
         happy with him."

16. In her earlier letter dated 27 August 2015 Ms Mytych wrote:

         "I understand that my partner made some mistakes in the past and he
         regrets them, but I think everyone deserves a chance for a  private
         and family life.  I think no one should be deprived of family  life
         because of the things he has done when he was  young  and  was  not
         thinking about his future.  It's been already 16  years  since  the
         crime committed in Portugal that resulted in prison sentence and he
         paid his time, had so  many  years  to  rehabilitate,  he  did  not
         reoffend until now so I believe that he  would  never  do  anything
         like  that  again  specially  now  when  his   life   was   getting
         better....."

17. Although it is accepted Ms Mytych writes 'from the  heart'  to  express
    her feelings about what she sees as there being no possibility  of  the
    appellant  reoffending,  the  reality  is  that  he  did  reoffend   by
    committing sexual offences at the time he had a family,  including  his
    son, the same model it is claimed will ensure he will not offend in the
    future.

18. Before the First-tier Tribunal there was no evidence from the Probation
    Service  to  support  Ms  Mytych's  assertions  in  relation   to   the
    effectiveness of their intervention with the appellant.  In  accordance
    with the directions given in the finding that an error of law had  been
    made two further documents have been  provided,  being  a  Pre-Sentence
    Report (PSR) dated 15 November 2013 and  a  letter  from  the  National
    Offender Management Service dated 23 November 2016.

19. The PSR noted the appellants description of his offending on  both  the
    20th and 30th March 2013 in the following terms:

         "Mr Semedo informs me that on the day of the offence  of  Outraging
         Public Decency on 20 March 2013, he was travelling  back  from  his
         workplace when he decided to stop for  a  cigarette.  He  explained
         that he was experiencing relationship difficulties at the time  and
         stated that whilst he had not parked his car with the intention  of
         exposing  his  genitals,  he  was  unable  to  offer   a   credible
         explanation for his actions. However, upon further  exploration  Mr
         Semedo stated that he is likely to have been thinking about  having
         sexual intercourse with his  partner,  when  he  decided  to  start
         touching his penis.  Mr Semedo estimates that he had been  touching
         his penis for 5-6 minutes, when the victim walked past his  vehicle
         and observed him masturbating.  However, Mr Semedo states that  his
         penis was not erect at the time and that he was  not  masturbating.
         The Crown Prosecution Service documents indicate  that  the  victim
         was walking along the pavement, when  Mr  Semedo  parked  alongside
         her.  Witness Statements describe the  victim  moving  towards  the
         passenger door due to her belief that Mr Semedo was known  to  her,
         when she observed him exposing his penis and genital  area,  whilst
         holding his penis  in  both  hands.   Mr  Semedo  was  detailed  as
         appearing to hold his trousers back, before moving one of his hands
         away. The victim subsequently reports walking  away  and  summoning
         Police assistance.

         In relation to the offence of Outraging Public Decency on 30  April
         2013, Mr Semedo states that he was again driving  home  from  work,
         when he stopped in the same location where  he  had  committed  the
         aforementioned offence, to smoke a cigarette.  He explained that he
         opened his car window and began smoking, when he  started  thinking
         about  occasions  when  he  and  his  partner  had  enjoyed  sexual
         intercourse.  He unzipped his trousers and began touching  himself.
         The Witness Statement in relation to  this  offence  refers  to  Mr
         Semedo's passenger seat window being fully open when the victim was
         walking by on the pavement, at which stage Mr Semedo lent  over  to
         the passenger seat when the  victim  was  parallel  with  the  car,
         leading her to believe that he had a general enquiry.  As a  result
         the victim describes leaning into the car, at which stage Mr Semedo
         had resumed a seated position in the  driver's  seat.   The  victim
         then details noticing that Mr Semedo had no trousers  or  underwear
         on and that he was fully exposing his genital area, whilst  holding
         his erect penis with both hands, which he was moving  up  and  down
         his penis to masturbate.  The victim refers to Mr Semedo looking at
         her with a vacant expression, prior to  her  walking  away,  before
         momentarily turning to note Mr Semedo's car registration number.

         ...

         Mr Semedo minimises his offending, stating that he did  not  target
         lone women during his commission of the  index  offence.   He  also
         disputes being aware that he was parked on a busy road at the  time
         of the offence.  However, Mr Semedo acknowledges that his offending
         is unacceptable and is likely to have a detrimental impact upon the
         victims and wider members of society. He  also  stated  "If  I  was
         thinking properly, I would not have done it on a busy road.  I  did
         something that is  morally  unacceptable."  In  my  assessment,  Mr
         Semedo made a calculated decision to park on a busy main road where
         lone females were likely to walk, in  order  to  commit  the  index
         offences which occurred within six weeks of each other. In view  of
         this, I assess Mr Semedo's offending as premeditated and assess him
         as being fully culpable for his actions."

20. In relation to 'offender assessment and likelihood of  reoffending'  it
    is written;

         "Mr Semedo's offending is indicative of reckless, risk  taking  and
         predatory behaviour.  I have spoken to him about the feasibility of
         completing the Community Sex Offender Groupwork  Programme  and  he
         demonstrates motivation to complete  this  intervention.   To  this
         end, I have liaised  with  my  colleague,  Ms  Cousins,  who  is  a
         facilitator for the groupwork, who concurs with my assessment  that
         Mr Semedo is a suitable candidate for this Programme. Therefore  if
         Mr Semedo continues to make progress in  addressing  his  offending
         behaviours, then there is scope for positive change."

21. The author of the PRS assessed the appellant as posing a medium risk of
    reconviction for sexual offences and continues:

         "However, as earlier outlined Mr  Semedo  expresses  motivation  to
         complete the Community Sex Offender Groupwork Programme and  if  he
         successfully completes this intervention,  this  risk  may  reduce.
         During the commission of  the  index  offence,  Mr  Semedo  made  a
         calculated decision to park his car on a  busy  main  road  and  to
         expose himself to Female strangers.  This leads me to assess him as
         posing a medium risk of harm to Female strangers.  However,  if  Mr
         Semedo engages with Probation Service Supervision, then his risk of
         harm may decrease."

22. The letter from the  National  Probation  Offender  Management  Service
    states:

         "To whom it may concern

         Mr Semedo was sentenced to a thirty six month  Community  Order  on
         26/11/2013, following the commission of two  offences  of  indecent
         exposure.   The  Order  comprised  of  requirements   to   complete
         Education, Training and  Employment,  the  Sex  Offender  Treatment
         Programme and thirty six months of Supervision.  Mr Semedo was also
         required to sign the Sex Offender Register.  This  was  managed  by
         the Leicestershire Police Public Protection Management Team.

         Upon commencement of the Sexual Offender  Treatment  Programme,  Mr
         Semedo completed three modules, which were the role  of  fantasies,
         relationships  and  victim  empathy.   However,  at  the  time   of
         deportation he was participating in the self management module  and
         was unfortunately  suspended,  following  his  deportation.   As  a
         result Mr Semedo was unable to complete his programme  and  at  the
         time of his deportation, he had three  modules  outstanding,  being
         self management, relationship skills and betterlives.  As a  result
         of this, I am unable to provide a full assessment  of  Mr  Semedo's
         progress.  However, I have liaised with  Ms  Lawler,  who  was  the
         Treatment Manager at the time of Mr Semedo's groupwork who is  able
         to identify that Mr Semedo attributed his offending to his  use  of
         themed pornography, relationship problems  at  the  time  and  poor
         coping skills.  To this end, Ms Lawler and I  concur  that  in  our
         assessment Mr Semedo's offending was also linked to his sexual pre-
         occupation at the time of the offences.  It is noted that Mr Semedo
         was visiting areas commonly known for observing public sexual  acts
         during the timescale of the offending.  However, it is of  positive
         note, that Mr Semedo engaged well with the Treatment Programme  and
         took responsibility  for  his  sexual  offending.  Furthermore,  Mr
         Semedo completed  interventions  exploring  abusive  fantasies  and
         techniques to manage such fantasies.

         During Mr Semedo's Probation supervision, I formed concerns that he
         may not have been residing at the address he  had  provided,  which
         was the tenancy of his sister, where he had reported sleeping on  a
         mattress in a lounge area.  These concerns developed as a result of
         disclosures made to Mr Semedo's Public Protection  Management  Team
         Police Officer, by his sister.  However, Mr Semedo maintained  that
         he  resided  at  that  address,  despite   information   suggesting
         otherwise.  Further to this, at the time of Mr Semedo's receipt  of
         official paperwork from immigration services in 2015,  it  came  to
         light that he had  a  conviction  for  an  offence  of  Robbery  in
         Portugal, which the National Probation Service had previously  been
         unaware of.   Nevertheless,  whilst  this  raises  concern,  it  of
         positive note that  Mr  Semedo  engaged  well  with  the  Probation
         Supervision and his Sexual Offender Treatment Programme,  prior  to
         his deportation."

23. It is accepted that the appellant did not choose to be removed from the
    United Kingdom but one consequence of his removal has been  to  prevent
    his finishing the course in the United Kingdom which was identified  by
    the author of the PSR as a factor that may result in a decrease in  the
    level of risk he presents.

24. In addition, the concerns of the author of the Probation Service letter
    in relation to the address the appellant was allegedly staying at,  not
    being that provided to the Probation Service and it no  doubt  being  a
    condition of his being registered on the Sex  Offenders  Register  that
    his address is known, is noted.

25. The National Probation Service letter  also  refers  to  the  appellant
    linking his offending to the three issues recorded above which are  not
    the same  as  those  he  informed  the  author  of  the  PSR  were  his
    motivation, which are recorded in the PSR in the following terms:

         "Upon exploring his motivation for offending, Mr Semedo informs  me
         that he was experiencing relationship problems  with  his  partner,
         with whom he was living at the time.  He explains that he had  been
         "looking for something more exciting" around the time of the  index
         offences,  stating  that  he  occassionally   viewed   dating   and
         "swinging" websites in  approximately  August  2012.   However,  Mr
         Semedo informs me that despite visiting these websites 2-3 times  a
         month between August 2012 and March 2013, there were no requests to
         meet him.  He describes subsequently thinking "it was  a  waste  of
         time", so tells me that he then stopped searching  the  sites.   Mr
         Semedo went on to state that when he stopped to smoke a  cigarette,
         he had began "thinking about times when me and my partner had  been
         enjoying good sex."  He informs me that as a  result,  he  unzipped
         his trousers and started touching himself.  Mr Semedo  went  on  to
         state that "he did not see anyone around" and when I suggested that
         he may have parked outside a particular workplace when women  would
         have been passing at the end of their working  shift,  he  disputed
         this.  Furthermore, Mr Semedo could offer no  credible  explanation
         regarding his decision to park on a main road at peak time and  his
         masturbating.  He denied being sexually aroused by  such  behaviour
         and  also  denied  committing  these  offences   to   gain   sexual
         gratification, informing me that he was fantasising about sex  with
         his partner at the time of the offences."

26.  Mr  Barnfield  was  asked  if  the  appellant   had   sought   further
    treatment/assistance since being returned to Portugal in September 2015
    but no evidence of the same was forthcoming.

27. The appellant is a convicted sex offender. I accept that in relation to
    the offences he committed in Portugal in 1998  and  1999  there  is  no
    evidence of a real risk of re-offending, but in relation to the  sexual
    offences it is clear that the appellant has not  been  entirely  honest
    with the professionals appointed to assist  him,  is  giving  differing
    accounts for why he committed  the  offences,  has  not  completed  the
    course which was considered to  be  important  in  addressing  what  is
    behind his offending behaviour, and has made no effort to demonstrate a
    real commitment  to  addressing  the  causes  or  developing  avoidance
    mechanisms  by  seeking  continued   support/assistance   in   Portugal
    following his being deported, even though it is known such courses  are
    available there. I find the assessment of the appellant posing a medium
    risk of reconviction remains a valid assessment on the facts  and  that
    it has been proved in this case that there is  a  genuine  present  and
    serious threat of the appellant committing further sexual  offences  in
    the future.

28. Turning to Regulation 21(5) I find as follows:

29. (a) the decision must comply with  the  principle  of  proportionality;
    this is reference to proportionality in relation to the right of an EEA
    national to 'free movement' within the EEA. It  is  accepted  that  the
    public policy ground for removal is an  exception  to  the  fundamental
    principle of the free exercise of EU rights and, as  such,  has  to  be
    construed  restrictively.  Such  a  right  will  be  prevented  by  the
    appellants removal and subsequent bar on  re-admission.  The  appellant
    has not shown he has been engaged with the labour market during all his
    time in the United Kingdom, as demonstrated by his  employment  history
    discussed above. The appellant has been found to pose a genuine present
    and serious threat of further offending of a sexual nature. The need to
    protect the public and the right of a Higher Contracting State such  as
    the UK to eject  those  who  pose  such  a  threat  count  against  the
    appellant.  The respondent has made out, when balancing  all  competing
    elements, that the decision is proportionate.

30. (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
    the person concerned; the analysis of past  offending  is  to  set  the
    background of the appellants conduct in perspective. The assessment  of
    the risk of such offending in the future, which justifies  removal,  is
    based solely upon the appellants personal conduct.

31. (c) the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society; sexual offences satisfy this criteria
    as they are contrary to the criminal laws passed for the protection  of
    victims  of  sexual  offending.  In  GW  (EEA  reg   21:   'fundamental
    interests') Netherlands [2009] UKAIT 00050 the Tribunal said  that  the
    'fundamental interests' of a society within the meaning of  reg  21  (a
    threat to which may justify the exclusion of  an  EEA  national)  is  a
    question to be determined by reference to the legal rules governing the
    society in question, for it is unlikely that conduct that is subject to
    no prohibition can be regarded as threatening those interests.

32. (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which  relate
    to considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision; no
    such matters have been held to justify the decision.

33. (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
    justify  the  decision;  neither  the  earlier  offences  committed  in
    Portugal or the sexual offences committed in the UK are the  basis  for
    the decision.   No  real  risk  of  a  repetition  of  the  'Portuguese
    offences' has been made out. The justification for the decision is  the
    real risk of further sexual offences.

34. In MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC) it  was
    held that (i) Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to  decisions
    taken on public policy, public security and public health grounds under
    regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations;  (ii)  It  is  only  if  the
    personal conduct of the  person  concerned  is  found  to  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it  becomes
    relevant to consider whether the decision is proportionate taking  into
    account all the  considerations  identified  in  regulation  21(5)-(6);
    (iii) There is no specific reference in  the  expulsion  provisions  of
    either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or   the   2006   EEA   Regulations   to
    rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the  Court  of  Justice  as  an
    aspect of integration, which is one  of  the  factors  referred  to  in
    Article  28(1)  and  regulation  21(6)  (Essa  (2013)  at  [23]);  (iv)
    Rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed in every EEA deportation
    or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it will not be relevant,
    for example, if rehabilitation has already been completed (Essa  (2013)
    at [32]-[33]); (v) Reference to prospects  of  rehabilitation  concerns
    reasonable prospects of a person ceasing to commit crime  (Essa  (2013)
    at [35]), not the mere possibility of rehabilitation.  Mere  capability
    of rehabilitation is not to be  equated  with  reasonable  prospect  of
    rehabilitation; (vi) Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects  are
    a factor to be taken into account  in  the  proportionality  assessment
    required by regulation 21(5) and (6)  (Dumliauskas  [41]);  (vii)  Such
    prospects are to be taken into  account  even  if  not  raised  by  the
    offender (Dumliauskas [52]); (viii)  Gauging  such  prospects  requires
    assessing the relative prospects of rehabilitation in the  host  Member
    State as compared with those in the Member State of origin, but, in the
    absence of evidence, it  is  not  to  be  assumed  that  prospects  are
    materially different in that other Member State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-
    [53] and [59]); (ix) Matters  that  are  relevant  when  examining  the
    prospects of the rehabilitation of offenders include  family  ties  and
    responsibilities,  accommodation,  education,   training,   employment,
    active membership of a community and the like (Essa  (2013)  at  [34]).
    However, lack of access to a Probation Officer  or  equivalent  in  the
    other  Member  State  should  not,  in  general,  preclude  deportation
    (Dumliauskas [55]); (x) In the absence of integration and  a  right  of
    permanent residence, the future prospects of integration  cannot  be  a
    weighty factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even  when  such  prospects
    have significant weight  they  are  not  a  trump  card,  as  what  the
    Directive and the  2006  EEA  Regulations  require  is  a  wide-ranging
    holistic assessment. Both recognise that the more serious the  risk  of
    reoffending, and the offences that a person may commit, the greater the
    right to interfere with the right of residence (Dumliauskas at [46] and
    [54]).

35. In relation to rehabilitation, the work  undertaken  by  the  Probation
    Service  in  the  UK  may  have   provided   realistic   prospects   of
    rehabilitation depending upon the appellant continuing to  engage  with
    the same and his reaction if in a situation similar to that  which  led
    to the  offending.   Such  work  was  not  completed  and  so  no  full
    assessment is available although some  concerns  have  been  raised  in
    relation to lack of knowledge by the Probation Service of  the  Robbery
    offence which is a crime of taking or attempting to  take  anything  of
    value by force, threat of force or by putting the victim in  fear,  and
    of the appellants place of residence and denial of a fact  informed  by
    his sister who would have been aware that the appellant was not at  her
    house as he should have been. Facilities are available in Portugal  for
    further rehabilitation work but there is no evidence that the appellant
    has made any effort to engage with the same.

36. When considering public  security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
    resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take account  of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of the person, the person's length of residence in the United
    Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration into  the  United
    Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with his country of origin

37. These are factors considered in detail in the decision letter.  Limited
    evidence has been provided of such elements in the appellants bundle in
    which it is claimed the appellant is living with a friend  in  Portugal
    and has little by way of ties there. Length of residence is noted above
    and family ties discussed in detail in the section relating to  Article
    8 below, although such have been considered as part of the appeal under
    the 2006 Regulations first and foremost.

38. In relation to the Article 8 claim, in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v BF (Portugal) (2009) EWCA Civ 923 the Court of Appeal said
    that  the  Tribunal  could  not  determine  whether   deportation   was
    proportionate for the purposes of Article 8, without  deciding  whether
    the appellant's conduct represented a genuine present and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting a  fundamental  interest  to  society  in  the
    context of the test for the deportation of an  EEA  national  with  his
    rights of residency. In this case there had clearly been such a  threat
    at the time of the offence and it was  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  to
    decide whether there was still  such  a  threat  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

39. In Mr Semedo's case such a threat at  the  date  of  hearing  has  been
    established.

40. When considering Article 8 issues it is  necessary  to  considered  the
    questions set out by Lord Bingham in paragraph 17 of the  judgement  in
    the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 which are:

         (1) Will the proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

         (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
         in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

41. In relation to the first of these questions, it is  not  disputed  that
    the appellant has family life with his son, who shall be referred to as
    'J'. The child was born on the 19 November 2012 to a Portuguese  father
    and Polish mother. In the bundle are a number  of  documents  from  the
    Education and Children's Services Department of Leicester City  Council
    relating to the assessment process for J, including by  an  Educational
    Psychologist. A 'First Report' dated 15 September 2014 noted that J was
    referred due  to  concerns  regarding  communication,  interaction  and
    behaviour. The conclusion of the report noted that "J  has  significant
    speech and language delay but appears to have made some  good  progress
    over the  summer holiday in that he is repeating words more  frequently
    and using more spontaneous single words... J would benefit from support
    and encouragement in order to develop his speech  and  language  skills
    and play and attention; his behaviour and  interaction  (including  any
    unusual characteristics or  patterns)  should  also  be  monitored  and
    recorded."    A further letter from a Dr Kershaw of the Families, Young
    People and Children's Services, dated 30 March 2016, has been  provided
    seeking further information from named professional bodies to  aid  J's
    assessment. A document entitled 'Early Years Child Passport' containing
    a start date of September 2016 has also been provided detailing  issues
    J needs help with and who will provide  such  help  in  the  pre-school
    environment.

42. In her witness statement dated 18 November 2016 Ms Mytych refers to J's
    assessment and development and to the fact J is attending a named  pre-
    school in which he has a 'key  person',  early  support  therapist  and
    speech therapist who work with him. Ms Mytych took J to Portugal to see
    the appellant in November  2015  and  it  is  said  he  speaks  to  the
    appellant  by  Skype  "nearly  every  day".  Ms  Mytych  describes  the
    difficulties she is facing as a single  parent  with  a  ten  year  old
    daughter  who  is  growing  up  fast  and  J  whose  behaviour  can  be
    challenging and requires her attention.

43. It is not disputed that the appellant has also played  a  role  in  the
    life of Ms Mytch's daughter from her marriage, as  a  step-parent,  and
    that family life exists between them to this extent.

44. It is accepted that the best  interests  of  the  children  are  to  be
    brought up by both parents in the case of J  and  in  a  stable  family
    environment in the case of both J and his sister.

45. In relation to My Mytych, the author of the  PSR  noted  in  discussion
    with the appellant "However, he states that he has separated  from  his
    partner."   The letter from the Probation  Service  dated  23  November
    2016 noted that the appellants address he provided to them was  at  his
    sisters house, not that of Ms Mytych. It has not been established  that
    family life exists at this time between the appellant  and  Ms  Mytych.
    They are not married and the statements lack reference to them having a
    future together as a couple. Ms Mytych focuses upon the assistance  the
    appellant can provide her with in relation to the children. If this  is
    meant to imply that she wants them  to  recommence  their  relationship
    this is noted, as is the reference to the appellant as 'her partner' in
    her 22 March 2016 letter.    As it is arguable they also form  part  of
    the others private life and the test for assessing  proportionality  is
    the same for either element, the need to differentiate is arguably  not
    necessary.

46. The appellant has a sister in the UK.  A  statement  from  the  sister,
    dated 20 November 2016, has been  provided.  The  sister  is  a  single
    parent and she claims to have received assistance  from  the  appellant
    with the children and household chores.  The  statement  refers  to  Ms
    Mytych and claims the appellant is "a good  father,  caring  uncle  and
    very supportive brother". The statement fails to  establish  more  than
    the normal emotional ties between the appellant and his sister and  her
    children. Family life recognised by Article 8 is not made out  although
    it is accepted they will form part of the appellants private life.

47. It is not disputed that interference with the family and  private  life
    identified may have consequences of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of article 8.

48. I find such interference to be in accordance with the law and necessary
    in a democratic society in the interests of national  security,  public
    safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of
    disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or  for  the
    protection of the rights and freedoms of others, as stated above.

49. In relation to  whether  such  interference  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved, it has not been shown that
    the legitimate aim can be achieved by the appellants proposal  that  he
    is permitted to re-enter the UK on the basis of an  assurance  he  will
    not reoffend. The sex offender work he was required to complete can  be
    completed if permitted to return but this is also the case in Portugal.
    If the appellant completed the work and was able to prove that the real
    risk that has been shown to exist has  reduced  or  can  be  adequately
    managed this may  possibly  be  a  more  favourable  scenario  for  the
    appellant, but this is not the case at this time.

50. Although there  is  an  impact  upon  the  children  this  is  not  the
    determinative factor. The reports and assessments of J are noted, as is
    the comment by Ms Mytych of the relationship between J and his  father,
    but the wider protection of the public carries great weight in relation
    to protecting them from sex offenders, even at the  appellants  current
    level, and no reports or opinions have been provided of the  impact  of
    the appellant not being able to re-enter the UK  for  the  purposes  of
    being reunited with his family, upon J. The appellant was removed on 15
    September 2015 and although it is accepted that  it  may  have  been  a
    difficult period for Ms Mytych the evidence does not reflect  a  family
    in crisis or one in which  there  is  a  strong  possibility  of  State
    intervention as a result of the inability of Ms Mytych to care for  her
    children. The wider family  clearly  provide  support  and  whilst  the
    situation is not perfect it has not been shown  that  a need  for  the
    appellant to be in the UK is the determinative factor. No circumstances
    that are sufficiently compelling to warrant a finding  to  this  effect
    have been made out.

51. Ms Aboni also referred to the fact that as a polish national Ms  Mytych
    has a right of free movement to Portugal or that she and the  appellant
    could live together in Poland. Neither option has been shown not to  be
    feasible or to be unreasonable in  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant. As such family life can continue in another part of Europe.

52. I find the respondent has discharged the burden of proof  upon  her  to
    show that (i) the principles for  deportation  pursuant  to  regulation
    21(5) are made out, (ii) that it is proportionate in terms  of  EU  law
    for the deportation order to stand, and, (iii)  that  the  decision  is
    proportionate to the interference with the family and private  life  of
    those involved pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.



Decision

53. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside  the
    decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.  This
    appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity.

54. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make no such order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 January 2017

