
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00973/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AG
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Osadebe, Zuniel solicitors
For the SSHD:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. I make an anonymity order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI2008/269)  because  the
         appeal includes an asylum claim. Unless the Upper Tribunal or Court
         orders otherwise, no report of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
         publication thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
         original Appellant. This prohibition applies  to,  amongst  others,
         all parties.

      2. In a decision dated 23 June 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page
         dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  dated  9  May
         2014 to make a deportation order against him. The Judge  determined
         the appeal in the appellant's absence on 18 June 2015  at  Columbus
         House, Newport.  The grounds of appeal submit that the Judge  acted
         unfairly in doing so.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  this
         basis.

      3. Judge Page set out what happened on the day of the hearing  in  her
         decision [10-14].  On the morning of the  hearing  the  appellant's
         solicitors, Zuriel Solicitors sent a fax at 10.12am  informing  the
         Tribunal that the appellant had gone to a hearing centre in  London
         by mistake and requested an adjournment.  The fax goes on to state:

             "Our client is unable to  return  to  Newport  today  for  his
             appeal hearing and as such  we  humbly  request  for  a  short
             adjournment to conclude our client's matter."

      4. The application for the  adjournment  was  opposed  by  the  SSHD's
         representative.  Judge Page was not satisfied  that  she  had  been
         given proper reasons for  the  appellant  and  his  solicitors  not
         attending the hearing and refused the adjournment request.

      5. I must decide whether  the  Tribunal  acted  unfairly  in  all  the
         circumstances, not simply whether it acted reasonably - see Nwaigwe
         (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).

      6.  The  grounds  of  appeal  prepared  by   Zuniel   Solicitors   are
         unimpressive: the appellant's nationality is wrongly stated  to  be
         Nigerian when he is a national of Ethiopia; the  document  contains
         numerous grammatical and spelling mistakes and is written  in  poor
         English; a witness statement  from  the  appellant  and  /  or  the
         solicitor to explain what happened on the day of the hearing is not
         attached; submissions  wrongly  contend  that  the  Judge  did  not
         consider the appellant's human rights.

      7. At the beginning of the hearing I asked Mr Osadebe if  he  had  any
         evidence to support what happened on the day of the hearing but  he
         was unable to provide me with any.  Mr Osadebe accepted that he was
         aware that the First-tier Tribunal hearing was listed to take place
         in Newport.  When I asked him why he  did  not  attend  he  gave  a
         conflicting  answer.   He  first  said  he  had  applied   for   an
         adjournment of the hearing.  He was unable to  provide  me  with  a
         copy of this request or any response to it.   I  could  not  see  a
         request on the  Tribunal  file.   In  any  event  he  accepted  the
         adjournment was not granted but still could not explain why he  did
         not attend.  He then explained that the 'brief was  not  perfected'
         and  there  were  funding  problems.   I  asked  him  if  in  these
         circumstances he formally informed the Tribunal he  was  no  longer
         acting but he was unable to explain why  he  took  no  action,  and
         continued to appear to represent the appellant.

      8. Mr Osadebe then told me that he had rung the Tribunal to  say  that
         the appellant was on his way from London to Newport.  At this point
         the appellant intervened and said that  it  was  he  who  rang  the
         Tribunal and not his solicitor.  I then heard  from  the  appellant
         who explained that he went to the  London  hearing  centre  because
         that is where his  previous  hearing  had  taken  place.   When  he
         discovered the hearing was in Newport he called  Zuriel  Solicitors
         and then the Newport hearing centre to tell them he was on his way.
          He arrived at 2.30pm but  was  told  that  the  hearing  had  been
         completed without him.

      9. Mr Harrison invited me to find that this is a case in  which  there
         had been unfairness as the appellant had done all that he could  to
         get to  his  hearing  after  discovering  a  genuine  mistake.   Mr
         Harrison was correct to concede matters as he did.  This  appellant
         did his best to  attend  the  hearing.   He  was  not  assisted  by
         solicitors who continued to act for him.   The  appellant's  appeal
         raises matters of  fundamental  importance  to  him.   In  all  the
         circumstances I am satisfied that there was  unfairness.   Had  the
         solicitors clearly  communicated  the  appellant's  willingness  to
         attend Newport that day matters may have turned out differently.

     10. I also accept Mr Harrison's submission that the decision  needs  to
         be remade completely and that given the nature and extent of  those
         findings, this needs to be done in the First-tier Tribunal.  I have
         had  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
         Statements and the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
         required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this  is
         an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

     11. I have serious concerns about the  way  in  which  the  appellant's
         solicitors have acted during the course of  these  proceedings.   I
         have therefore directed Mr Osadebe to  address  these  concerns  by
         providing the Tribunal and the appellant  with  an  explanation  in
         relation to each of the matters set out below.

          a) The solicitors remained on record as acting for the  appellant
             when it is clear that they had no intention of  attending  the
             hearing.  Notwithstanding this no effort was  made  to  inform
             the Tribunal that they  would  not  be  attending.   In  these
             circumstances  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  view  with  some
             suspicion the fax from the solicitors.  This fax was sent from
             a London fax number.  No effort was made to  explain  why  the
             solicitors could not attend the hearing in Newport.

          b) The solicitors did not clearly ascertain  or  communicate  the
             appellant's intention to travel to Newport  that  day  to  the
             Tribunal.  Instead the solicitors indicated that the appellant
             would not be able to attend that day.

          c) The solicitors sought to rely upon grounds of  appeal  without
             any evidence to  support  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
             appellant's claim that he made his way  to  Newport  that  day
             albeit late in the day.

          d) Mr Osadebe  provided  me  with  an  unclear  and  inconsistent
             explanation for why he did not attend Newport on  the  day  of
             the hearing.  His claim to have asked for an  adjournment  was
             entirely unsupported.  His account of what happened  that  day
             appears not to have been contemporaneously recorded anywhere.

Decision

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     13. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting in Manchester (TE: 2.5hrs) on the first date available.

      2) Mr Osadebe shall provide the Tribunal and the  appellant  with  his
         position in relation to the concerns set out at paragraph 11  above
         within 14 days of the date of service of this decision.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 October 2015
