
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00832/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ELJON LUJKAJ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal even  though
    this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen  of  Albania,  born  on  26th  May  1982.  His  appeal  against
    deportation was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gibbs  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 in a  decision  dated  1st  November
    2014.

2.   On 5th July 2010 the  Appellant  pleaded  guilty  at  Canterbury  Crown
    Court to two counts of being  knowingly  concerned  in  the  fraudulent
    evasion of  prohibition  or  restriction  on  importation  of  Class  A
    controlled drugs.  He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for the
    first offence and ten years' imprisonment for the second.   These  were
    to run concurrently.  He appealed his sentence  which  was  reduced  to
    eight years' imprisonment.  He had no previous convictions.

3.   The Secretary of State appealed  the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under the EEA Regulations on the  following  grounds.   Firstly,
    the judge failed to take into account the nature of the offence and the
    length of the sentence as well as the circumstances of  the  Appellant,
    given that there was no evidence demonstrating a significant change  in
    his personal circumstances since the conviction. And secondly, that the
    judge's findings on proportionality under Regulation 21(5)(a) and 21(6)
    were inadequately reasoned and were contradictory.

4.   In renewed grounds to the Tribunal the Respondent relied  on  the  case
    of R v Pierre Bouchereau [1977] EUECJ R-30/77 and  concluded  that  the
    judge erred in law on the basis of what is set out at paragraphs 27 and
    29 of that judgment, in that for the most serious offending, even where
    there is little or no risk of reoffending, the requirements  of  public
    policy might permit removal or deportation on the  basis  of  the  most
    serious past criminality. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  those
    grounds by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on the 31st March 2015.

Submissions

5.   Mr Walker submitted that the judge had misdirected herself in  relation
    to Regulation 21(5)(c). The Appellant had  been  convicted  of  a  very
    serious offence and received a lengthy sentence which the  judge  noted
    at paragraphs 3 and 4.  However, she failed to take this  into  account
    when she was  assessing  his  future  risk  under  the  Regulations  in
    paragraphs 12 to 18 of the decision.  In doing so she made  a  material
    error of law.

6.   The judge made  findings  on  the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances
    since the conviction but there was an absence of evidence demonstrating
    improvement and the  nature  of  the  offence  was  such  that  if  the
    Appellant found himself in similar circumstances, namely if he  started
    gambling again, then the risk of him reoffending would be substantially
    heightened.

7.    In  relation  to  ground  2,  Mr  Walker  submitted  that  there  were
    inadequate reasons for finding that the Appellant had integrated in the
    UK.  He had arrived in 2006 and was convicted  in  2010.   He  had  not
    acquired permanent residence and therefore could not have integrated in
    the UK. The judge's conclusion that he had done  so  was  contradictory
    given that the Appellant had spent significant time in prison.

8.   The judge's findings at paragraph 17 on proportionality, if  they  were
    not contradictory, were very  unclear.   In  relation  to  the  renewed
    grounds Mr Walker relied on paragraphs 27 to 29 of R v  Bouchereau,  in
    particular what is stated at paragraph 29, namely

         "Although in general a finding that such a  threat  exists  implies
         the existence in the individual concerned of a propensity to act in
         the same way in the future, it is possible that past conduct  alone
         may constitute such a threat to the requirements of public policy".

9.   So in essence Mr  Walker's submission was that the serious  nature  and
    the length of sentence in this case was such that it  could  be  relied
    upon in order to show that the Appellant was at risk of reoffending and
    therefore at risk to the public in the future.

10.  Mr Balroop submitted that ground 1 was simply not made out.  There  was
    ample evidence before the judge to enable  her  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant was not a genuine present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

11.  The judge took into account the probation  letter  dated  October  2014
    which was before the Respondent and appears at paragraph 132 and 133 of
    the bundle. There was clear evidence in this letter that the  Appellant
    had addressed his gambling habit and had changed his  behaviour.  There
    was also further evidence of his activities in prison and the fact that
    he  was  temporarily  released  in  2012  to  travel  from  Watford  to
    Borehamwood to work in a charity shop.  It was clear from the probation
    report that the Appellant was not a repeat offender and this was a  one
    off offence due to his gambling addiction which he had  now  addressed.
    Therefore, it was not arguable that there was no  evidence  before  the
    judge that there was a change in circumstances.

12.  The judge also relied on the NOMS report which dealt  with  the  nature
    of the offence and the risk of reoffending.  The writers of the  report
    had met the Appellant and were  well  aware  of  the  offence  and  his
    sentence, yet they categorised him as low risk of reoffending, low risk
    of harm to others and low risk of reconviction.  The  judge  took  this
    into account at paragraph 5 of her decision.

13.  This evidence was not  disputed  by  the  Respondent.   The  Respondent
    either ignored it or just came to a decision that was different to that
    of the judge and there was no basis on which to say  that  the  judge's
    decision was not properly reasoned. The grounds essentially amount to a
    submission that the judge should have come to  a  different  conclusion
    and that did not amount to an error of law.

14.  The judge assessed the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  took
    into account all relevant factors as set out in Regulation  21(6),  but
    came to the opposite conclusion to that of the Respondent.   They  were
    sufficient reasons, but in any event, the judge's findings were open to
    her on the evidence before her.

15.  The Appellant had been out of  the  country  for  two  months  in  2006
    during a ten year period. The judge considered all factors  in  looking
    at integration  which  was  separate  to  a  decision  in  relation  to
    permanent residence. Integration took into account  how  the  Appellant
    would interact with the  rest  of  society,  not  just  his  length  of
    residence in the UK. The judge took into account all  relevant  factors
    including that the Appellant had visited Albania. Her finding that  his
    deportation was disproportionate was one which was open to her on  that
    evidence.

Discussion and Conclusions

16.  In relation to ground 1, I find that the judge took  into  account  the
    sentencing remarks  and  the  letter  from  the  Appellant's  probation
    officer, and she was well aware of the nature of the  offence  and  the
    length of the sentence which she set out at paragraphs 3 and 4  of  her
    decision. It cannot be said that these  matters  were  ignored  in  her
    findings at paragraph 12 to 18  when  she  considered  the  Appellant's
    personal circumstances.

17.  The judge took into account the evidence regarding what  the  Appellant
    did during his time in prison and also his credible oral  evidence  and
    that of his wife and, at paragraph 15, she made the following findings:



         "I have relied on the documents set out  above  together  with  the
         credible oral evidence of the Appellant and his wife.  I find  that
         since November 2012 the Appellant started to leave prison  to  work
         in a charity  shop,  and  subsequently  was  also  given  overnight
         release to his wife. In my view, he had  demonstrated  that  he  is
         able to function in  society  without  reverting  to  his  previous
         gambling habits,  and  I  place  weight  on  the  Appellant's  oral
         evidence that he has attended Gamblers Anonymous and also the  fact
         that now that his wife is aware of this issue she is also  able  to
         help him. Again  I  place  significant  weight  on  the  conclusion
         reached by the Probation Officer who knows the Appellant that  'The
         Probation Service has assessed Mr Lujkaj as presenting a  low  risk
         of both reoffending and harm. He has given us every reason, both in
         word and deed, to conclude that he has learned his  lesson  and  is
         determined and well equipped to make  a  valuable  contribution  to
         society in the event that he is permitted to remain in the UK.' "

18.  These findings were open to the judge on the evidence  before  her  and
    she gave cogent reasons for her conclusions at paragraph 16  where  she
    stated:

         "I take a different view to the respondent who, although  accepting
         the findings of the NOMS assessment nonetheless focuses on the risk
         to the public if the Appellant was  to  reoffend.  I  am  persuaded
         however that the evidence before me (and particularly that set  out
         above) supports a finding that such a  risk  is  so  low  that  the
         Appellant cannot  be  said  to  present  a  'genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society'."

19.  The judge was aware that other conduct had to  be  taken  into  account
    under Regulation  21(5)(e),  which  states  that  a  person's  criminal
    convictions do not in themselves justify the decision.  She  took  into
    account the Appellant's change in behaviour and  circumstances,  namely
    his attendance at Gamblers Anonymous, the fact that  he  has  disclosed
    his gambling habit to his wife and his work with the charity shop which
    she set out at paragraph 15. The risk of reoffending was low and it was
    three years since the Appellant was released from prison.

20.  The judge properly considered all factors of the  Appellant's  personal
    conduct including his conviction and length of sentence.  I  find  that
    her conclusion that he was not  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society
    was a finding which was open to her on the evidence and  there  was  no
    error of law in respect of Regulation 21(5).

21.  In relation to ground 2, having concluded that the Appellant was not  a
    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests, the judge was entitled to take this into account
    in  assessing  proportionality.  Although  there  is  a  strong  public
    interest in deporting the Appellant, because of the seriousness of  the
    offence, the judge was entitled to take into account this  finding  and
    balance it against the public interest.

22.  There were also other matters to which the judge referred at  paragraph
    17 where she found:

         "With regard to Regulation 21(6) I accept that  the  Appellant  has
         lived in the UK since 2006 and is integrated here, as is  his  wife
         who has lived here for ten years. Both of them speak fluent English
         and the couple are self-sufficient which is to  their  credit.   In
         addition, prior to May 2010, the Appellant has  lived  lawfully  in
         the UK since 2006, as has his wife.  They are both  healthy,  young
         individuals and the Appellant's evidence is that he has returned to
         Albania with his wife on occasions. Although  I  accept  that  they
         would prefer to live in the UK, I do not find that  these  ties  in
         themselves make the Respondent's decision disproportionate,  but  I
         do find that this is evidence that I must take into account  in  my
         proportionality assessment."

23.  The judge has given clear reasons for why she finds that the  Appellant
    is integrated into the UK and the level of that integration  which  was
    not dependant on him acquiring a right of permanent residence.

24.  There was no contradiction as alleged at paragraph 12  of  the  grounds
    of appeal because the judge makes it clear that the Appellant's ties in
    themselves do not render the decision to deport  him  disproportionate.
    This was just one of the factors the judge took into account.

25.  I am persuaded by Mr Balroop's  submissions  on  this  point  that  the
    judge's findings were certainly not contradictory  and  she  has  given
    adequate reasons. The judge properly considered  proportionality  under
    Regulation 21(6) and her finding that the deportation of the  Appellant
    was disproportionate was one which was open to  her  on  the  evidence.
    Therefore, there was no material error of law.

26.  In relation to the renewed grounds of appeal, that in essence  for  the
    most serious offending the requirements of public policy permit removal
    on the basis of the most serious past criminality, the judge's decision
    was not contrary to the findings in R v Bouchereau. Although there  was
    significant weight to be attached to the public interest in this  case,
    the judge found that  it  was  outweighed  for  the  reasons  given  at
    paragraphs 12 to 18 of the decision.

27.  Accordingly I find that there was no misdirection  on  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The judge's finding that the Appellant was not
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society was a finding which was open to her on
    the evidence before her. The  Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  that
    finding  and  for  finding  that  the   Appellant's   deportation   was
    disproportionate in the circumstances.

28.  There no error of law in the decision of  1st  November  2014  and  the
    Respondent's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


J Frances
Signed   Date: 9th December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

