
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  DA/00601/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18th November 2014                |On 19th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR AHMED HUSSAIN MOHAMMED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Mr E Cole (instructed by Staines & Campbell,
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State  in relation to a Determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Aziz and Dr De Barros) promulgated on 25th June 2014.

 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, which it allowed  on  asylum
    grounds, was against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order.

 3. The grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal referred
    to the Appellant's lengthy and horrendous immigration history which  is
    set out. Essentially, as argued by Mr Shilliday, the Secretary of State
    challenges the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal  and  asserted  its
    reasoning was inadequate to support a conclusion that the Appellant  is
    a genuine Christian convert.  In  particular  at  paragraph  9  of  the
    grounds the Secretary of State says:-

        "In coming to that conclusion, the Tribunal balanced the scales  in
        the appellant's favour based on the witnesses ("men  of  religion")
        testimony (para 142). However after cross-examination of the second
        witness, it became apparent the Appellant had not informed  him  of
        his immigration history and criminal past. It is submitted that the
        Appellant intentionally did not disclose his past  to  the  witness
        for self-serving reasons. Given that his claim to be a  convert  is
        clearly not credible (para 141). The Appellant is a persistent liar
        and has the propensity of fabricating evidence. The  Appellant  had
        ample time to notify the Secretary of State upon his first interest
        in his Christian interest (sic) however failed to  do  so,  instead
        using this as bait to avoid removal (para 48)".


 4. The grounds go on to  suggest  that  the  Tribunal  tipped  the  scales
    incorrectly in the Appellant's favour and failed  to  make  a  reasoned
    decision rejecting credibility.

 5. Before me Mr Shilliday referred to the grant of permission by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  and in particular to the final part of  the  third
    paragraph thereof where the Judge said:-


        "Given the unusual strength of the evidence against  the  Appellant
        as acknowledged  by  the  panel  themselves  in  the  case  of  the
        deportation of a foreign criminal, it is arguable that more careful
        and greater analysis of the pastors evidence was required  in  this
        case including perhaps reasons why those  pastors  had  simply  not
        been gullible when faced  with  a  manipulative  Appellant  as  the
        accepted evidence appears to demonstrate."


 6. Mr Shilliday submitted that it is important to identify the context  of
    the Pastors' evidence and in that regard he referred me to paragraph 27
    of the Determination where the Tribunal referred to  a  letter  from  a
    third Pastor, the Rev Nassar and the contents of that letter which were
    untrue for the reasons given.

 7. Mr Shilliday referred me to paragraph 93 of the determination where the
    panel set out  Pastor  McFarlane's  evidence  and  submitted  that  his
    evidence suggested that the role of the Appellant at church amounted to
    no more than serving tea and biscuits. He also  referred  to  paragraph
    141 where the Tribunal says that the  Judge  set  out  the  Appellant's
    appalling history to Pastor McFarlane who had been hitherto unaware  of
    it. The Pastor said that his opinion  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    Appellant's conversion was unchanged. Mr Shilliday submitted  that  was
    hardly surprising given that it had been sprung upon  him.  Essentially
    he argued that more cogent reasons  were  required  for  accepting  the
    Appellant's conversion  particularly  given  the  considerable  adverse
    matters  in  this  case  and  that  the  Tribunal's  reasons  were  not
    sufficiently cogent.

 8. I take no pleasure in dismissing this appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


 9. The Appellant's  appalling  history  is  of  relevance.  He  was  first
    encountered  by  the  UK  authorities  in  April  2004  having  arrived
    clandestinely. Five months later he claimed asylum as a Syrian national
    with a name other than the  one  he  now  uses.  That  application  was
    refused and  his  appeal  dismissed.  After  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted he was removed to  Syria  in  March  2005.  However,  he  was
    refused entry on the basis he was not Syrian.

10. He then claimed asylum again, this time in the name he now uses, as  an
    Iraqi  national.  That  application  was  also  refused,   his   appeal
    unsuccessful and he became appeal rights exhausted once again  in  July
    2005.

11. He was then convicted of assault in October 2007 and  sentenced  to  12
    months  imprisonment.  As  a  result  of   that   offence   deportation
    proceedings ensued. His appeal against the decision to deport  him  was
    dismissed in 2008. He was refused onward appeals  and  the  deportation
    order was signed in August 2008.

12. In March 2009 the Appellant made a  series  of  asylum  representations
    which were considered by the Secretary of State who refused  to  revoke
    the deportation order. The Appellant once again lost his appeal against
    that decision and was once more appeal  rights  exhausted  by  December
    2010.

13. He made a third asylum application and a further application to  revoke
    the deportation order in 2011 which was refused and certified.

14. He made a fourth asylum and human rights application and an application
    to revoke the deportation order in 2012. That application was  rejected
    in March 2014 and it was his appeal  against  that  decision  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.


15. The First-tier Tribunal noted  that  there  were  three  heads  to  the
    Appellant's claim not to be returnable to Iraq. The first was  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution as  he  had  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity; secondly that he  had  a  number  of  health  issues  and
    thirdly that he was in a relationship with a British National  and  her
    child.

16. The tribunal rejected the second and third grounds.


17. With regard to his  conversion  to  Christianity  the  Tribunal   noted
    numerous adverse points and in particular that   no  mention  had  been
    made previously of his conversion despite his now claim  to  have  been
    interested in and converted to Christianity at the time he  was  making
    applications to the Secretary of State. He also  entered  into  Islamic
    marriages and the Tribunal noted the letter  from  Pastor  Nassar,  the
    contents of which were untrue. The Tribunal noted  the  timing  of  the
    Appellant's claim and the Appellant's inconsistent evidence about this.
     Indeed the  Tribunal  found  nothing  this  Appellant  said  could  be
    believed and that his partner had similarly embellished and exaggerated
    matters and her evidence was not trustworthy either. The  Tribunal  set
    that out in considerable detail and also set out in detail the evidence
    that it heard from two Pastors.

18. The  Tribunal's  findings  of  fact  start  at  paragraph  110  of  the
    Determination and continue to paragraph 142. It  is  at  paragraph  119
    that the Tribunal  said that it was  difficult to attach any weight  to
    what the Appellant said but went on to note that "fortunately  for  him
    it is not only his own testimony that he  relies  upon".  The  Tribunal
    referred to a large amount of documentary evidence before them  and  to
    the evidence of the two Pastors. The Tribunal note that  the  Secretary
    of  State's  position  was  that  if  the  Appellant's  conversion   to
    Christianity was indeed genuine then he would be at risk of persecution
    in Iraq.

19. The Tribunal specifically state at paragraph 138 that had the  evidence
    of his conversion been limited to his own and his partner's evidence it
    was unlikely that he would have succeeded. However, the Tribunal placed
    considerable reliance on the oral  evidence  of  Pastor  Sameh  Youssef
    Khalil and Pastor Steve McFarlane of  Langston  Church  in  Portsmouth,
    which has been the Appellant's Church for over two years.

20. The Tribunal said that it had listened very carefully to  the  evidence
    of both of those witnesses. Both were independent  witnesses  and  both
    were "men of  religion".  The  Tribunal  noted  that  the  Pastors  had
    witnessed the Appellant's religious observance at  close  hand  and  it
    accepted that neither witness would have appeared before  the  Tribunal
    had they believed the Appellant's conversion to be a  fabrication.  The
    Tribunal found both witnesses highly credible and in particular  Pastor
    McFarlane's evidence particularly persuasive because he had  been  head
    Pastor at the Appellant's Church for a period of over two years.

21. It cannot be said that the Tribunal did not  consider  the  possibility
    that the two Pastors had been gullible and been duped by the  Appellant
    because the Judge specifically asked the Pastors about how and  whether
    they considered his conversion genuine. In  particular  they  preferred
    Pastor McFarlane to the Appellant's appalling history and whether  that
    affected his decision.  He  said  that  it  did  not.  Apart  from  the
    Tribunal's own questions to the Pastors, the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented at the hearing and no doubt raised these matters also.


22. In paragraph 142 of the Determination it is  clear  that  the  Tribunal
    found the decision in this case difficult and unpalatable. Nevertheless
    the Tribunal indicated that bearing in mind the low standard  of  proof
    required in asylum cases and the two credible independent witnesses  it
    accepted the Appellant's claimed conversion and on that  basis  allowed
    the appeal.

23. The First-tier Tribunal, unlike me, the author of  the  grounds  or  Mr
    Shilliday had the benefit of hearing from those witnesses.  Apparently,
    neither their credibility nor their independence was challenged by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer. The reasoning is full and  detailed  in
    that regard.

24. While it is an unpalatable decision that a person with  the  background
    and behaviour of this Appellant should be granted refugee status in the
    UK, nevertheless in the same way as persons who  cynically  manufacture
    sur place claims by parading in front  of  Embassies  waving  flags  or
    appearing on Facebook or Blogs are entitled to  succeed,  as  was  made
    clear by the Court of Appeal in Danian v SSHD [2002]  IMM  AR  96.  The
    Court of Appeal said that there is no express limitation in the Refugee
    Convention  in  relation  to  persons  acting  in  bad  faith,  despite
    Counsel's attempt in Danian to have one implied.


25. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 18th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
