
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00428/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th October 2014                          |On 11th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                             HAMID REZA BAGHBANI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tuburu
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of Hamid Reza Baghbani a male citizen of Iran, born
      30 June 1973.  The appellant had  appealed  against  the  respondent's
      decision of February 2014 to make a deportation  order  under  Section
      3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The decision  was  made  because
      deportation was deemed to be conducive to the  public  good  following
      the appellant's conviction at Luton Crown Court in March  2006  of  an
      offence of possession and/or use of a false instrument.  The appellant
      had been sentenced to a term of 15  months  in  prison.   He  did  not
      appeal that sentence.

   2. The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  asserting
      that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules  or
      the law; it caused a breach under the Refugee Convention and the Human
      Rights Act 1998.  In essence the appellant's appeal was based upon his
      fear of return to Iran because of his conversion to Christianity.

   3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge's of the First-Tier  Tribunal
      Harries and Mr P Bompas sitting at Columbus House on 9 June 2014.   An
      oral hearing was held.  The appellant  was  again  represented  by  Mr
      Tuburu and the respondent was represented by a Home Office  Presenting
      Officer.  In a decision dated 13 June 2014  the  panel  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal both under the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8
      ECHR.

   4. The appellant sought leave to appeal that decision alleging  that  the
      panel erred in having accepted that the appellant was probably  now  a
      genuine, practising Christian had found that he would not be  at  risk
      as an  actively  evangelical  Christian  which  was  contrary  to  the
      evidence.  Error is alleged on the part of the  panel  in  failing  to
      properly assess the appellants risk as a convert  who  would  practice
      evangelical or proselytising activities.  The Tribunal had  failed  to
      follow the case of HJ  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2010] UKSC 31.  In general the panel were  criticised  for
      failing to take into consideration at the "socio religious climate" in
      Iran and in failing to properly take into account the evidence of  the
      appellant's Pastor.

   5. In granting leave to appeal  a  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal said this:

         "1.  First-Tier Tribunal Judge Harries sitting in a  panel  with  a
      lay member  dismissed  the  Iranian  appellant's  appeal  against  the
      decision of the respondent to make a deportation order, having  regard
      to Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

     2.  The grounds include the submission that the panel  failed  to  have
      any or any sufficient regard to the  guidance  in  HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD
      [2010] UKSC.  Given what appears at paragraph 38 of  the  determinate,
      the ground is arguable.

     3.  For the avoidance of doubt, all grounds may be argued".

   6. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   7. Mr Richards confirmed that no Rule 24 response had  been  prepared  by
      the respondent.

   8. Mr Tuburu relied upon the grounds for appeal.  The key issue  was  the
      appellant's conversion to Christianity.  If he were deported  to  Iran
      he would suffer breaches of Articles 2 and 3 of  the  Convention.   By
      reference to the case of HJ (Iran) the appellant  would  not  practice
      quietly.  The panel had heard from  the  appellant's  Pastor  (Mr  Ian
      Parry).  The appellant would go out telling people  of  his  Christian
      faith.   The  panel  should  have  followed   HJ.    The   appellant's
      credibility was not at issue as he had  been  found  credible  in  his
      evidence.

   9. Mr Richards submitted that  the  panel  had  made  clear  findings  at
      paragraph 37.  The appellant is regarded as an ordinary  convert.   He
      is neither a leader nor a lay preacher.  He is not ordained and he  is
      not an Evangelist.  These were the  clear  findings  of  the  Tribunal
      panel.  Upon this basis HJ (Iran) did not come into play and there  is
      no reason why the appellant would not  be  able  to  continue  in  his
      Christian practice.  There was no suggestion that the appellant  would
      openly preach.  He would not come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
      authorities in Iran.  The findings were properly open to the panel and
      there was no material error of law.

  10. Mr Tuburu responded by reference  to  paragraphs  32  and  33  of  the
      determination of the panel who had  found  him  a  genuine  practising
      Christian.  He would be "sharing the word".

  11. Having considered the documentation before me and having  listened  to
      the submissions made, I announced my decision that I found no material
      error of law in the determination and the appeal will be dismissed.  I
      indicated my reasons would be provided in writing which I now give.

  12. In reaching my conclusion I did take into account  the  letter  of  Mr
      Parry written from the Bay Church Cardiff on 20  June  2014.   I  will
      refer to that again later.

  13. As part of the appellant's evidence before the panel he  alleged  that
      he had suffered persecution for his political opinion whilst in Iran.

  14. At paragraph 31 of the determination the panel rejected that aspect of
      the appellant's appeal (findings which had not been challenged  before
      me).  In paragraph 31 the panel said this:

         "We reject the appellant's  claim  to  have  come  to  the  adverse
      attention of the authorities for the reasons claimed or for any  other
      reason.  We do not accept that he was detained, tortured  or  required
      to attend court in Iran.  We find that the appellant is not  a  person
      in need of genuine international protection or at risk  on  return  to
      Iran; we do not accept that he left Iran for the reasons claimed.  The
      appeal cannot succeed on political asylum grounds".

  15. At paragraph 32 of the determination the panel said this:

         "In the light of our adverse credibility findings we have reason to
      doubt that the appellant's conversion to  Christianity  was  genuinely
      motivated.  His conversion and baptism in 2007 were at a time when  he
      was making  continuing  efforts  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      However, we take account of the possibility that a person  turning  to
      religion for ulterior motives  may  well  acquire  genuine  faith  and
      having taken account of the totality of the evidence we are  satisfied
      that the appellant is probably now a genuine, practising, Christian".
  16. Mr Tuburu had referred  to paragraph 33 of the  panel's  determination
      which is set out as follows:

         "In particular, we have no reason to doubt the evidence  of  Pastor
      Ian Parry which was tested in cross examination before us.  We  accept
      that he believes the appellant to be a genuine Christian  contributing
      to the congregation, although he accepted that in  the  light  of  the
      language barrier between them he has to speak slowly  and  with  short
      words to the appellant and there have  often  been  misunderstandings.
      The Pastor's evidence is that  the  Christianity  in  question  is  an
      evangelical faith, but not practised from a "soap box"; they purposely
      adopt methods to avoid such an approach.  He supported the appellant's
      evidence that he attends  the  Pastor's  church,  as  well  as  prayer
      meetings and at Cardiff market in Splott where the appellant  and  his
      church colleagues have a stall to  promote  their  Christianity;  they
      display Christian books on the stall".


  17. The panel then went onto set out in detail the jurisprudence available
      to them before reaching their conclusions at paragraphs 37 and 38.

  18. At paragraph 37 the panel found:

         "Taking account of the above case law we find the appellant is  not
      at risk as a returning, failed, asylum seeker on return to  Iran;  nor
      does he claim to be.  We find that on his own  evidence  and  that  of
      Pastor Parry he comes within the category set out in paragraph 187  of
      [FS & others Iran - Christian converts (Iran CG) [2004] UKIAT  00303],
      namely an ordinary convert, who has  converted  outside  Iran  and  is
      neither a leader, lay or ordained, nor a Pastor, nor a proselytiser or
      evangelist.  He is not  in  our  view  actively  evangelical;  he  has
      quietly spread his faith in the United  Kingdom,  mostly  with  people
      known to him and by allowing others to come to him.   The  appellant's
      evidence is that he has already exercised caution about his  faith  in
      Iran by avoiding its discussion  in  telephone  calls  to  his  family
      members there".

  19. At paragraph 38 the panel said:

         "We have found that the appellant  has  not  achieved  any  adverse
      profile with the authorities prior to  his  departure  from  Iran  for
      political or any other reason.  It is primarily his  family  that  the
      appellant wishes to share his faith with  if  returned  to  Iran.   In
      these circumstances, in accordance with FS, we find  that  the  actual
      degree of risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3 is  not
      sufficient to  warrant  the  protection  of  either  Convention.   The
      reality is  that  a  social  and  economic  life  can  be  maintained;
      Christianity can be practised, if necessary, cautiously at  times,  by
      church attendance, association with Christians and Bible  study.   The
      appeal fails on religious asylum grounds".

  20. Returning now to Pastor Parry's letter of June 2014.  Such a  document
      is something that I would not normally take into account at this stage
      of the appeal process.  However I have read it and noted the contents.
       In essence the letter indicates  that  the  panel  misunderstood  the
      Pastor's evidence and misinterpreted the appellant's evidence.   I  do
      find that the criticism contained within that letter  is  ill-founded.
      The Tribunal panel found that the appellant  probably  was  a  genuine
      convert to Christianity.  In essence the issue was  how  he  practices
      that faith.  The letter contends an "active and effective evangelist".

  21. I  find  no  material  error  of  law  contained  within  the  panel's
      determination.  Whilst they questioned the appellant's credibility  as
      to, inter alia, his conversion they did accept that  he  is  "probably
      now a  genuine,  practising,  Christian".   The  question  before  the
      Tribunal and the only issue before me is whether  they  then  properly
      considered the risk  upon  return.   They  clearly  properly  directed
      themselves as to the law and with regard to country guidance.   Having
      taken into account the  appellant's  evidence  (and  the  evidence  of
      Pastor Parry) they came to  the  view  that  the  appellant  was  "not
      actively evangelical" paragraph 37 explains that view when  read  with
      paragraph 38.  In short the panel found that  the  appellant  was  not
      evangelical, nor did he practice proselytising.  He would not need  to
      change or suppress his religious views and accordingly would not  come
      to the adverse attention of the authorities.

  22. No anonymity direction has previously been  given  and  there  was  no
      application made before me.  Accordingly I make no such direction.

Decision

  23. No material error of law exists in the panel's determination  and  the
      appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole                   10th November 2014
