
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |13 November 2015                     |
|Oral judgment delivered on 27 October|                                     |
|2015                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOLGATE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                          Mr Jeyathevaraj Thangiah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, who was born on 13 February 1961, is a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.  He appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    30 December 2013 to issue a deportation order under  Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 25 September 1986 on a  Sri
    Lankan diplomatic passport.  He applied for leave to remain  which  was
    granted until 29 June 1989.  He was given further leave to  remain  and
    then on 11 March 1994 indefinite leave to remain. In September 2002  he
    married in Sri Lanka. His wife,  a  Sri  Lankan  citizen,  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK on 11 July 2005.  He has two sons,
    one born in 2004  and  the  other  in  2009.   They  are  both  British
    citizens.

 3. The Appellant was convicted of four offences of fraud committed between
    30 April and 30 June 2010.  The sentencing judge said that the evidence
    against him was  overwhelming.   He  also  said  that  the  Appellant's
    behaviour could only properly be described as confidence fraud  because
    he had abused the confidence placed in him as a letting agent by taking
    large sums of money as deposits from prospective tenants of residential
    property, and pretending to them that he had the authority to  let  the
    properties in question when he had nothing of the  kind.   He  deceived
    them into parting with their money.

 4. The trial judge said that the Appellant had then fobbed the victims off
    with  lying  excuses  and  raised  their  expectations  by  continually
    assuring them that they would be  able  to  rent  the  properties  even
    though he knew that there was no possibility of that happening.   Worst
    of all, said the judge, when the Appellant was found out, he failed  to
    give back the money even though he promised to do so. The  judge  found
    the offending serious because of the loss to the victims of their hard-
    earned money.  Indeed he noted that in one case the victim had borrowed
    money in order to provide the sum to the Appellant.

 5. The judge went through the mitigating circumstances relied upon by  the
    Appellant, illness and absence from the office.  He  pointed  out  that
    they had not been supported by any evidence. The judge then referred to
    the attempt by the Appellant to  blame  his  own  staff  for  what  had
    happened but he rejected that and said  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    responsible for running the scam, no-one else was to  blame.   He  said
    that the public was entitled to  be  protected  from  conmen  like  the
    Appellant. So he disqualified him from being a company director  for  a
    period of five years, in addition to imposing a prison sentence  of  18
    months.

 6. The judge in the First-tier  Tribunal  said  in  paragraph  52  of  her
    decision that she, like the sentencing  judge,  found  this  to  be  an
    extremely serious offence because in crimes  of  confidence  fraud  the
    public is at risk of being cheated of  their  hard-earned  money.   She
    also noted that the Appellant did not plead guilty  at  his  trial  and
    tried to put the blame on his own staff, which had  been  categorically
    rejected by the trial judge.

 7. In her decision between paragraphs 7  and  8  the  judge  set  out  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules and also the principles to
    be applied under Article 8 taken from the  decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar.  Between paragraphs  10  and  19  she  summarised  the
    evidence which had been given at the hearing.  Her decision  then  fell
    into two parts.  Between  paragraphs  21  and  39  she  considered  the
    application of the Immigration Rules and concluded by  finding  against
    the Appellant at paragraph 39 of her decision.

Ground 2

 8. Between paragraphs 40 and 67 the Judge dealt with  the  application  of
    Article 8.  It was in this part of her judgment that  she  relied  upon
    the Appellant's continuing failure to repay the victims of his  crimes.
    In ground 2 of the notice of appeal the Appellant said that as a matter
    of law this was an immaterial consideration.  However, at  the  hearing
    today Mr Jaisri for the Appellant  very  properly  conceded  that  this
    matter was no longer pursued.  We entirely agree with that concession.

 9. Nevertheless for the avoidance of any doubt, we respond briefly to  the
    criticisms made under  ground  2.   First,  we  note  that  before  the
    Tribunal the Appellant asserted that he was  remorseful  for  the  four
    offences of fraud he had carried out.  Plainly the offences had  caused
    serious harm to victims in a vulnerable position seeking accommodation.
     The judge in the Tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    circumstances in which no repayment had been made in order to  evaluate
    the claimed remorse. This was a relevant consideration.

10. Second, it was suggested that the sentence passed in the Crown Court of
    eighteen months imprisonment had already factored  in  the  failure  to
    repay victims.  In our view the sentencing judge properly had regard to
    the level of  harm  caused  to  the  victims  in  accordance  with  the
    sentencing guidelines.  Reimbursement of  the  victims  had  not  taken
    place by that stage and so was  not  available  as  mitigation  of  the
    sentence otherwise imposed. But the judge's sentencing remarks  do  not
    suggest that he increased the sentence on that account.  The sentencing
    guidelines would not have supported his doing so,  so  we  also  reject
    this criticism.

11. Third, it is said that no compensation order was made  because  it  was
    considered unnecessary to  make  one.   This  was  mere  assertion  and
    unsupported by evidence before the Tribunal. We have not been shown any
    transcript of the adjourned  hearing  on  the  issues  of  compensation
    orders and costs.  It cannot be inferred that the  judge  considered  a
    compensation order to be unnecessary.  He  might  have  been  satisfied
    that at that stage the Appellant lacked the means to make any  payment.
    That would have been an entirely different point.

12. The fourth and last criticism was that the  Tribunal's  focus  on  non-
    repayment simply revealed an improper purpose to punish  the  Appellant
    further.  That suggestion was entirely misconceived.

Ground 1

13. The ground of appeal which has been argued before us today is that  the
    judge in the Tribunal failed to make any findings  in  accordance  with
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  as  to
    what would be in the best interests of the two children,  one  aged  10
    and the other 5 as at the date of the hearing before the Tribunal.  The
    judge considered this issue entirely within the section of her decision
    dealing with the application of the Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph  24
    referred to Section 55.  Paragraph 25 referred to the decision of  this
    Tribunal in LD (Article 8 - best interests of  child)  Zimbabwe  [2010]
    UKUT 278 (IAC).

14. There was some evidence before the Tribunal as to the  effects  of  the
    children being separated from their father.  For example, paragraph  11
    of the determination records:

         "His criminality had a disastrous effect on  his  family  and  they
         suffered a lot.  His eldest son had to go to a  doctor  because  he
         was mentally disturbed.  Since he  has  been  out  of  prison,  his
         eldest son is doing very well and there is a letter from the school
         to prove this."

    Likewise paragraph 14, summarised the evidence of the Appellant's  wife
    as follows: "Her eldest son  missed  the  Appellant  and  reacted  very
    negatively."

15. In paragraph 26 of her decision the judge recorded the agreed fact that
    both sons are British citizens.  In paragraphs 27 to paragraph  31  the
    judge considered the position of the elder son.  She  began  by  saying
    that in her view she had to consider whether it would  be  unreasonable
    to expect the Appellant's eldest son to leave  the  United  Kingdom  or
    whether there was another family member who was able to care for him in
    the United Kingdom.

16. Paragraphs 28 to 29 of the decision appear to suggest  that  the  judge
    took the view that the mother could look after both  sons  by  herself.
    In paragraph 30 the judge said that there was no credible evidence that
    Sri Lanka does not have an education system suitable for a 10 year  old
    boy or a 5 year old boy.  The judge thought that  both  sons  do  speak
    some Tamil and could learn the language  and  adjust  to  life  in  Sri
    Lanka.  In paragraph 31 she concluded that it would not be unduly harsh
    for the elder son to return to Sri  Lanka  although  he  is  a  British
    citizen entitled to live in the United Kingdom.

17. In paragraph 32 of her decision she simply added this  in  relation  to
    the younger son:

         "The Appellant's second son is 5 years old and  therefore  has  not
         lived in this country for about seven years.  I find  that  he  can
         return to Sri Lanka with the rest of the family as  a  family  unit
         and it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to do so."

    Of course, what was relevant here was not that this child had lived  in
    the UK for less than seven years, but that he is a British  citizen  in
    any event.

18. The last sentence of paragraph 32 then dealt with a  different  aspect:
    "His mother who has indefinite leave to remain can also remain with her
    two sons in this country if that is her wish."  So it is plain that  in
    these paragraphs no consideration  was  given  by  the  judge  to,  for
    example, the effects of separating the children from  their  father  if
    they were to remain in the United Kingdom.

19. We refer briefly to the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania)
    v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]  2  AC  166.   In
    paragraph 26 of her judgment Baroness Hale laid down the principle that
    the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration and the
    Tribunal  must  ask  whether  the  force  of  any  other  consideration
    outweighs that factor.  In paragraph 29 she gave  examples  of  matters
    which should  be  addressed  in  applying  Section  55  and  she  dealt
    specifically in paragraph 31 with children who are British.   She  said
    that such children have an unqualified right of abode  here;  they  may
    have lived here all their lives; they are  being  educated  here;  they
    have other social links with the community here.

         "It is not enough to say that a young child may  readily  adapt  to
         life in another country.  That may well be so, particularly if [the
         child] moves with both [his] parents to a country which  they  know
         well  and  where  they  can  easily  re-integrate  in   their   own
         community...  But it is very different in the case of children  who
         have lived here all their lives and are being expected to move to a
         country which they do not know and will be separated from a  parent
         whom they also know well."

20. She went on to say in paragraph 32 that  the  intrinsic  importance  of
    citizenship should not be played down.   "As  citizens  these  children
    have rights which they will not be able to exercise  if  they  move  to
    another country.  They will lose the advantages of growing up and being
    educated in  their  own  country,  their  own  culture  and  their  own
    language."  We also  bear  in  mind  the  well-known  passages  in  the
    judgments of Lord Hope at  paragraphs  40  and  41  and  Lord  Kerr  at
    paragraph 46.

21. Of course, in cases such as the present one there  may  well  be  other
    considerations  which  are  capable  of  outweighing  a  child's   best
    interests.  That is a matter for the Secretary of  State  initially  to
    determine and on appeal by the Tribunal, but in order to carry out  the
    balancing exercise required by the law it is necessary  that  the  best
    interests of a child are identified from the material placed before the
    decision-maker so that those interests may be placed  in  the  balance.
    That requirement is clear from authorities such as  MK  (India)  [2011]
    UKUT 475 (IAC) at paragraph 19 and also H v Lord Advocate [2013]  1  AC
    413 per Lord Hope DDSc at paragraph 51.

22. We are fully satisfied that the judge failed to make any findings as to
    what would be in the best interests of  each  of  these  two  children.
    Instead, she focused on another consideration which is relevant but  is
    not the only consideration, namely their ability to adapt  to  life  in
    Sri Lanka.

23. We conclude that the decision of the First Tier Tribunal  involved  the
    making of the error of law identified above and therefore  this  appeal
    must be allowed. The decision of 5 December 2014 is set aside  and  the
    appeal will be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh before a different judge pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  practice  statement
    7.2(b).

24. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date:  30 October 2015

The Hon. Mr Justice Holgate
