
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00250/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 LOUIE MENDY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Louie Mendy, was born  on  4  October  1989  and  is  a
    citizen of Sweden.  I shall hereafter refer to  the  appellant  as  the
    respondent and to the respondent as the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant appealed (against the decision of the respondent to  make
    a  deportation  against  the  him  under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006) to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Robertson; Ms L Schmitt JP) which, in a  determination  promulgated  27
    June 2014, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground concerns the alleged
    failure of the Tribunal to give reasons  for  findings  on  a  material
    matter.  The Secretary of State asserts that the appellant had lied  to
    the Tribunal.  The Tribunal had failed to take his unreliability  as  a
    witness into account in its analysis.  The appellant had  continued  to
    deny responsibility for the index offence and was likely  to  associate
    with  "negative  influences."   These  were  both  matters  which   the
    Secretary of State asserts should have led the Tribunal  to  find  that
    the appellant was likely to  re-offend.   Secondly,  the  Secretary  of
    State asserts that the Tribunal  failed  to  provide  reasons  why  the
    appellant's rehabilitation prospects would  be  better  in  the  United
    Kingdom rather than in Sweden.  This  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the
    Tribunal's decision in respect  of  Article  8  ECHR.   The  respondent
    considered  that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  in   the
    appellant's case which might justify allowing the appeal on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.

 4. The Tribunal found that there were no serious  grounds  for  concluding
    that the appellant was a  present,  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to a fundamental interest in society.  I find that the  Tribunal
    was fully aware of the fact that the appellant had  denied  involvement
    in  the  index  offence  (on  20  April  2011,  he  was  convicted   at
    Wolverhampton Crown Court on two counts of  robbery  and  sentenced  to
    four years' imprisonment).  At [33] the Tribunal was aware that it  had
    to balance "[the appellant's] attempt  to  minimise  his  part  in  the
    offences he has committed with the  positive  steps  he  has  taken  to
    date."  At [34], the Tribunal stated  that  it  appreciated  that  "the
    appellant's crime represents an escalation in his offending" and  noted
    the appellant's "unsettled lifestyle, with neither parent being engaged
    with him  during  the  time  he  was  offending."   The  Tribunal  also
    considered the unsatisfactory milieu in which the  appellant  continues
    to live.  I find that it was plainly open to the Tribunal  to  conclude
    that the appellant would have more family support in the United Kingdom
    than he would in Sweden; his only close relative in Sweden  is  his  14
    year old half-brother.

 5. I also find that the Tribunal was entitled to give weight to the report
    of Lisa Davies.  Miss Davies had concluded that the  appellant  was  at
    medium risk of re-offending.  The Tribunal gives six  detailed  reasons
    at [32] for placing  weight  on  her  report.   The  assertion  by  the
    respondent that it was wrong to do so is no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the Tribunal's reasoned findings.

 6. I agree with the submissions of Miss  Rutherford,  for  the  appellant,
    that the ground raising "exceptional circumstances" and Article 8  ECHR
    is misconceived.  The  Tribunal's  assessment  of  proportionality  was
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  and
    not under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (see Vasconelos (Risk  -
    Rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC).  Regulation 21 identifies  the
    issues to be considered in a  proportionality  assessment  under  those
    Regulations.  I cannot find anything in the determination  which  might
    indicate that the Tribunal has applied the law incorrectly or that  its
    reasonable findings were not available to it on the evidence.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal has carried out a very  detailed  and  thorough
    analysis of the evidence.  It has  applied  the  correct  law  and  has
    reached a conclusion which was available to it.  It has not had  regard
    to irrelevant evidence nor has it (as the grounds  suggest)  failed  to
    have  regard  to  relevant  considerations.   The  Tribunal   was,   in
    particular, aware of the appellant's reluctance to admit involvement in
    the index offence but it was entitled to conclude that the  appellant's
    rehabilitation was likely to be more successful in the  United  Kingdom
    than in Sweden.  I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
