

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00501/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23 May 2017                      |On 24 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DAVID CHJRZANOWSKI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    None

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      ('SSHD') against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  24
      January 2017, in which it allowed the appeal of the  respondent  ('the
      claimant').

Background

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Poland.  He was born in 1994 and  entered
      the UK with his parents in 1995, when he was a baby.  He has  remained
      in the UK since this.  It is accepted  that  he  has  not  acquired  a
      permanent right of residence in the UK.  Although Poland  became  part
      of the European Union on 1  May  2014  the  claimant  never  exercised
      Treaty rights.
   3. The claimant has a long offending history set  out  in  a  PNC  record
      sheet.  From 2008 the claimant amassed 20 convictions in  relation  to
      29 different offences.   These  resulted  in  non-custodial  sentences
      until 25 November 2014 when he was sentenced to 12 weeks  in  a  young
      offenders institution.  On  22  December  2015  he  was  sentenced  to
      imprisonment of 8 weeks and on 4 August 2016 he was  sentenced  to  10
      weeks imprisonment.


   4. In a decision dated 30 September 2016  the  SSHD  decided  to  make  a
      deportation order against the claimant.  The reasons for this are  set
      out in a very detailed letter running to 147 paragraphs.

FTT decision under appeal

   5. One of the key issues for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  was
      whether or  not  the  claimant  had  acquired  a  period  of  10-years
      residence prior to the deportation decision and was therefore entitled
      to benefit from the enhanced level of protection i.e. that his removal
      must be justified on imperative grounds of public security.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal decided this issue in the claimant's favour at
      [38].  The First-tier Tribunal dealt with the issue  in  brief  terms,
      finding that by the time that the claimant was imprisoned on 4  August
      2016, he had already been resident  for  a  continuous  period  of  10
      years.  The First-tier Tribunal then found at [40] that  the  claimant
      "does present a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
      affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society"  but  that
      "whilst his removal  from  the  UK  may  be  desirable  it  cannot  be
      presently be justified on imperative grounds of public security".

Grounds of appeal

   7. In granting permission to appeal in a decision dated  16  March  2017,
      Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor observed that for the  reasons  stated  in
      the grounds, the First-tier Tribunal may not have properly  calculated
      the 10-year residence period prior to the deportation  decision.   The
      grounds of appeal relied upon the submission that following SSHD v  MG
      [2014] EUECJ C-400/12 the 10- year period must be  counted  back  from
      the date of the decision.

Hearing

   8. At the hearing Mr McVeety made very brief submissions.  He relied upon
      SSHD v MG and invited me to find that notwithstanding  the  claimant's
      length of residence, his criminal offending was such that he could not
      be said to be integrated and in the premises, he did not meet the  10-
      year residency requirement and the enhanced level  of  protection  did
      not apply.


   9. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.


Error of law discussion

  10. In SSHD v MG the ECJ considered the wording of Article 28 of Directive
      2004/38.  This states at (3) that:


                 "an expulsion decision  may  not  be  taken  against  Union
                 citizens, except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative
                 grounds of public security, as defined by Member States, if
                 they: (a) have resided in the host  Member  State  for  the
                 previous 10 years..."


  11. The ECJ clearly found at [24] and  [28]  that  the  10-year  residency
      necessary for the grant of enhanced  protection  in  Article  28(3)(a)
      must be calculated by counting back from  the  date  of  the  decision
      ordering that person's expulsion.


  12. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  adopt  this  approach  and  instead
      counted forward from the date Poland joined the EU.  This is an  error
      of law.  This error was compounded by a  second  error  of  law.   The
      First-tier Tribunal failed to consider all the  relevant  factors  and
      the degree of integration involved, given the apparent interruption to
      the continuity of residence by the claimant's periods of imprisonment,
      in order to determine whether the 10-year  residency  requirement  was
      met.  This relevant test is set out by the ECJ in SSHD v  MG  at  [25-
      37].


  13. In MG (prison-Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Direction) Portugal  [2014]
      UKUT 392 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  made  it  clear  that  the  ECJ's
      judgment in SSHD v MG should be understood as meaning that a period of
      imprisonment during the relevant 10 years does not necessarily prevent
      a person from qualifying for enhanced protection  if  that  person  is
      sufficiently integrated, albeit a period of imprisonment must  have  a
      negative impact in so far as establishing  integration  is  concerned.
      This has been considered recently in Warsame v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      16.  The Court of Appeal appears to have accepted at [9] that there is
      a "maybe" category of cases where a person has  resided  in  the  host
      state for the 10 years prior to imprisonment depending on  an  overall
      assessment of whether integrating links have been broken, and that  in
      such cases it might be relevant to determine the degree of integration
      in the host state and the extent to  which  links  with  the  original
      member state have been broken.  This claimant plainly falls into  this
      "maybe" category.

  14. The First-tier Tribunal's decision fails  to  take  into  account  the
      principles set out in the ECJ judgment of SSHD  v  MG  and  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision applying it.


  15. Mr McVeety acknowledged that it is important to consider whether  this
      is a material error.  He accepted that there were  strong  factors  in
      favour of the claimant's integration and it may well be very difficult
      to argue that there would have been a  different  result  if  all  the
      relevant factors were taken into account.


  16.  Had  the  First-tier  Tribunal  taken  into  account  the  principles
      established in the MG  cases,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  have
      inevitably reached the  same  conclusion  on  the  10  year  residency
      requirement.   It  follows  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has   not
      committed a material error of law.


  17. I accept the  reasoning  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  [42-48]  in  MG
      (Portugal) regarding  the  correct  approach  to  [33]  of  the  ECJ's
      judgment in SSHD v MG.  Had this reasoning been applied by the  First-
      tier Tribunal to the facts accepted, the findings set out below  would
      have been inevitable.


   i) The claimant has had periods of imprisonment during the requisite  10-
      year period (counting back 10 years from  the  date  of  decision,  30
      September 2016).


  ii) Nonetheless it is still possible  for  him  to  qualify  for  enhanced
      protection in the "maybe" category, and an overall assessment needs to
      be made which takes into account all relevant factors.  These  include
      the following:


   a. The vast majority of the claimant's personal and family links  are  to
      the UK and no other Member State - he lived between foster care in the
      UK and with his mother in the UK, he has a girlfriend in the UK;
   b. The claimant is 23 years old and has lived in the UK since  he  was  a
      baby;
   c. The claimant has not had any period of absence  from  the  UK  -  this
      means that he resided in the UK during the 10 years prior to his first
      imprisonment in 2014;
   d. The claimant has very  few  links  to  Poland  beyond  his  parentage.
      Although he was born there and is a citizen of Poland, he only  speaks
      basic Polish and is unable to read or write in Polish.
   e. Although the claimant has had no employment  in  the  UK  and  has  an
      extensive history of criminal offending in the  UK,  he  still  has  a
      substantial degree of  integration  by  virtue  of  having  lived  the
      entirety of his life, save the first nine months, in the UK.


 iii) The claimant's imprisonment and criminal  offending  have  a  negative
      impact upon the establishment of integrative links, but his length  of
      residence in and integrative links to  the  UK,  and  the  absence  of
      meaningful links to Poland, are such that he clearly qualifies for the
      enhanced level of protection in Article 28(3)(a).

Decision

  18. The FTT decision does not contain a material error of law and  is  not
      set aside.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
23 May 2017



