
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00545/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 March 2020                  |On 24 September 2020             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JESUALDO AFONSO QUIBELO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Shaw, of counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Jesualdo Quibelo is a national of the Netherlands, born on 25  February
    1999.  On 13 November 2019, his appeal against the Secretary of State's
    decision to  deport  him  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Burnett.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted  permission  to
    appeal against that decision.  We will refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal: Mr Quibelo, as the  appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.



The Factual Background

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with his mother  in  August
    2010, he was 11 years of age.  The  appellant  has  not  been  able  to
    establish any entitlement to permanent residence in the UK.

 3. The FtT was  aware  of  number  of  cautions,  findings  of  guilt  and
    convictions:

          a. On 27/1/12 he was cautioned for an offence of  sexual  assault
             by touching, the act occurred on 29/5/11 when he was 12,

          b. On 18/12/13 he received a Referral  Order  for  6  months  for
             handling stolen goods,

          c. On 14/9/15 he received a Youth  rehabilitation  Order  for  12
             months for possession of cocaine and  heroin  with  intent  to
             supply and possession of a bladed article,

          d. On 29/9/15 he received a Conditional Discharge  for  6  months
             for theft by shoplifting,

          e. On 8/3/17 he was sentenced to 21 weeks detention  in  a  Young
             Offenders Institute for possession of an offensive weapon,

          f. On 10/7/17 he was sentenced to 32 months detention in a  Young
             Offenders Institute for possession of heroin and cocaine  with
             intent to supply. The offences occurred in October 2016.

 4. We were told that the appellant was in  custody  at  the  time  of  the
    appeal before us. The information about that was unclear at the time of
    the hearing. It seems that he was being held on remand awaiting  trial.
    We now understand the position  to  be  that  the  appellant  has  been
    convicted of attempted burglary and the possession of a bladed article.
    On 22 April 2020 he was sentenced to 8 months detention for the  bladed
    article offence and a 2 year Community Order for the burglary  offence.
    The sentence had been served on remand and he has been  detained  under
    immigration powers. These matters were not before the FtT and played no
    part in the decision. Although the FtT Judge could not  have  known  of
    these matters, he was  aware  that  the  appellant  had  recently  been
    arrested.



The Deportation Order

 5. The initial decision of  the  SSHD  is  dated  13th  August  2018.  The
    decision was to make a deportation order in accordance with Regulations
    23(6)(b) and 27 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2016. The decision was taken on the grounds  of  public  policy  and/or
    public security. The decision was triggered by the sentence  passed  on
    29 November 2016 at the Crown Court sitting in Reading

 6. On 18 July 2017 the respondent issued the appellant with a notice  that
    she intended to deport him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   Human  rights
    representations were made against that course but, on 13 August 2018, a
    deportation order was signed against the appellant.

 7. The decision to deport was based on Regulation 23(6)(b).  It  was  said
    that the appellant's removal was justified on  the  grounds  of  public
    policy and security. The First Tier Tribunal found  that  he  does  not
    have a right of permanent residence and no issue  is  taken  with  that
    finding.



The Regulations

 8. Regulation 23 provides,

         23.- ...

         (6)  Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an  EEA  national  who  has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a  national
         who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

             (a)  ...

             (b)  the Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health in accordance with regulation 27; or

             (c)  ...

 9. Regulation 27 provides,

         27.- (1) In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         ...

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         ...

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy, public security and the fundamental  interests  of  society
         etc.).

10. Schedule 1 to Regulation 27 provides,

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the  United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at  or  around
         the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

         ...

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,
             public offence)  and  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
             (particularly in relation  to  offences,  which  if  taken  in
             isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the  requirements
             of regulation 27);

             (j)  protecting the public;



The Appeal to Judge Burnett in the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appeal came before Judge Burnett on 23 August 2019.  The  appellant
    was represented by Mr Smyth, the respondent by Ms Javed,  a  Presenting
    Officer.  Both parties had filed and served comparatively large bundles
    of documents.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his
    witnesses: his sister and O.S. from  the  St  Giles  Trust.  The  judge
    received submissions from both representatives, after which he reserved
    his decision.

12. The judge's reserved decision is lengthy and logically structured.   He
    set out the relevant immigration and offending history. In  summary  he
    found that the appellant had  not  established  a  right  of  permanent
    residence in  the  UK,  he  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    demonstrated to be a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    to the fundamental interest of society to mean that his deportation  to
    the Netherlands was a proportionate response.

13. In paragraphs 13-15 of his judgment he set out the test to be  applied,
    namely whether the  respondent  had  established,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellant is a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat to the fundamental interests of society.   No  complaint
    is made about these self-directions, which are in accordance  with  the
    authorities, including SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245;  [2016]
    2 CMLR 3.

14. The judge set out the relevant  parts  of  the  regulations,  including
    schedule 1, at [17].  Having concluded  that  the  appellant  was  only
    entitled to the basic  level  of  protection  against  deportation,  he
    turned  his  focus  to  the  threat  posed  by  the  appellant  to  the
    fundamental interests of society.  At [26], he reminded  himself  again
    of the burden of proof in this respect, and of the  relevant  parts  of
    the  Regulations.   The  judge  reviewed  the   appellant's   offending
    behaviour from [27] onwards.  He noted that the  appellant's  Probation
    Officer believed that he was engaging with the  relevant  services  and
    would be assisted by them. He noted that she believed that there was  a
    high chance of positive change by the  appellant.  He  noted  that  she
    believed that the assistance provided would "hopefully" deter him  from
    further offending.

15. The Judge heard evidence form the appellant's sister  who  also  stated
    that the  appellant  had  a  more  positive  attitude  towards  change,
    although she did not know his friends or the people he mixed with on  a
    regular basis.

16. He also heard from O.S., who works for  the  St  Giles  Trust  and  had
    worked with the appellant for about a month prior to  the  hearing.  He
    found O.S. to be a 'very impressive witness'. He  recognised  that  the
    contact between the appellant and O.S. had only lasted for a relatively
    short period of time but work  was  being  done  through  a  number  of
    agencies towards rehabilitation and employment. The Judge found O.S. to
    be confident in the prospects for rehabilitation.

17. He observed that the respondent had not provided  any  evidence  of  an
    assessment of risk posed by the appellant in  an  OASys  or  any  other
    report. Although the appellant had not provided any report  either,  he
    had submitted evidence from his Probation Officer and called O.S., both
    of whom "expressed the hope" for the commitment and engagement  of  the
    appellant.

18. The Judge noted  that  although  no  charges  were  being  pursued  the
    appellant had recently been arrested with others in a car, a knife  had
    been found in the car. That had occurred in July 2019.  Worryingly  the
    appellant was still mixing with people who drove a car which  contained
    a knife.

19. The Judge paid careful attention to the sentencing remarks of HHJ Duran
    QC who sentenced the appellant to 32  months  in  July  2017.  She  had
    observed that the appellant had come under pressure  to  offend,  which
    fell short of duress. He had been using drugs and was under pressure to
    offend to finance his own use. He had re-offended despite earlier court
    appearances. She had observed that the appellant  was  young  and  that
    there was the prospect of change with maturity.

20. The findings crucial to this appeal are set out at paragraphs 36  -  38
    of the FtT judgment.

         "36. The appellant's criminal record points to  a  continuation  of
         his offending behaviour and a pattern of behaviour.  The  appellant
         has been convicted twice of possession of a bladed article. He  has
         been convicted twice of dishonesty offences. He has been  convicted
         twice of the possession with intent to supply drugs. The  appellant
         was also recently arrested, and he states that a knife was found in
         the car, but this had nothing to do with him. However,  the  arrest
         shows the appellant still associates  with  individuals  who  carry
         knives. The appellant has been persuaded in the past to resume  his
         offending behaviour and the appellant is  described  as  vulnerable
         due to his difficult  childhood.  The  appellant  has  clearly  not
         changed his peer  group.  Balanced  against  this  evidence,  which
         points to a risk of further offending, is  the  evidence  from  the
         Probation Officer and Mr O.S. regarding  the  appellant's  positive
         behaviour and commitment. The judge also expressed a hope that  the
         appellant would gain some maturity after his incarceration, and the
         judge noted the appellant's young age.

         37.  In my judgment there is some risk the  appellant  will  offend
         again. If there was no such risk  the  multi-agency  would  not  be
         working with the appellant. The question is whether there is a real
         risk and the likelihood of such reoffending. The probation  officer
         is hopeful for the appellant.  Mr  OS  is  confident  and  positive
         regarding the appellant's future and his  chances  of  moving  away
         from his offending behaviour. I found Mr OS  to  be  an  impressive
         witness and accept his assessment. These are  professionals,  whose
         employment and role is to assist people move  away  from  offending
         behaviour. If the confidence in the appellant is borne out there is
         only a small risk, he will offend again in the future.

         38.  The question I need to answer is whether the personal  conduct
         of the appellant represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society.  In all the circumstances, I consider that  the  threshold
         set out in [sic] regulations  has  not  been  demonstrated  by  the
         respondent and I conclude that the appellant does not  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  at  this  present
         time.  This is sufficient to dispose of this appeal."

21. The Judge went on, in the alternative, to consider the  proportionality
    of the appellant's deportation. The appellant had come to this  country
    as a child and had a difficult childhood, including going into the care
    of the local authority for some time. His mother and sister live in the
    UK. His father may still live in the Netherlands  but  there  has  been
    very limited contact, the last being in 2015.

22. Having considered the nature and quality  of  the  appellant's  claimed
    family life the Judge found that there was help  available  to  him  to
    find employment and avoid re-offending.  He  has  the  support  of  his
    mother and sister in the UK.

23. The Judge found that his  considerations  under  the  Regulations  were
    wider than would be required  for  an  Article  8  ECHR  consideration.
    Therefore, it was not necessary for  him  to  consider  the  Article  8
    argument further, having found for the appellant under the Regulations.



24. The finding that the appellant does not represent  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat to society  is  at  the  core  of  this
    appeal.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

25. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the ground that there had
    been a material misdirection in law. She submitted  that  the  FtT  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for the finding that the appellant  did
    not pose a genuine, present and sufficient threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society. Further that the evidence before the tribunal did
    not support the finding because it was expressed in terms of  hope  for
    the future and that the witness who expressed a confident view had only
    known the appellant for too short a period of time and was not aware of
    a recent arrest. The respondent argues that because the finding  at  to
    future risk was flawed, the subsequent reasoning on proportionality was
    "infected" by those earlier findings.

26. Permission to appeal was granted on the following grounds by a judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal;

          a. That the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his finding
             that the appellant was not a risk because it was based on  the
             evidence of the Probation Officer that it was  hoped  that  he
             would not re-offend,

          b. That the Judge was wrong to place reliance on the evidence  of
             O.S. because he  had  not  known  of  the  appellant's  recent
             arrest,

          c. That the judge had failed to take account of  the  appellant's
             continued association with others involved in crime.

27. The skeleton argument of the SSHD argues that the  FtT  had  not  given
    sufficient reasons for making the finding that the  appellant  did  not
    pose  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.  It  is
    submitted that the Probations Officer's view was expressed  as  a  hope
    that he would not re-offend, rather than a "firm  conclusion"  that  he
    would not. Further it is argued that the FtT should not  have  accepted
    the evidence of O.S. and the Probation Officer because  they  were  not
    aware of the recent arrest and were therefore not  fully  appraised  of
    the  facts  of  the  appellant's  recent  conduct.   Also,   that   the
    appellant's continued association with persons who drove a car in which
    a knife was found  showed that there was a continuing risk  of  further
    offending It is argued that the FtT failed adequately to  consider  the
    full extent of the offending history as past conduct carries weight  as
    to future behaviour.

28. We were invited by Ms Shaw to adjourn the appeal to await the Court  of
    Appeal's decision in a case (or cases) in which further guidance was to
    be given on the deportation  of  EEA  nationals.   She  was  unable  to
    provide us with any further details of the case, or with  the  date  on
    which a decision might be expected.  In the circumstances, we  declined
    to adjourn and proceeded to consider the parties' submissions.

29. In addition to relying on the skeleton argument submitted on behalf  of
    the SSHD, Mr Tufan sought  to  argue  that  the  FtT  had  not  engaged
    sufficiently with Schedule 1, which requires separate consideration  of
    all the relevant factors.  He accepted that there was no application to
    vary  the  grounds  but  he  submitted  that  the  point   was   raised
    'tangentially' in the grounds.  In amplification  of  the  grounds,  he
    submitted that the judge had erred in attaching weight to the  evidence
    he had heard regarding rehabilitation, since that evidence  was  merely
    speculative and based on  nothing  more  than  hope.   The  appellant's
    conduct post-hearing shed light on the risk of re-offending  and  there
    was a tension between the judge's assessment at [38] and [46]-[47].

30. Miss Shaw submits that the Judge was entitled to place reliance on  the
    evidence of O.S. as an expert witness in the assessment of  risk.  That
    his confident view could be  used  to  balance  the  fact  of  repeated
    offending over the appellant's adolescence. The Probation  Officer  had
    known the appellant for a longer time and was supportive  of  the  view
    that the risk was not sufficiently great.

31. She submits that the Judge heard the evidence, applied the regulations,
    and reached a conclusion open to him on the facts. She argued  that  he
    had properly considered all the  applicable  factors  in  reaching  his
    decision on the proportionality of deportation. She relied on the  Rule
    24 Response in addition to her oral arguments.

32. We reserved our decision.



Discussion

33. The appellant is a young man with an unenviable  record  of  offending.
    That full record was before the FtT and the history and nature of those
    offences was adequately summarised in  the  judgment.  The  Judge  read
    evidence from his Probation Officer, who had known him and worked  with
    him for some time. He also heard from O.S. who had worked directly with
    the appellant but only for a short time.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    draw, from that combination of  expert  opinion,  the  conclusion  that
    whilst the risk of further offending could not be eliminated there  was
    an evidential basis upon  which  he  could  conclude  that  there  were
    grounds for confidence. O.S. was confident and  the  Probation  Officer
    was hopeful, neither could provide certainty and the Judge reached  his
    findings on the basis that there was a continuing risk.

34. The FtT noted that the appellant  had  been  found  by  the  Judge  who
    sentenced him at Reading Crown  Court  to  be  immature,  acting  under
    pressure from others and to some extent driven by the need  to  finance
    his own drug use. She expressed the view that increasing  maturity  was
    an important factor in reducing the risk of future offending.

35. The judgment of the FtT does adequately set out the reasoning by  which
    the Judge concluded that the SSHD had not discharged the burden on  her
    of proving that the appellant was a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the interests of this society. It was open to him  to
    place weight on the evidence of O.S. who expressed  confidence  in  the
    appellant's future conduct, even if he had not been told of  an  arrest
    which had not led to a prosecution.

36. The separate points made in the grounds of appeal amount, in truth,  to
    nothing more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  reached  by  the
    judge.  He was demonstrably aware of the full extent of the appellant's
    offending; the extent of the witnesses' familiarity with the appellant;
    and his more recent offence.  There can be no doubt that he took all of
    those matters into account.  Nor can there be any doubt that the weight
    which he attached to the evidence, and in particular  the  evidence  of
    OS, was a matter for him.  It  is  trite  that  an  appellate  Tribunal
    should be slow to interfere with factual decisions such as this,  based
    as they are on the 'sea of evidence' before the Tribunal of  fact.   We
    see no  proper  basis  to  interfere  with  the  judge's  well-reasoned
    conclusion that the appellant does not present a genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of the  United
    Kingdom.  As the judge himself noted, that conclusion was determinative
    of the appeal before him, and our conclusion that it is free from legal
    error is determinative of the appeal before us:  MC  (Portugal)  [2015]
    UKUT 520 (IAC); [2016] Imm AR 114.

37. There is no conflict between the judge's conclusions at  [36]-[38]  and
    those he expressed subsequently.  The findings made at [36]-[38]  stand
    alone,  and  represent  clear  conclusions  about  the  level  of  risk
    presented by the appellant.  And there is no failure in  the  reasoning
    to the conclusion on the level of future  risk  that  can  be  said  to
    "infect" the conclusion reached on the proportionality  of  the  SSHD's
    decision. If the appellant has  not  been  demonstrated  to  present  a
    sufficient threat to the interests of  society  than  the  decision  to
    deport is disproportionate.

38. Insofar as Mr Tufan sought to vary the  grounds  of  appeal  so  as  to
    include a submission that the judge failed to have  regard  to,  or  to
    apply, schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations,  we  refuse  permission  for
    that  variation.   We  do  not  accept  that  the  point   was   raised
    'tangentially' in the grounds; there is no reference to schedule 1, nor
    to the principles within it.  No application to vary  the  grounds  was
    made in writing, whether  in  the  respondent's  skeleton  argument  or
    otherwise. No notice was given to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant  or
    his representatives of the attempt to raise a wholly new argument.   As
    was explained in Das [2019] UKUT 354 (IAC), representatives who attempt
    to raise new points at the very last moment in this way  can  generally
    expect the Upper Tribunal to adopt a robust approach, and to insist  on
    proper standards of appellate advocacy.  That was said in  the  context
    of a late application by an  appellant's  representative  but  it  must
    apply a fortiori to the respondent, given the resources at her disposal
    (see, for example, SSHD v SS(Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387; [2016] 1
    All ER 706).

39. We must, we think, add one concluding observation to  ensure  that  the
    appellant understands the consequences of our  decision.   The  judge's
    decision was reached on the basis of the facts presented to  him.   The
    circumstances which obtain at today's date are evidently different, for
    the reasons we have set out at [4] above.  It is no doubt open  to  the
    respondent to initiate further deportation proceedings as a  result  of
    those subsequent convictions, and the appellant would  be  mistaken  to
    think that he is somehow immune from deportation as  a  result  of  our
    decision.



Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the FtT stands.


Mrs Justice McGowan

23 September 2020

