

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      DA/00075/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 5 August  2013                         |On 13 August 2013        |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                            Mr Alexey Vylegzhanin
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr R Jesuram, Counsel
For the Respondent:            Mr C Avery,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         This appeal comes before me following the grant  of permission
      to the appellant on 25 June 2013  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Bowen against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S
      Taylor sitting on a panel with Mr F T Jameson. No anonymity order  was
      granted to the appellant by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  none  was
      requested of the Upper Tribunal. The determination of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was promulgated on 7 May 2013.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Russia born on 31 January 1980. He
      appeals against a decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order
      against him under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. There  was
      no appeal against the earlier deportation order made on  18  September
      2012 following the appellant's  conviction  on  19  January  2012  for
      conspiring to defraud (by  cloning  details  from  credit  cards)  and
      knowingly possessing a false and improperly obtained identity document
      (a false Lithuanian passport). A two year sentence was delivered on  4
      May 2012). His application for revocation was made on 3 December  2012
      but was refused on 7 January 2013. He has now completed  his  sentence
      (it is not when known precisely) and is being held  under  immigration
      powers.

   3.       The application for revocation is made on the basis of an asylum
      claim. The appellant maintains he is gay and  would  therefore  be  at
      risk from non state actors if returned to Russia.

Error of law Hearing

   4.          At the hearing  on  5  August  I  heard  submissions  from Mr
      Jesurum and Mr Avery. Mr Jesurum expanded his grounds  of  appeal.  He
      submitted that the panel had  erred  in  refusing  an  adjournment  to
      obtain a second expert report the first not having properly  addressed
      the issue of sufficiency of protection. This  report  had  since  been
      received and was favourable to the appellant. The previous failings of
      the expert should not be held against the appellant and  the  Tribunal
      misdirected itself in refusing the adjournment and then dismissing the
      appeal because of a lack of documentary evidence on  the  very  matter
      another  report  would  have  addressed.   The  report  now  available
      confirmed that the appellant would be at risk because  he  was  openly
      gay and because the police would be unwilling to help.

   5.       It was further argued that  the  approach  of  the  Tribunal  on
      credibility issues was flawed, the Tribunal  having  taken  section  8
      matters as a primary consideration.  There  was  no  reference  to  JT
      Cameroon principles and there had  been  a  failure  to  consider  the
      appellant's explanation for the delayed asylum claim. There were  also
      problems in that the appellant did not recall when he had  signed  the
      voluntary return form and Counsel had not had sight of it at  all.  As
      such, the panel should not have used a failure to  recall  a  date  to
      make adverse credibility findings.   There  was  also  no  attempt  to
      analyse the appellant's account against the background evidence.

   6.       Finally, it was argued that the wrong test had been applied.  It
      had been accepted that the appellant was openly gay and there  was  no
      challenge to his intention to live openly on return.  That  being  the
      case, the panel had been wrong to consider whether he would be able to
      form gay relationships  or  lead  a  gay  lifestyle.  It  should  have
      considered whether he would be at risk as a result of doing so.  There
      had been a failure to consider HJ Iran. For these reasons, Mr  Jesurum
      submitted the determination needed to be  set  aside  and  the  matter
      remitted for rehearing.

   7.       In response, Mr Avery submitted there had been no error of  law.
      The panel had been entitled to refuse the adjournment. The expert  had
      been informed of the issues. He was experienced in these  matters  and
      had prepared many reports in the past. There was no obligation on  the
      part of the Tribunal to adjourn simply because Counsel  had  not  been
      happy with the contents of the report. On the issue of credibility, it
      should be borne in mind that the appellant was convicted of fraud  and
      this impacted on his reliability as a witness. His explanation did not
      satisfactorily explain the seven year delay in his  claim.  The  panel
      was not satisfied with his evidence and  was  entitled  to  reach  the
      adverse findings it did. The last ground was hampered by the  lack  of
      the second expert report. However, the  determination  indicated  that
      the HJ test had been applied. The panel found that the appellant would
      only be subjected to discrimination. There was  no  fundamental  error
      and the determination should stand.

   8.         Mr  Jesurum  replied.  He  stated  that  in  respect  to   the
      adjournment application, the shortcomings of  the  expert  should  not
      reflect on the appellant. The report did not  address  the  issue  and
      that  was  why  an  adjournment  had  been  sought.  By  refusing  the
      application the Tribunal had deprived itself  of  the  opportunity  to
      receive  evidence  crucial  to  the  issue  at   hand.   Additionally,
      credibility was not assessed in the  round  and  the  wrong  test  was
      applied to accepted facts.  His  dishonesty  had  no  bearing  on  the
      assessment of what would happen to him in the light of accepted facts.
      The determination should be set aside as it was unsustainable and  the
      matter should be remitted for re-hearing as findings of fact would  be
      required following the second expert report and  new  developments  in
      Russian law.

   9.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  10.        I have carefully considered the determination, the  submissions
      made, the grounds for permission and the other evidence before me. The
      addendum report from the expert was not before the Upper  Tribunal  or
      the Presenting Officer and no confirmation that it had been served was
      adduced. If an error of law is found then of course it may  be  served
      and shall be considered.

  11.       The first ground attacks the Tribunal's refusal to  adjourn  the
      appeal so as to obtain a second report  from  the  same  expert  whose
      initial report was before the panel. It is misleading to  suggest,  as
      is maintained  in  the  grounds,  that  the  Tribunal  approached  the
      adjournment application from the point of  view  of  its  timing.  The
      application is dealt with at paragraph 6.  The  consideration  of  the
      timing of the application does not feature in  the  judge's  reasoning
      until towards the end of  the  paragraph.  There  is  nothing  in  the
      reasoning to indicate that this formed the basis for the refusal. Read
      as a whole, it is plain that the Tribunal  noted  that  a  report  had
      already been obtained, that the issue of sufficiency of protection had
      been put to the expert, that he had addressed this over a  whole  page
      (at paragraph 2.5.1) and that there was nothing to suggest he would be
      able to add anything further  or  produce  a  report  which  met  with
      Counsel's satisfaction. This was not a scenario where  an  expert  had
      omitted to deal with an issue put to him (when it could be argued that
      his failing might have disadvantaged an appellant); it was a situation
      where the  appellant's  representative  was  not  satisfied  with  the
      contents of the report and wanted something else. In  the  absence  of
      any indication that more could or would be forthcoming  and  the  fact
      that the expert had already dealt with the issue put to him, I do  not
      find that the Tribunal erred in deciding to proceed with the hearing.

  12.       The next complaint relates to the adverse  credibility  findings
      made in respect of the appellant.  It  is  argued  that  the  Tribunal
      reached a negative finding  at  paragraph  22  having  considered  the
      appellant's period of overstaying and his seven year delay  in  making
      an asylum claim only after he had decided  to  return  home  and  well
      after the deportation order had been made. Much is made  of  the  fact
      that the Tribunal placed weight on the appellant's inability to recall
      when he signed the disclaimer even though he had not been shown a copy
      and his representative did not have sight of it. It is plain from  the
      determination that the precise date of signing it is neither here  nor
      there; what was important was that  the  appellant  admitted  in  oral
      evidence that he had decided to return home (at paragraph 24) and that
      it was only after speaking to his brother that he  changed  his  mind.
      Having sight of the form would have made no difference  to  that.  His
      admission also undermines the submission made that the  appellant  had
      not realised what he was signing.  The Tribunal was entitled to  place
      weight on the fact that the appellant had made a decision to return.

  13.       I am, however, troubled by the judge's approach to  credibility.
      It is the case that the appellant's sexuality was not disputed by  the
      respondent and that the appeal was determined on that basis however as
      submitted  by  Mr  Jesurum,  the  judge  commenced   his   credibility
      assessment by considering the appellant's  past  immigration  history,
      criminal conduct and timing of the application and before even  coming
      on to his alleged experiences in Russia, found that section 8  factors
      had damaged his credibility (at paragraph 22).  Of  course  these  are
      matters which are very relevant to the credibility assessment and  may
      point to a finding that the appellant had come here for  economic  and
      criminal reasons rather than to seek protection but they must be taken
      along with the other evidence and a conclusion should only be  reached
      when all matters have been considered. It may be that  the  judge  had
      all the evidence in mind and had just  set  out  his  findings  in  an
      unfortunate manner but I cannot speculate on that. What  is  plain  is
      that an adverse finding had  been  made  before  the  account  of  the
      appellant's experiences in Russia was considered. At paragraph 24  the
      judge states: "While the Tribunal accepts that the appellant may  have
      been assaulted on at least one occasion, the Tribunal has  found  that
      the appellant is an unreliable witness and less than  credible".  This
      plainly demonstrates that the judge's negative view of  the  appellant
      impacted upon the rest of the findings he  made.  However  undesirable
      and distasteful the appellant's conduct has been justice requires  the
      evidence to be assessed fairly and in the round.  I  do  not  consider
      this has been done here.

  14.       I would add, however, that contrary to what  is  argued  in  the
      grounds, the appellant's explanation for his late claim was considered
      but the judge did not accept that he would not  have  known  he  could
      have claimed asylum. Additionally, the absence of any reference to  JT
      Cameroon would not invalidate a judge's  findings  if  the  principles
      were properly applied.  Judges are not required to cite case  law  for
      every applicable principle.

  15.       It was also argued that the HJ (Iran) test had not been properly
      applied. It is unclear from paragraphs 24-25 whether the judge had the
      guidance of HJ in mind. Moreover, his findings on whether or  not  the
      appellant had been assaulted are somewhat contradictory.  On  the  one
      hand he finds that the appellant "may have been"  assaulted  at  least
      once, he later  rejects  the  account  of  assaults.  Given  that  his
      findings on what is said to have occurred in Russia are in  any  event
      flawed, there are no sustainable findings on what would be  likely  to
      happen to the appellant as an openly gay  man  living  an  openly  gay
      lifestyle.

  16.       Despite the fact that I find there were no errors in the judge's
      refusal to adjourn the appeal or in his approach to the disclaimer,  I
      am  of  the  view  that  there  are  serious  difficulties  with   his
      credibility assessment and findings  of  risk  on  return.  For  these
      reasons I have decided to set aside the determination in its entirety.
      It only stands as a record of the proceedings. The  appeal  is  to  be
      transferred to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing afresh.

Decision

  17.       The First-tier Tribunal made errors  of  law  which  require the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal is allowed and remitted  for
      re-hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

            Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


            9 August 2013



