
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00478/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                  |Determination Promulgated|
|On 21st August 2014                     |On 28th August 2014      |
|Signed on 21st August, 2014             |                         |


                                   Before

                    UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RICHARD CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                   A.S. D
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Lay, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr P Mangion, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. In this appeal, both the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      and A.S.D., have appealed the decision of the First Tier Tribunal.   I
      have therefore continued to refer to them as  they  were  referred  to
      before the First Tier Tribunal.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born  on  the  26  March
      1979.  He appeals the decision of a Panel of the First  Tier  Tribunal
      (First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaniker sitting with Mr M E Olszewski)  at
      Taylor House  on  the  11  February  2014  to  refuse  to  revoke  the
      deportation order by virtue of Section 52 of the Immigration Act  1971
      and discharge the certification under Section 72 of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002.

   3. The Panel considered a number of detailed medical reports before  them
      and noted that the Secretary of State had  certified  the  Appellant's
      claim under Section 72 of the 2002 Act.  His conviction  on  the  10th
      July 2004, was for robbery and his sentence was for a  term  of  three
      years.  The Tribunal found that the Appellant had been convicted of  a
      'particularly serious offence' and  that  the  Appellant  presented  a
      danger to the community.

   4. They noted in particular, a report of Dr Anderson and at paragraph  17
      said:

                   "We  note  with  interest  her  distinction  between  the
                 Appellant's robbery offence and other offending to date and
                 her opinion that substance abuse and intoxication were more
                 directly  relevant  to  the  majority  of  the  Appellant's
                 offending   behaviour   when   his   diagnosis   was    for
                 schizophrenia paragraphs 13.3.3 and 13.3.4. She noted  that
                 the Appellant had  not  engaged  in  any  substance  misuse
                 treatment and did not appear to  consider  this  an  option
                 therefore  she  considered  despite   a   change   in   the
                 Appellant's  insight  his  risk  of  substance  abuse   was
                 unchanged at present."

   5. The Tribunal went on to say:

                 "We find  no  credible  evidence  before  us  pointing  the
                 Appellant  having  undergone  any   therapy   or   remedial
                 treatment programme addressing the issue of what appears to
                 have been a long history of substance  misuse  and  we  are
                 unable to conclude from the evidence  before  us  that  the
                 Appellant would not continue to  engage  in  such  activity
                 behaviour  given  the  opportunity.   He  was  released  on
                 immigration bail on the 31  January  2014  and  we  do  not
                 consider that there has been suitable period  of  proof  of
                 abstinence for us to be able to conclude the Appellant  now
                 has his substance abuse under control so that he would  not
                 reasonably likely engage in further acts of criminality."

   6. The Appellant challenged this determination  on  the  basis  that  the
      Tribunal did not  properly  ask  itself  the  correct  test.   It  was
      suggested that the correct test was set out by the Court of Appeal  in
      EM Serbia [2007] EWCA Civ 630 and that the Tribunal failed to consider
      the  correct  test  as  to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  in  fact
      constituted a danger to the community as at the date of  the  hearing.
      They found that there was a real risk of serious harm to others if the
      Appellant had a relapse to mental illness, but as Counsel pointed out,
      this had the effect of introducing a contingent and  spent  cumulative
      prediction of harm and of a risk that the correct test was whether  or
      not the Appellant in fact posed a danger.

   7. Mr Mangion pointed out that the medical reports make it clear that the
      Appellant has on occasions failed  to  self  medicate  and  that  this
      posses a risk.  He suggested that the Panel had carefully examined the
      evidence before it, including the very detailed  medical  reports  and
      was entitled to reach the conclusion it had.

   8. Mr Mangion and I were both slightly hampered in that  the  Appellant's
      bundle submitted for the purposes of the First-tier Tribunal  appeared
      to be missing from the file.  Counsel very helpfully  provided  copies
      of documents that Mr Mangion and I needed to refer to.

   9. Counsel suggested that what the Tribunal had done, is to  'assess  the
      risk of a risk' rather than consider whether  the  Appellant  actually
      poses a risk of danger to the community.  There is,  if  he  fails  to
      take medication and relapses into misuse, a risk  that  the  Appellant
      will offend, but Counsel pointed out, that would not necessarily  mean
      that he would commit a 'particularly  serious  crime'.   Counsel  drew
      attention to the Appellant's previous record set out on pages 1 and  2
      of the Home Office letter of the 5 February 2013.  The  offence  which
      led to the making of the deportation order is detailed at paragraph 7;
      since that time there  have  been  other  offences  committed  by  the
      Appellant but none of them could be properly regarded as being serious
      and some appear to have been connected with whilst drinking.

  10. Despite having committed a further  nine  offences  between  2002  and
      2011, none of them are for serious offences and despite having been on
      bail since February of this year, he  has  not  been  in  any  further
      difficulties.  Mr Lay suggested that the appeal against the refusal to
      discharge the deportation order should be looked at again by the First-
      tier Tribunal given that it will need to carefully analyse the medical
      reports.

  11. I then heard submissions from Mr Mangion in respect of the Home Office
      challenge to this determination.  In  their  determination  the  panel
      went on to find allow the Appellant's appeal on human  rights  grounds
      under Article 3.  They noted that the Appellant had  left  Somalia  at
      the age of 16 years and had lived in the United Kingdom  for  some  19
      years.  They  noted  also  that  he  was  able  to  speak  Somali  but
      considered him to  be  obviously  anglicised  in  his  appearance  and
      demeanour.

  12. He has been diagnosed suffering with paranoid schizophrenia and  while
      his father belonged to the Hawiye clan he is not  a  person  with  any
      family or other social contacts with established links with Somalia so
      that the risk to him on return to Mogadishu have  to  be  examined  in
      that context.  They believe that he would not be  either  welcomed  or
      taken in by members of his father's clan and given that  he  had  been
      away from Somalia for so many years and has not  proof  of  family  or
      social links there and is also suffering  from  a  mental  illness  he
      would be at risk.

  13.  They  noted  that  a  diagnosis  that  he  made  that  his   paranoid
      schizophrenia is a severe and enduring mental illness  which  requires
      management by specialist health professionals.  One  report  spoke  of
      people  with  schizophrenia  needing   considerable   social   support
      including stable housing to reduce their risk of relapse and they tend
      to relapse under stressful conditions.   They  concluded  that  taking
      into account his serious mental health  and  substance  misuse  issues
      they have concluded that the Appellant is not reasonably likely to  be
      able to find a means  of  sustaining  and/or  maintaining  himself  on
      return to Somalia and nothing in the evidence which would lead them to
      conclude that his father's clan would extend a protective arm  to  him
      on account of his father's clan membership.

  14. They noted also the mental health care services situation  in  Somalia
      and found no credible evidence that the Appellant  would  be  able  to
      access treatment and/or be able to pay  for  such  medication  as  was
      required to address his condition.  He has no family  support  in  the
      country, no demonstrable means of support and/or assistance there  and
      accordingly found that there was  a  risk  that  his  condition  would
      seriously deteriorate and that he would be at real  risk  of  inhumane
      and degrading treatment or punishment quite apart from  other  general
      risk reasonably likely to be imposed to a person in his  condition  in
      Somalia.  They believed that there was a reasonable likelihood that he
      would end up on the streets and  on  account  of  the  vulnerabilities
      created by his mental health issues  faced  a  real  risk  of  serious
      mistreatment and abuse.  They found that an internal flight was not an
      option for the Appellant.

  15. The Respondent challenged the determination  and  suggested  that  the
      Tribunal had failed to set out the test in TS and EO Article 8  Health
      Issues India [2012] UK UT00397 IAC and in  addressing  me  Mr  Mangion
      sought to rely on those grounds.  He suggested  that  effectively  the
      Tribunal had not correctly identified the threshold for Article  8  in
      terms of  case  law.   Counsel  pointed  out  that  the  Tribunal  had
      considered that the Appellant would not be able to relocate  and  that
      their consideration of the Appellant's Article 8 claim was not flawed.
       The Tribunal make it clear that they found favour with submissions in
      his skeleton argument that the Appellant's condition  would  seriously
      deteriorate and given that  the  treatment  of  the  mentally  ill  in
      Somalia were entitled to conclude as they did.

  16. I have concluded that the  panel  of  the  tribunal  did  err  in  its
      consideration of the Appellant's  challenge  against  refusal  of  the
      Secretary  of  State  to   discharge   the   deportation   order   and
      certification.  I believe that the task  facing  the  tribunal  was  a
      difficult one; namely to establish whether on the evidence  before  it
      the Appellant constituted a present danger  to  the  community.   What
      they did actually did was to find that he presented a risk of becoming
      a present risk of danger to the community and did not consider whether
      there was a real risk of him committing a particularly serious  crime.



  17. Both representatives agreed that in the circumstances, a  remittal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal would be the appropriate course and in respect
      of the Appellant's challenge to the certification of  the  deportation
      order that is what I propose to do.  The matter will be  heard  afresh
      by the First-tier Tribunal comprising a judge other than Mr  Swaniker,
      and if it is considered necessary for a Non-Legal Member to  sit  with
      the judge, then it shall not be Mr Olszewski.

  18. Insofar as the Respondent's challenge is concerned I  do  not  believe
      that  the  panel  has  erred.   I  believe  that  in  the   particular
      circumstances of this Appellant this is one of those  rare  cases  the
      Tribunal spoke of in GS and EO.   The  Appellant  fails  to  take  his
      medication regularly unless  he  is  supervised.   On  his  return  to
      Mogadishu he is likely to be questioned and the  manner  in  which  he
      answers the questions posed to him may or may not cause the questioner
      some concern, assuming he is allowed out of the airport.  There  is  a
      danger that he will, as the tribunal have found, find himself  on  the
      streets and because  of  his  illness,  be  at  serious  risk  of  ill
      treatment or harm.  I believe  the  tribunal  were  entitled,  on  the
      evidence before them, to reach the conclusion that they did and  I  do
      not believe that they erred.  The findings of the First Tier  Tribunal
      Judge are preserved.

  19. In summary therefore I find that the Tribunal did err in  law  in  its
      consideration of the challenge against the refusal of the Secretary of
      State to discharge the certification of the deportation  order  and  I
      remit that part  of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
      Tribunal's findings in respect of Article3 are upheld. The hearing  is
      to be allowed for half a day.

Signed[pic]
Judge Chalkley
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

