
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00239/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 January 2014                            |On 28 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         THE HON MR JUSTICE FOSKETT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KYLE MBWEBWA KALALA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rai, instructed by Freemans, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Following a hearing on 20 November 2013 the Upper  Tribunal  (The  Hon.
    Lord Matthews and UTJ Latter) found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law by allowing an appeal by Kyle Kalala against the Secretary
    of State's decision of 22 January 2013 to make a deportation order.   A
    copy of that decision is annexed to this  determination.  The  decision
    was set aside and it was directed that it would be re-made in the Upper
    Tribunal and was listed accordingly.  We will refer to the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Kalala  as  the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.   On 20 January  2014  the  respondent  indicated  that  the  deportation
    decision would be  withdrawn  while  she  formulated  her  position  in
    respect of deporting  foreign  national  offenders  to  the  Democratic
    Republic of the Congo in the light of the judgment of Phillips J  in  R
    (P) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  3879
    (Admin).   The  hearing  remained  listed  to  give  the  appellant  an
    opportunity of making submissions on this issue.  Mr Rai indicated that
    there was no objection to this course in the  particular  circumstances
    of the appellant.

3.    In  these  circumstances,  we  give  our  consent  to  the  respondent
    withdrawing her case under  rule  17(2).   As  the  decision  has  been
    withdrawn, there is no valid appeal pending before us and  no  decision
    to be re-made.

Decision

4.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law  and  its  decision  allowing  the
    appeal was set aside.  The respondent has now  withdrawn  the  original
    decision with the consent of the Tribunal.  There is  no  valid  appeal
    pending before the Tribunal.





Signed                                  Date: 28 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

                                    ANNEX

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an  appeal  by  Kyle  Kalala  against  the
    decision made on 22 January 2013 to make a deportation order.  In  this
    decision we will refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr Kalala as the appellant and the Secretary of State as
    the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
    born on 20 May 1987.  According to the respondent's records as set  out
    in the decision letter, the appellant entered the UK  as  his  mother's
    dependant on 12 December 1992 age 5.  He was granted  indefinite  leave
    to  remain  on  8  April  2004  but  a   subsequent   application   for
    naturalisation was refused on 1 December 2005.

3.    The  appellant  has  an  extensive  history  of  offending  which   is
    summarised in [3] of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  His most
    recent conviction was on 25 August 2011 when he was  convicted  at  the
    Central Criminal Court of conspiracy to rob and on 4  October  2011  he
    was sentenced to three years, six months' imprisonment.  On 3  November
    2011 he was notified of his liability to  deportation  and  invited  to
    make representations which he did on 7 November 2011.  The  deportation
    decision was eventually made on 23 January 2013.

4.   When considering whether deportation would result in a  breach  of  the
    appellant's rights under  Article  8,  the  respondent  considered  the
    provisions of  para  398  and  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant had no  existing  ties  to
    the DRC saying that, although it was noted that he had entered  the  UK
    at a relatively young age, 4 by his own account, it was  believed  that
    he would have still retained his language within his household  and  it
    would not be unduly harsh for him to integrate back into  life  in  the
    DRC.  The respondent went on to consider whether there were exceptional
    circumstances but found, in the light of his conviction for  conspiracy
    to rob and his background of  persistent  offending,  that  deportation
    would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of the prevention of crime
    and disorder.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

5.   The Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant, his mother  and  sister
    and took  into  account  the  documentary  evidence  which  included  a
    probation report and a letter  from  the  probation  officer  dated  18
    August 2013 together with statements of  support  from  various  family
    members and friends.  It noted at [22] that there was  a  statement  in
    the bundle from his partner but in evidence the appellant had said that
    he was not at present in a serious relationship.

6.   The Tribunal considered at [24]  the  appellant's  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular para 399A.   It  was  not  disputed
    that the appellant's family background was from the DRC  and  that  the
    appellant had some knowledge of Lingala as it was spoken at  home.   It
    took into account the Tribunal determination in Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60
    on the issue of the extent of his ties to the DRC and found that he did
    not have any ties which would bring him within para 399A  and  in  that
    regard the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  rules.



7.   The Tribunal then said:

         "26. The respondent in the refusal seems to have conceded that  the
             appellant otherwise came within rule 399A and if we do not  go
             behind that  concession  then  the  appellant's  appeal  would
             succeed under the rules.  However we have concerns  about  the
             respondent's concession which were not raised at the  hearing.
             In  particular  we  note  that  in   sub-paragraph   (a)   the
             requirement is for the appellant to have lived at least twenty
             years   immediately   preceding   the   immigration   decision
             discounting any period  of  imprisonment.   The  appellant  is
             accepted as having entered the United Kingdom on  12  December
             1992.  The decision was made on 23 January 2013  meaning  that
             as of that date the appellant had spent 21  years,  one  month
             and eleven days in the United Kingdom.  However from that must
             be deducted his time in prison which appears to  be  one  year
             and nine months, bringing him  just  below  the  twenty  years
             required.  Therefore the appellant cannot succeed  under  sub-
             paragraph (a).


         27.  It is sub-paragraph (b)  that  the  respondent  has  made  the
             concession.  However it is clear that the respondent was wrong
             in his calculation.  The appellant was 25  years  old  at  the
             date of decision.  He is therefore not under  the  age  of  25
             years.  On that basis the appellant  cannot  comply  with  the
             Immigration Rules.  However  the  respondent  having  conceded
             that in the decision we do not feel it is proper for us to  go
             behind it and therefore we do allow the appeal under rule 399A
             of the Immigration Rules."

8.   The Tribunal went on to say at [28] that if they  were  wrong  in  that
    respect they would consider the appellant's claim  in  accordance  with
    the "ordinary common  law  principles  of  an  article  8  claim".   It
    referred to the decision of the ECtHR in Maslov [2008] ECHR 546 and  on
    this issue said:

         "31. It is argued before us on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
             that Maslov does not apply in this case, firstly, because  the
             appellant did not commit most of the offences in  his  history
             whilst a juvenile.  We think this misunderstands the nature of
             the appellant's  criminal  history.   It  is  clear  from  the
             details we set out above  that  the  cautions  and  first  two
             convictions did take place when the appellant was a  juvenile.
             However a number of the convictions and  in  particular  those
             arising out of the drug and the vehicle crime from August  and
             July 2005 took place when the appellant was just aged 18.   It
             was noted by the judge in the final case that even at the  age
             of 24 the appellant was immature.  That would  certainly  seem
             to  indicate  that  having  just  turned  18  he  was  not  in
             possession of any adult characteristics and was  clearly  also
             very immature.  Much jurisprudence has indicated there is  not
             a bright line between a person being 17 years old and  turning
             18 years old.  In those circumstances it appears  to  us  that
             the bulk of his convictions were convictions in  the  form  of
             juvenile delinquency and not those of an adult.  We also  note
             that other than the possession of the knife (which  did  occur
             when he was only 15 years old and in respect  of  which  there
             was no suggestion he actually used it for any  violence)  none
             of the convictions were for  violent  crimes.   Most  of  them
             related to possession of cannabis and driving  offences.   The
             level  of  sentencing  seems  to  indicate  that  he  was  not
             considered to be a risk to the public.


         32.  Even if his latter two offences were  committed  when  he  was
             only 19 years old and again we would point out that  it  would
             appear that he was still  immature  at  this  stage  and  even
             though these could be considered to be juvenile offences.   In
             those circumstances we do find that the appellant  has  proved
             that he comes within Maslov in so  far  as  the  bulk  of  his
             offending behaviour did occur when he was a youth and  was  of
             the nature of juvenile delinquency."

     On this basis the appeal was also allowed under Article 8.

The Grounds and Submissions

9.   In the grounds it is argued that the Tribunal was wrong to apply a  two
    stage test and that in any event paras 398, 399 and 399A of  the  Rules
    reflected the Maslov principles in a way that  ensured  consistency  of
    assessment.  The Tribunal should not have simply regarded the rules  as
    a starting point before moving on to a second  freestanding  article  8
    assessment.  The Tribunal  was  wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    situation was exceptional and to allow the appeal on article 8  grounds
    and it failed to give adequate reasons  for  its  finding  that  he  no
    longer had ties to the DRC.

10.  Mr Melvin submitted that it was clear from  the  respondent's  decision
    letter that in fact no concession had been made and  in  particular  no
    point had been made about the appellant being under 25  years  of  age.
    In these circumstances, the Tribunal had erred by allowing  the  appeal
    under the rules.  Although the appellant had said that  he  arrived  in
    the UK in 1991, the Tribunal had been entitled to proceed on the  basis
    of the respondent's assertion that it was December 1992.  In the  light
    of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, it was clear that  there  was  no
    freestanding article 8 appeal and in circumstances where  an  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of  para  399  the  issue  was  whether
    exceptional circumstances were  identified  which  would  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.  He  referred  to  and  relied  on  the
    judgment of Sales J in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 and submitted that in  any
    event the appellant did not bring himself within the Maslov criteria as
    he had been 24 when he had committed the offence of conspiracy  to  rob
    and that offence could not on any basis be regarded as one committed by
    a juvenile delinquent.

11.  Mr Rai accepted that there  had  been  an  error  in  relation  to  the
    concession and if it was material, the judge ought to have invited  the
    representatives to make  submissions.   In  any  event  the  Tribunal's
    assessment under article 8 was proper and disclosed no  error  of  law.
    Further, no adequate reasons had been given by the respondent  for  the
    delay in reaching the decision.  When considering  proportionality  the
    Tribunal had looked at the position overall and when all  the  relevant
    factors were taken into account, a decision had been reached within the
    range of decisions reasonably open to the Tribunal.

12.  Mr Rai also sought to argue that the respondent should  not  have  been
    granted an extension of time for fililng the notice of  appeal  by  the
    Upper Tribunal .  He referred to the Tribunal decision in Wang and Chin
    (Extension of time for appealing) [2013] UKUT 343 and in particular  to
    the matters to be taken into account set out at [15]-[16].

Assessment of the Issues

13.  The issue for us at this stage of the appeal is  whether  the  Tribunal
    erred in law such that its decision should be set aside.  We will  deal
    firstly with the issue of the grant of permission  to  appeal.   It  is
    correct that time  was  extended.   An  application  was  made  in  the
    respondent's notice of application and the reason given for  the  delay
    was as follows:

         "It is respectfully asked that the Tribunal extends the time  limit
         for making this application.  The main reason for delay was because
         the Specialist Appeals Team (SAT) on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
         State did not receive the determination from  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Tribunal until 2 October 2013, when we received a copy  from
         the appellant's representatives who informed us of the outcome.  It
         is submitted that the delay was not on account of SAT and they have
         endeavoured to submit these grounds within  five  working  days  of
         receipt.  An extension of time is respectfully requested."

    The grounds are dated 2 October 2013 and were faxed on that day to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  We have very real doubts whether we have  jurisdiction
    to set aside a grant of permission and we note that in  Wang  and  Chin
    the Tribunal at [19] found that it was unnecessary  to  determine  that
    issue in those proceedings.  That of course does not undermine  in  any
    way the guidance  given  on  the  factors  to  be  considered  when  an
    application is made to extend  time:  to  consider  all  the  available
    material, the extent of the delay and whether the  explanation  covered
    the whole of the period.  In the present case the  appeal  was  out  of
    time only by a matter of days.  An explanation was given and  there  is
    no  reason  to  doubt  its  truthfulness.   Even   assuming   we   have
    jurisdiction, we would have found in any event  that  the  decision  to
    extend time was clearly open  to  the  judge  granting  permission  and
    cannot even arguably be categorised as  wrong  in  law,  irrational  or
    unreasonable.

14.  We now turn to the issue of whether the First-tier Tribunal  was  right
    to proceed on the  basis  that  a  concession  had  been  made  by  the
    respondent about the length of time the appellant had been in  the  UK.
    The relevant provisions of the  rules  are  para  399A  which  read  as
    follows:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -


         (a)  the person has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least
             twenty years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  he  has
             no ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK; or


         (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least  half
             of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK   immediately
             preceding the date of the  immigration  decision  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including
             social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

15.  The passage at page 5 of the  decision  letter  said  to  amount  to  a
    concession reads as follows:

         "Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules requires that each of  the
         criteria contained in it is satisfied:


         (a)  it is accepted that you have lived continuously in the UK  for
             at least half of your life immediately preceding the  date  of
             the  immigration   decision   (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and


         (b)  it is not considered that there  are  no  ties  to  Democratic
             Republic of the Congo to which you are to be deported."

16.   The  reference  in  the  decision  letter  to  the  appellant   living
    continuously in the UK for at least half  of  his  life  preceding  the
    decision cannot be interpreted as a concession either  in  relation  to
    the twenty year period under sub-paragraph (a) or that  he  could  meet
    the requirements of (b) of having spent  at  least  half  of  his  life
    living continuously in the UK as a person aged under 25.  The  Tribunal
    pointed out in [27] that the appellant was 25 years old at the date  of
    decision and therefore could not comply  with  the  Immigration  Rules.
    There  was  no  concession  that  the  appellant  met   the   residence
    requirements to bring himself within the provisions of either paragraph
    399A(a) or (b) and the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by finding that
    there was.  We also accept, as Mr Rai submitted, that if there had been
    an issue on this point it should have been raised  at  the  hearing  so
    that the parties could have had an opportunity of addressing it.

17.  We now turn to the grounds relating to article 8.  The judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) has confirmed that the Rules contain  a
    complete code in deportation appeals and that  where  an  appellant  is
    unable to bring himself within the provisions of  paras  398,  399  and
    399A, the issue which then  arises  is  whether  he  is  able  to  show
    exceptional circumstances outweighing the  public  interest.   In  that
    assessment the Tribunal is entitled (and required) to take into account
    the factors set out in Strasbourg jurisprudence.

18.  We are satisfied that when carrying out that  exercise  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to give proper weight to the public interest as set out
    in the UK Borders Act 2007 and  the  current  Immigration  Rules.   The
    offence which led to the  deportation  order  was  committed  when  the
    appellant was 24.  It is clear from the judge's sentencing remarks that
    this offence involved  committing  a  cash-in-transit  robbery  from  a
    security custodian.  When  sentencing  the  appellant  the  judge  said
    although he was the getaway driver and that it was  right  to  describe
    that as a somewhat lesser  role  than  the  role  of  those  physically
    involved with the victims,  it  was  still  equally  essential  to  the
    success  of  the  crime.   The  judge  said  that  the  appellant   was
    significantly the oldest of the three  but  not  necessarily  the  most
    mature.  This comment did not entitle the Tribunal to  proceed  on  the
    basis that the appellant was at the age of 24 immature or to equate his
    offence with those committed by him as a juvenile or when  he  was  19.
    There was a significant increase in  the  seriousness  of  the  offence
    which appears not to have been taken into account by the Tribunal.   We
    are therefore satisfied that the Tribunal erred in law  in  respect  of
    its assessment under article 8 by failing to take all relevant  matters
    into account or to give adequate reasons for its decision.

19.  Mr Rai's submission was that there should be a  full  rehearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal whereas Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  matter
    should be reconsidered by the Upper Tribunal.  We  are  satisfied  that
    the case should remain with the Upper Tribunal.  In further submissions
    it was also made  clear  that  there  was  a  dispute  about  when  the
    appellant had arrived in the UK, which could have a direct  bearing  on
    whether he was able to meet the requirements of para 399A(a).  In  this
    context,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal's  finding   on   the
    appellant's lack of ties with the DRC is  well-reasoned  and  does  not
    disclose any error of law and that finding is  to  stand.   The  proper
    course is for this appeal to be  adjourned  for  further  evidence  and
    submissions at a resumed hearing.

20.  In summary, we find that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  such
    that its decision should be set aside.  The decision will be re-made in
    the Upper Tribunal.  It will be  re-listed  on  23  January  2014.   If
    either party seeks to call further evidence,  an  application  must  be
    made under rule 15(2A).  Otherwise the appeal will be determined on the
    basis of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date: 5 December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

