
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: DA/00847/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DD
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Cogan, of counsel, instructed by Rawal & Co,
solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       original appellant, a citizen of Poland born on 14  September,  1988,
       as the appellant herein.

    2. Following a hearing in December 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  allowed
       the appeal of the appellant against a decision taken by the Secretary
       of State on 2 May, 2014 to deport him.

    3. The respondent considered the appellant's case under the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. It was considered that the
       appellant had not been exercising  Treaty  rights  for  a  continuous
       period of five years in accordance with the EEA  regulations  and  he
       had not acquired the right of permanent residence in United Kingdom.

    4. The respondent noted that the appellant had  12  convictions  for  14
       offences in the UK  between  2009  and  2014.  The  majority  of  the
       offences  were  repeated  offences.  The  convictions  indicated   an
       established pattern of repeated acquisitive offending.  There  was  a
       risk of reoffending. The appellant had been  convicted  of  11  theft
       related offences and the appellant had provided no evidence  to  show
       he had addressed the issues that had led him to commit  the  offences
       in question. The appellant  had  a  propensity  to  reoffend  and  he
       represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the
       public so that his deportation was justified  on  grounds  of  public
       policy. The respondent noted in connection with her consideration  of
       proportionality that the appellant  was  aged  26  and  he  had  been
       granted indefinite leave to remain on 24 March, 2004 as  a  dependant
       of an asylum seeker. He had received his first conviction in 2009. He
       was a single man with no children and in good health and there was no
       evidence that he had undertaken any rehabilitative work. There was no
       evidence of any  significant  integration  into  the  community.  His
       deportation would not be disproportionate. In relation to  Article  8
       it was noted that paragraphs 396 to  400  of  the  immigration  rules
       regarding Article 8 were not applicable in the applicant's case.  The
       respondent, having considered the  questions  set  out  in  Razgar  v
       Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27, concluded  that  the  decision  to
       deport the appellant complied with the principle of proportionality.

    5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on the  basis
       that there was a  procedural  irregularity  in  that  the  presenting
       officer had not been permitted to cross examine the appellant on  his
       "non-convictions". Reliance was placed on  the  case  of  Farquharson
       [2013] UKUT 00146 (IAC).

    6. It has also been argued that the panel had failed  to  give  adequate
       reasons  for  its  findings  and  had  faled  to  have  in  mind  the
       immigration rules in  relation  to  Article  8  which  represented  a
       complete code and the appellant could not meet any of the  exceptions
       under paragraphs 399. The appellant had failed to consider s 117B  of
       the 2002 act inserted by the Immigration Act 2014.

    7.  In  granting  permission  to   appeal   First-tier   Judge   Simpson
       concentrated on the point made in relation to the case of Farquharson
       and found the grounds identified an arguable material error  of  law.
       Judge Simpson pointed out it was not clear whether the respondent had
       drawn the case to the panel's decision or whether the respondent  had
       complied with the conditions set out in the  paragraphs  1-3  of  the
       headnote. The headnote is as follows:

           (1)   Where the respondent relies on allegations of  conduct  in
           proceedings for removal, the same principles apply as  to  proof
           of conduct and the assessment of  risk  to  the  public,  as  in
           deportation cases: Bah [2012] UKUT 196 (IAC) etc applicable.

           (2)   A criminal charge that has not resulted in a conviction is
           not a criminal record; but the acts that led to the  charge  may
           be established as conduct.

           (3)   If the  respondent  seeks  to  establish  the  conduct  by
           reference to the contents of police CRIS reports,  the  relevant
           documents  should  be  produced,  rather  than  a  bare  witness
           statement referring to them.

           (4)   The material relied on must be supplied to  the  appellant
           in good time to prepare for the appeal.

           (5)   The judge has a duty to ensure a fair hearing is  obtained
           by  affording  the  appellant  sufficient  time  to  study   the
           documents and respond.

           (6)   Where the appellant is in detention and  faces  a  serious
           allegation of conduct, it is in the interests  of  justice  that
           legal aid is made available.

    8. To meet this issue Mr Kotas lodged the notes made by  the  presenting
       officer at  the  original  hearing.  She  had  brought  the  case  of
       Farquharson to the attention of the judge.

    9. It is convenient to deal with the point based on Farquharson first as
       Mr Kotas, having heard counsel's argument, conceded it.

   10. In relation to  this  ground  counsel  pointed  out  that  the  panel
       referred to hearing from a police officer  in  paragraph  21  of  its
       decision. The officer produced the record of the appellant's  history
       of offending and he was not cross-examined. Farquharson was a  serial
       rapist it was submitted and  he  disputed  that  he  had  ever  raped
       anyone.  The  panel  in  the  instant  case  had  properly  exercised
       discretion in refusing the request to  cross-examine  the  appellant.
       The Police Officer had been tendered and had not been  challenged  or
       cross-examined by the Presenting  Officer.  As  the  panel  observed,
       points could be taken in submissions.

   11. Mr Kotas was acting entirely properly in conceding the point.

   12. In relation to the "non-convictions" Mr Kotas also submitted that the
       panel had not fully taken them into account in its deliberations.  In
       paragraph 48 of its decision the panel had stated:

           "The appellant's criminal record is not  in  dispute.  He  is  a
           habitual offender who has  committed  several  offences  over  a
           number of years to  feed  a  drug  habit.  In  addition  to  the
           convictions and cautions a number of other non-convictions  were
           recorded. He displayed a pattern of antisocial behaviour over  a
           period of five years and the sentencing judge described  him  as
           "self-absorbed and totally  selfish  with  no  thought  for  the
           public or his parents or his children". We  have  however  taken
           into account that he has no  convictions  for  violent  offences
           against the person or sex offences."

   13. Mr Kotas submitted that  the  panel  had  erred  in  downplaying  the
       seriousness of the appellant's offences in this paragraph.  Reference
       was made to sub-paragraphs 29 (i) and (j) of the case of   MC  [2015]
       UKUT 520 (IAC):

           "i.   Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects  of
           the  rehabilitation  of  offenders  include  family   ties   and
           responsibilities,    accommodation,     education,     training,
           employment, active membership of a community and the like  (Essa
           (2013) at [34]). However, lack of  access to a Probation Officer
           or equivalent in the other Member State should not, in  general,
           preclude deportation (Dumliauskas [55])

           ...

           j.    In the absence of integration and  a  right  of  permanent
           residence, the future  prospects  of  integration  cannot  be  a
           weighty factor (Dumliauskas  [44]  and  [54]).  Even  when  such
           prospects have significant weight they are not a trump card,  as
           what the Directive and the 2006 EEA  Regulations  require  is  a
           wide-ranging holistic assessment. Both recognises that the  more
           serious the risk of reoffending, and the offences that a  person
           may commit, the greater the right to interfere with the right of
           residence (Dumliauskas at [46] and [54])."

   14. It was submitted that re-integration was not an important factor, the
       panel had not considered the appellant's  non-convictions.  Reference
       was made to Badewa (ss 117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT  00329
       (IAC). The panel should have directed itself by reference to  s  117C
       in the light of what was said in that case.

   15. Mr Cogan, having addressed the  principal  ground  which  as  I  have
       mentioned above was conceded submitted that the panel had given ample
       reasons for its decision. It was clear that it had taken into account
       the appellant's non-convictions. It had accepted that  the  appellant
       was an habitual offender as appeared from paragraph 48. It had  heard
       from three sources. It had heard evidence from the appellant and  his
       parents and a letter from the mother of the children. The points made
       in the grounds were not made out. The  evidence  of  the  appellant's
       parents had been accepted. It was not right to say that it was merely
       self-serving evidence. The panel had been entitled  to  rely  on  the
       oral testimony. The grounds referred  to  paragraph  117B  which  the
       panel had taken into account. The appellant had been  in  the  United
       Kingdom for 18 years and he had had his education here.  He  had  had
       two children in this country and was integrated. The convictions  did
       not demonstrate that he was not integrated.

   16. In reply, although conceding the point in relation to the  procedural
       irregularity Mr Kotas relied on  section  117C.  The  panel  had  not
       considered whether the impact on the children was unduly harsh.

   17. Counsel submitted that the point based on  section  117C  was  a  new
       point and had not featured in the grounds of appeal.

   18. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.  I  can
       only interfere with the decision of the panel if  it  was  materially
       flawed in law.

   19. I am grateful to both advocates for their submissions and to Mr Kotas
       for lodging the notes made by the presenting officer although in some
       respects they do not help his  case  and  for  his  prompt  and  fair
       concession regarding the procedural irregularity point.

   20. It does appear that the judge granted permission  to  appeal  on  the
       basis  of  this  point  although  he  did  not  specifically   refuse
       permission on the other grounds.

   21. The grounds referred to the immigration rules in relation to  Article
       8 but this point was not pressed by Mr Kotas and indeed in  paragraph
       34 of the decision the respondent specifically stated that they  were
       not applicable to the applicant's case.

   22. It was submitted that the panel erred in failing to consider s  117C.
       As counsel argued this  point  had  not  featured  before.  Mr  Kotas
       submitted that the point was "Robinson" obvious:  R  v  Secretary  of
       State ex parte Robinson [1997] Imm. A.R. 568. One might  ask  if  the
       point was so obvious why it did not feature in the grounds and why no
       application to amend the grounds had been made before the hearing  to
       give counsel the opportunity to address it. It  does  not  appear  to
       have been raised at the initial hearing according to  the  Presenting
       Officer's notes.  The Tribunal in Badewa accepted at paragraph 15  of
       its decision that the matter was not  straightforward.  Even  if  the
       point were obvious it is doubtful that the Secretary of  State  could
       rely on it: see GH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ
       1603; [2006] Imm AR 235 at para 17 per Brooke LJ:

           "It remains undecided how much further, if at all, that approach
           [ie the Robinson approach] can be relied on by the Secretary  of
           State to complain of a failure by the court to take points  that
           the Secretary of State had not taken. For  our  part,  we  would
           wish to come to that question  with  considerable  caution,  not
           least because the inequality of resources between the government
           and the average asylum-seeker  makes  it  unattractive  for  the
           Secretary of State to appeal to a forensic indulgence originally
           formulated in favour of the asylum-seeker. It is  not  necessary
           to pursue that enquiry in the present case, because no extension
           of the Robinson jurisprudence in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
           State can apply here. That is because the present case  concerns
           not the refugee Convention, but the European Convention on Human
           Rights. In contrast to the  provisions  of  Article  1F  of  the
           refugee Convention, the signatory  state  to  the  ECHR  has  no
           positive obligation to refuse relief in any case. If, therefore,
           as is alleged to have occurred in this case, the state  purports
           to grant relief under an  article  of  the  ECHR  when  properly
           understood such relief is not available, the state, in  contrast
           to  the  position  in  A  (Iraq),  commits  no  breach  of   the
           international  instrument  that  it  purports  to  be  applying.
           Accordingly, the overriding obligation to prevent such  breaches
           that was identified in A (Iraq) does not exist."

   23. The  Presenting  Officer's  notes  were  fairly  disclosed  in  their
       entirety by Mr Kotas. I consider that the  Presenting  Officer  acted
       with commendable frankness and neutrality in her  remarks  about  the
       procedural  issue  -  now  conceded.  Although  only  of   peripheral
       relevance, she also  correctly  forecast  the  panel's  decision  and
       commented that the oral evidence was consistent with  the  view  that
       the panel was likely to take.

   24. The panel gave proper reasons for its  decision.  It  approached  the
       appellant's evidence with an understandable degree of caution  as  it
       says in paragraph 49. It accepted matters were finely  balanced.  The
       grounds largely consist  of  expressions  of  disagreement  with  the
       conclusions of the panel. Its decision was satisfactorily reasoned on
       all salient issues. I have carefully considered the  points  advanced
       on both sides but I accept  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Cogan  as
       outlined above on the matters that were not conceded.

   25. The determination was not materially flawed in law and I direct  that
       it shall stand.

   26. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




       Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               18 December 2015


       ANONYMITY ORDER
       The anonymity order made by the panel continues.


