

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00311/2013
Approved Ex Tempore Judgment


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2013                            |On 6 February 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

                                   Between

                              MARK WAYNE MILLER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, (of Counsel), instructed on behalf of
                    Barnes Harrid & Dyer Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Laurence Tarlow, Home Presenting Officer/
                    Treasury Solicitor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the  Determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal ("the Tribunal").  The Determination  had  its
      origins in a decision made by the Secretary of  State  on  24  January
      2013 which entailed the making of  a  deportation  order  against  the
      Appellant.  That Order was the subject of a successful appeal  to  the
      Tribunal.

   2. In seeking permission to  appeal  several  grounds  were  advanced  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State.  The grant of permission  to  appeal
      was formulated in the following  way:   the  grounds  were  considered
      arguable in light of the sentencing Judge's recommendation and remarks
      and the decision in the Masih at [2012] UKUT 00046.   Accordingly,  in
      determining the appeal, our focus is drawn to the  sentencing  Judge's
      recommendations and remarks and the Masih decision.

   3. In presenting the appeal on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
      Tarlow helpfully refined the grounds to  two  points.   The  first  he
      described as the public interest issue.  The  argument  developed  was
      that there is a strong public interest in deporting offenders such  as
      the Appellant.  Continuing, Mr Tarlow indicated that this is a  weight
      challenge. He explained that in  submitting  that  the  Tribunal  gave
      insufficient  weight  to  the  public  interests  engaged  these   are
      conveniently drawn together in the  case  of  Masih,  where  they  are
      described as the strong public interest in removing  foreign  citizens
      convicted of serious offences, which is linked to  the  deterrence  of
      others from committing crimes.  It was submitted that the Tribunal was
      guilty of inadequate assessment of the  competing  interests,  namely,
      these public interests, on the one hand, and the Appellant's and other
      family members' Article 8 interests, on the other,  in  the  balancing
      exercise which had to be performed.

   4. In response, on behalf of the Appellant it has been  submitted  by  Mr
      Spurling of Counsel that  properly  analysed,  this  is  a  perversity
      challenge.  We agree with that submission.  Where there is a complaint
      about the  weight  that  is  attributed  to  certain  factors  and  an
      associated complaint about the  inadequacy  of  weight  attributed  to
      others  one  finds  oneself  in  the  territory  of  an  irrationality
      challenge.  The legal principles to be applied are well  settled:  see
      Edward v Bairstow.  In summary,  the  test  is  whether  a  reasonable
      Tribunal properly directing itself on the law could, having regard  to
      all the evidence, and the findings made, have rationally come  to  the
      conclusion  under  scrutiny.   In  rehearsing   that   test   one   is
      appropriately reminded that in challenges of this  kind  there  is  no
      suggested misdirection in law  as  such.   Accordingly,  the  question
      becomes whether the impugned decision of the Tribunal lay  within  the
      band of conclusions reasonably open to it having  regard  to  all  the
      evidence and the findings made.

   5.  We  find  it  unnecessary  to  rehearse  the  main  passages  in  the
      Determination of  the   Tribunal.   We  do,  however,  in  brief  draw
      attention to the following.  Firstly, the rehearsal of the Appellant's
      immigration history in paragraph 2.  Secondly, the recitation  of  his
      criminal history in  paragraph  3,  which  included  in  particular  a
      lengthy excerpt from the sentencing  hearing  and  the  words  of  the
      sentencing Judge.  Next  we  highlight  the  additional  consideration
      given to the Appellant's criminality in the context of considering the
      family life factors.  All of this is detailed in paragraph  9  of  the
      Determination.  We draw attention  also  to  the  formulation  of  the
      argument considered by the Tribunal in paragraph 11 and in  particular
      in paragraph 11(B).

   6. In paragraph 12, the  Tribunal  reminded  itself  once  again  of  the
      Appellant's criminality and of the gravity of his offending.  Next, we
      draw attention to the summary contained in  paragraph  17,  where  the
      Tribunal draws together a number of the factors in the equation before
      it.  Following this, the  Tribunal  made  a  series  of  findings  and
      evaluative assessments which are contained in paragraph 23.  This,  in
      turn, was followed by an extensive rehearsal of  the  decision  in  SS
      (Nigeria).  The importance of this was that the Tribunal  was  clearly
      alert to the potency of the public  interest  in  play.   Finally,  in
      paragraph 25, the Tribunal said:  " In the balance  we  conclude  that
      the Appellant has a strong family life".  We  pause  to  observe  that
      this conclusion, in the context  of  this  error  of  law  appeal,  is
      unimpeachable.  Next, the Tribunal said while full account  was  taken
      of the strong public interest in the removal of foreign  citizens,  it
      was of the considered opinion that it did not regard  the  Appellant's
      deportation as proportionate to the legitimate aim engaged.   Overall,
      the interference with the family life of the  Appellant,  his  partner
      and  all  the  children  contemplated  by  his  deportation  was   not
      considered by the Tribunal necessary in public interest.

   7. We conclude  that  there  is  no  irrationality  identifiable  in  the
      Tribunal's conduct of the Article 8 exercise and  its  undertaking  of
      the associated necessary exercise of considering the best interest  of
      the children and according  to  those  the  primacy  which  they  must
      receive in accordance with Section  55  of  the  2009  Act.   In  this
      context we  have  been  appropriately  reminded  of  the  most  recent
      pronouncements on this subject by the Supreme Court  in  the  case  of
      Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.   Accordingly,  the  first  ground  of  appeal
      fails.

   8. The second ground of appeal  helpfully  formulated  by  Mr  Tarlow  in
      argument was that inadequate reasons were given by  the  Tribunal  for
      the outcome  of  the  balancing  exercise  which  it  conducted.   The
      Tribunal undoubtedly expressed reasons. These  can  be  found  in  the
      passage to which we have just adverted in paragraph 25.  They are  not
      full, nor are they extensive, but one can understand  from  then  what
      was in the Tribunal's mind.  That assessment is appropriate  when  one
      performs the duty of reading the Determination as a whole and, in this
      respect, we have nothing to add to our outline  of  the  Determination
      above.   The ultimate barometer in  a  reasons  challenge  is  whether
      there are sufficient indications in the text of  the  judgement  under
      scrutiny of what the Tribunal was doing, where it was going, where  it
      finished and why it finished where it did. That is a basic summary  of
      the extensive case law on the subject of the judicial duty to  provide
      reasons for decisions.  We  are  particularly  mindful  of  that  duty
      having regard to the recent decision of this Tribunal in the  case  of
      MK  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  64  (IAC).    Adequacy  is  the   ultimate
      touchstone.  While the reasons in the present  case  could  have  been
      better and more fully articulated and while  the  Determination  could
      have been more elegantly structured, these are counsels of perfection.
       We are satisfied that it passes the test which  we  have  identified.
      Accordingly, the second ground of appeal fails also.

   9. It follows that we dismiss the appeal against the Determination of the
      First-tier Tribunal, which we affirm.




                                                                       [pic]




                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date: 4 February 2014

















