
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00479/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2016                           |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    R. I.
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 23 January 1982 and is a  citizen  of  Latvia
    and an EEA citizen.  It is understood that he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom when he was 29 years old and he has been in the United  Kingdom
    for more than four years and has worked on occasions. However there  is
    no indication that he has been exercising EEA treaty rights  throughout
    this period.  Indeed for part of that period he has  been   in  prison.
    It is not suggested that he is someone who  has  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence.

2.   Indeed the appellant has a very  bad  criminal  record  such  that  the
    Secretary of State considered that  his removal from the United Kingdom
    was justified on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
    public health in accordance with Regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. Thus it was that  notice  of
    liability to deportation was served upon the appellant on 8  June  2015
    requesting the reasons from him why he should not be so deported.

3.   Those representations were submitted which have been considered.   Thus
    it was by a decision of 28 September 2015 that the  respondent  decided
    indeed to make a deportation order  against  the  appellant.   Such  an
    order was signed and dated 28 September 2015.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Green on 19 February  2016.   The
    Judge allowed the appeal.  However on a subsequent appeal against  that
    decision by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  that
    decision was set aside by reason of error of law.[My decision dated  28
    September 2016 is annexed hereto]  Thus  it  is  that  the  appellant's
    appeal falls to be considered afresh. The hearing was scheduled for  10
    November 2016.  On that occasion the appellant  attended  unrepresented
    and gave oral evidence on his behalf.

5.   The nature of  the  appellant's  offending  behaviour  is  set  out  in
    various documentation.  On  1  July  2013  he  used  a  vehicle  whilst
    uninsured. He was sentenced for that matter on 6 December 2013  at  the
    Warwickshire Magistrates Court where he received  a  financial  penalty
    and an endorsement upon his licence.

6.   On 1 July 2013 he was said to have gone equipped for theft and to  have
    facilitated the acquisition of criminal property. He pleaded not guilty
    to those matters but on 21 March 2014 at the Coventry and  Warwickshire
    Magistrates Court he was convicted and received a community order  with
    various requirements such as unpaid work.

7.   On 9 August 2014 he was involved in a serious traffic  incident  caused
    by his dangerous driving and causing serious injury.  On 12 May 2015 at
    the Northampton Crown Court he received imprisonment for 22  months  as
    well as disqualification from driving and  a  requirement  to  take  an
    extended driving test. The circumstances of that matter were that on  9
    August the appellant was driving on the A43  with  a  number  of  other
    motor vehicles.  Driving in the other direction was a vehicle driven by
    one [CP] with her daughter [Z], aged 14, in the  front  passenger  seat
    and her son, [S], 8, in the rear seat.

8.   The appellant attempted an overtaking manoeuvre which resulted  in  his
    colliding with the oncoming vehicle causing extensive injuries  to  the
    family. The children had to be airlifted  to  hospital  on  account  of
    their multiple injuries and remained in hospital for eleven days.

9.   Such was the emotional strain placed  on  the  family  that  it  was  a
    contributing factor, as found by the sentencing Judge, to the breakdown
    of the marriage. The accident also contributed to the children  missing
    school.  The children have made significant recovery  but  not  totally
    so.  Although it was not a prolonged episode of  dangerous  driving  it
    was found by the sentencing Judge, His Honour Judge Mayo, that  it  was
    an episode of seriously dangerous driving, not a simple overtaking that
    went wrong but an overtaking of one car followed by a movement  of  the
    vehicle into the incoming lane to overtake  another.   It  was  also  a
    thoroughly unnecessary manoeuvre.  The sentence was reduced  by  reason
    of a guilty plea to one of 22 months' imprisonment.

10.  The respondent, in the relevant  decision,  concluded  that  there  had
    been an escalating of his offending behaviour  and  that  there  was  a
    serious deficit in the manner that the appellant thought  and  behaved.
    He had shown that he was prepared to take risks without considering the
    consequences and the effect of his actions upon his victims. He did not
    seem to have much of an awareness of the consequences of his  behaviour
    in the past nor he impact which his most recent offending behaviour had
    on the public.

11.  The respondent relied on this as an indication that the  appellant  was
    considered to pose a continuing  risk  of  harm  to  the  public.   The
    respondent also quoted the sentencing remarks of the Judge at length in
    the refusal letter.

12.  When he was convicted of this road traffic offence  the  appellant  was
    the subject of a community order.    He  had,  since  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom, received convictions for five offences, namely  two  of
    theft  and  kindred  other  offences.   His  offending  behaviour   had
    escalated in seriousness without being deterred by previous convictions
    or sentences. He appeared to have given no consideration  to  the  time
    and public funds spent each time he offended and the resources spent by
    the police investigating his crimes.

13.  The respondent relied upon this as evidence  that  he  had  disregarded
    the law  and  lacked  understanding  of  the  negative  impact  of  his
    offending behaviour on others. There were concerns about  his  lack  of
    consequential thinking  and  poor  moral  reasoning,  in  that  he  had
    demonstrated that he was willing to take risks without considering  the
    effect of his actions on the community. There was also no  evidence  to
    show that he had engaged in any rehabilitation programme.

14.  The respondent concluded that the completion  of  courses  such  as  an
    enhanced thinking skills or victim awareness could possibly reduce  the
    risk of his reoffending in the future.  In view of such matters however
    the respondent concluded that the appellant was likely to behave  in  a
    similar manner should he fail to address the issues  that  led  to  his
    offending behaviour.  He had the potential to cause serious harm to the
    public should he reoffend. He had the propensity  to  reoffend  and  he
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious to  the  public
    to justify his deportation on the grounds of public policy.

15.  In addressing the question  of  proportionality  the  respondent  noted
    that the appellant claimed to have  lived  and  worked  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than four years and that he was 33 years old  and  was
    believed to be in good health.  He is married to the  sponsor  and  had
    two children all of whom were resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.   the
    eldest child attended primary school and the youngest attended  nursery
    school.

16.  The respondent concluded that  notwithstanding  his  family  life,  the
    appellant  had  not  provided  evidence  to  show  that  he  had  fully
    integrated into the community in the United Kingdom. Indeed he had been
    excluded from society whilst serving his custodial sentence.

17.  The respondent addressed the question of rehabilitation.  There was  no
    evidence that the appellant  had  undertaken  any  rehabilitative  work
    whilst he had been in custody.  He had not demonstrated any significant
    integration in the community and had grown up in Latvia where he  still
    had family members.  The respondent noted  that  the  sponsor  and  his
    children were living in the United Kingdom but  the  sponsor  had  been
    unable to prevent the appellant from committing offences for  which  he
    was convicted.   In  the  absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary  the
    respondent believed that the sponsor would be  unable  to  provide  the
    appellant with the necessary support to help him  rehabilitate  and  to
    reduce the risk of his offending in the future.  There  was  no  reason
    why the appellant could not continue to work towards rehabilitation  in
    Latvia with the support of his family members living there. He did  not
    need to remain in the United Kingdom to be rehabilitated.

18.  Consequently deportation to Latvia would not  prejudice  the  prospects
    of his rehabilitation. In any event, interfering in his  rehabilitation
    was said to be proportionate and justified when  balanced  against  the
    continuing risk that he posed to the public.

19.   The  appellant  indicated  that  his  private  and  family  life   had
    substantially changed since the decision of the respondent in September
    2015.  At the Tribunal hearing on  19  February  2016  the  appellant's
    wife, the sponsor,  had  attended  and  given  evidence  on  behalf  of
    appellant. She had indicated to the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  she
    wanted to help the appellant and wanted  him  back  at  home  with  the
    children so that they could resume their family life.  It  would  seem,
    however, that at or around this time, or shortly after, there had  been
    a degree of domestic disharmony resulting in the separation of  himself
    from his family.  Seemingly there were  allegations  made  against  him
    that he had assaulted his wife in terms of domestic violence.

20.  The appellant was somewhat unsure as  to  the  chronology  of  matters.
    Seemingly he had parted from  his  wife  well  before  the  deportation
    appeal hearing in February 2016.   She  had  left  him  and  taken  the
    children and commenced proceedings in  the  magistrates  court  against
    him.

21.  He went back to live in Latvia for a few  months  but  came  back  with
    permission of the immigration authorities to attend his  court  hearing
    in February 2016, living at 39 Bishops Road, in Peterborough, which was
    the family home  although  his  wife  no  longer  lived  there  or  the
    children.

22.   Following  the  court  hearing  in  Birmingham  in  relation  to   the
    deportation matter he returned to Latvia living with  his  mother.   He
    said that he had no qualifications of any educational significance  and
    therefore was unable to find any job.  So he  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom in March or April 2016.

23.  At some stage in July there was a hearing at the Magistrates  court  in
    connection with the allegations  made  against  him.   Seemingly  those
    court proceedings came to an end with no conviction of  the  appellant.
    His wife, now divorced from him, and children continue  to  live  apart
    from him and indeed  his  wife  objects  strongly  to  him  seeing  the
    children.  He has not  seen  the  children  for  many  months.   If  he
    approaches the school his wife calls the  police.   He  has  considered
    taking out legal proceedings in order to enforce some form  of  custody
    or contact but has not done so to date because of  the  uncertainty  of
    his position and the expense which that entails.

24.  At present he is not working although it is his hope that  he  will  go
    into business with as  fellow  Latvian.   This  is  proposed  to  be  a
    business operating the website buying and selling  goods  akin  to  the
    "Gumtree".  It is called" Hand2Hand".  At present he does not earn  any
    money or have any benefits but he has sublet rooms in 39  Bishops  Road
    and receives rent from the occupants of those rooms sufficient  to  pay
    for the utility bills and leave a little money left for  him to  manage
    to live.

25.  Seemingly he has now divorced his wife and he had received  money  from
    her whilst he was living in Latvia and they had agreed to  an  amicable
    divorce.   The  divorce  was  endorsed  by  the  court.   He   had   no
    notification of that and had not received information until recently as
    to the divorce.

26.  He agreed that he had worked in a factory for a short time  before  his
    imprisonment but not thereafter.   He  said  he  spent  six  months  in
    prison. When he was released in October 2015 when he  went  to  Latvia,
    coming back to attend the court hearing and later in March  and  April.
    He says that his wife had divorced him on 7 July 2016 when he had  been
    in Latvia and had a special form  filled  in.  He  had  last  seen  his
    children in July.  He had visited a social worker who had  advised  him
    to institute court proceedings.  He would have to pay a fee of �255  to
    do so and did not have the money and was disinclined to do so until  he
    knew what was his future.

27.  He repeated that he had been to Latvia in  October  2015,  living  with
    his mother. He does not have any other family in  Latvia.  He  went  to
    Latvia because of his wife's behaviour.   His mother is  66.   He  says
    there is no chance of earning money in Latvia and no chance of working.
    He speaks to his children on Skype but not  physically.   There  is  no
    order preventing his seeing his children but when he tries to do so the
    police are called.

28.  When asked about his convictions he said that he really felt  that  the
    police had been unduly hard on him in the way that they had dealt  with
    him.  In relation to the insurance matter, he said that he  borrowed  a
    van from a friend thinking that his insurance for his car  would  cover
    him and he was wrong about that.  He denied that he had had  a  vehicle
    for the purposes of burglary, saying that the  allegations  which  were
    made about him by the police were untrue.  Seemingly the  diesel  found
    in the van was said to be stolen. A friend  of  his,  who  was  abroad,
    could have confirmed that he had come by the diesel innocently but that
    witness was unavailable at the trial.  He was convicted. He was legally
    represented at that trial but did not appeal the conviction.

29.  In terms of the dangerous driving, he expressed the view  that  it  had
    been exaggerated, that he had not been going at a very fast  speed  and
    that it was just an unfortunate accident.  He said that at no stage had
    he intended to do anything wrong and was concerned that the authorities
    treated him unreasonably harshly in all the circumstances.

30.  He indicated that currently he was  just  coping  financially  and  has
    tried to find a job.   Apparently  he  was  motivated  to  re-establish
    contact with  his children aged 10 and  4.  He  said  of  returning  to
    Latvia that he would not be able to find a job  and  really  wanted  to
    sort out his problems with his wife and children in the United Kingdom.

31.  There is material that was served by the respondent under  cover  of  a
    letter of  20  September  2016,  from  the  Peterborough  City  Council
    concerning the assessments of the children.  There was an assessment in
    relation to child K born on 10 April 2008.  The referral was made on 20
    June 2016, the address at that time still stated as  being  39  Bishops
    Road. K had reported to the school that the  appellant  had  physically
    assaulted him  in  the  past.  The  mother  confirmed  this.   She  was
    frightened of him and had been subjected herself to domestic abuse  and
    had not reported the incidents to the police.

32.  The assessment was completed on 9 August 2016.  Both children had  been
    seen on home visits during this period and child V was living with  his
    mum and sibling at a family friend's home and did not want any  contact
    with the appellant, who is his stepfather and is angry with him.

33.  Child M is the natural daughter of the appellant but is not seeing  him
    because of the risks that her mother foresees.

34.   In  terms  of  the  children  and  how  they  are  responding  to  the
    difficulties, it is said K is a popular child, achieving well at school
    both academically and in  sport.   He  seems  to  be  emotionally  well
    adjusted and there are no behavioural concerns  for  him.   M  is  also
    happy and confident  little  girl  and  does  not  seem  to  have  been
    significantly affected by all the  changes  that  have  recently  taken
    place.  The assessment describes her  as  a  very  mature  child.   The
    children and their mother are staying with close  Latvian  friends  who
    are like a family them. It is a difficult time for  both  children  and
    mother. it is indicated that they are coping well in the circumstances.
     At the time of the assessment neither children had  any  contact  with
    the appellant.

35.  Mrs I made a complaint that on 6 June 2016 the appellant threatened  to
    harm herself and refused to allow K to leave the house.  At  that  time
    Mrs I indicated that she was divorcing the  appellant  and  seeking  to
    make a home for the children elsewhere.  The mother  has  reported  the
    historic domestic abuse of a serious nature and  K  has  also  made  an
    allegation of violence towards him by the appellant.

37.  The social services were supportive of  the  situation  of  the  family
    living apart from the appellant.  There is nothing to indicate that the
    appellant was spoken to about such matters. It is plain  from  his  own
    evidence that he was in Latvia for a significant  part  of  that  time.
    Mention is made in that assessment of pending court proceedings.

38.  I remind myself of Regulation 19(3)(b) of the 2006 Regulations. It  was
    a crucial issue  in  this  case  whether  the  appellant's  removal  is
    justified on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
    health in accordance with Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.

39.  I remind myself as to Regulation 21(5) which provides:

         "Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy  or
         public security  it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this Regulation be taken in accordance with
         the following principles:


         (a)    the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;
         (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
             of the person concerned;
         (c)  the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the    fundamental interests of society;
         (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;
         (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in  themselves
             justify the decision."


40.  I bear in mind also 21(6) that

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

41.  I remind  myself  that  removal  of  course  is  an  exception  to  the
    fundamental principles of the free exercise of EU rights  and  as  such
    has to be construed restrictively. This was indicated in  the  case  of
    Arturs, Dumliauskas, Lukaszwozniak and ME (Netherlands) [2015] EWCA Civ
    145 there has to be a real risk of reoffending, otherwise  the  grounds
    of public policy or public security do not arise.

42.  As I have indicated, so far  as  the  issue  of  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society the respondent relied upon the escalation of  the  offences.
    There was a lack of consequential thinking and poor moral reasoning and
    the lack of any attempt to engage with any programme that might address
    such matters.

43.  In that connection it is significant, as I so find, that the  appellant
    even now seems reluctant to take any responsibility for  his  offending
    behaviour.  He contributes his arrest in the past to  the  unreasonable
    conduct of the police and of their unwarranted suspicions of  him.   He
    seeks to minimise thie serious nature of his conduct which led  to  the
    road traffic accident.  In not addressing or  seeking  to  address  his
    offending behaviour there is little indication that his future  conduct
    will be improved.

44.  Indeed, it was presented at the original hearing in February, that  the
    appellant had the support of his wife and children as offering a degree
    of stability in his private and domestic life.  Cleary that at  present
    is not the case and may not have been true then. He  is  divorced  from
    his  wife  and  lives  apart  from  her  and  the   children.   It   is
    understandable that that is a matter of anxiety both for them  and  for
    him.

45.  The allegations, which are made, are themselves a  source  of  concern,
    particularly violence has been offered to his former wife and to one of
    his children. The evidence that has presented on  that  matter  is  far
    from clear other than the assessment  which  was  conducted  by  social
    services which tended to uphold the concerns that had  been  expressed.
    It is perhaps surprising, given that the assessment spanned the  period
    June to August 2016, that little mention was  made  of  any  magistrate
    court proceedings.  Still less the settlement of those matters.  In the
    absence of any clear evidence about such proceedings it is right that I
    ignore them in the sense of assessing the risk which the appellant  may
    or may not pose to the public by his conduct.

46.  As I indicated it is perhaps unfortunate that he was not questioned  by
    social services about the matter but it would seem  from  the  somewhat
    difficult chronology as presented, in that much of  the  time  in  this
    year he spent in Latvia.

47.  On his own account he has little funds and such is of clearly  relevant
    consideration. It is to be considered that  certain  of  his  offending
    behaviour in the past  was  to  do  with  theft  and  appropriation  of
    property presumably for financial gain. His lack of work  and  lack  of
    funds is, as I so find, a relevant  factor  in  assessing  the  present
    threat that he poses to  society  and  the  risks  of  his  reoffending
    behaviour.

48.  In relation to the question of rehabilitation, there is  no  indication
    that he has undertaken any rehabilitative work or is likely to do so to
    address his reoffending in the future in the UK.  Indeed he  no  longer
    has the support of his family at present in the United Kingdom but  has
    the support of his mother in Latvia.  He cites limited job prospects in
    Latvia as opposed to better prospects in the United  Kingdom,  but  the
    reality is once again that he has not been working since being released
    from prison. In weighing up the relative prospects of rehabilitation in
    the United Kingdom and in Latvia  it is relevant to note that he has no
    permanent right of residence but perhaps  less  weight  than  otherwise
    falls to be given to rehabilitation in the UK, particularly  when  none
    has  been  attempted  or  has  been  effective.   Indeed,   given   the
    difficulties with  his  domestic  situation,  as  indeed  seemingly  he
    recognised for a while, it would be better for him to be in Latvia with
    some stability which perhaps he does not have in the United Kingdom.  I
    find that the prospects of rehabilitation in Latvia  are  significantly
    better than they would be in the United Kingdom.

49.  It is a matter of some concern to note the way in  which  evidence  was
    presented before First-tier Tribunal Judge Green on  19  February  2016
    when the sponsor attended to give evidence. She had assured  the  Judge
    that the appellant would change. She wanted to help him and wanted  him
    back home with the children so that  they  could  resume  their  family
    life.  She had not seen him with drugs and not  seen  him  with  people
    associated with drugs.

50.   Given  the  background,  as  highlighted  in   the   social   services
    assessment, it is far from clear to  me  that  the  sponsor  was  being
    entirely honest with the Judge as to that family life. If  she  was  it
    was sadly  a  hope  that  was  very  short-lived  given  the  behaviour
    seemingly of the  appellant  towards  her  and  her  children  and  the
    separation. That in  itself  also  serves  to  reinforce  the  risk  of
    offending as someone who behaves in  that  manner,  not  accepting  the
    stability and support which otherwise might  have  been  offered.   The
    opportunity of family and stability has now been removed.

51.  In terms of integration with the  community,  I  find  little  evidence
    that that has been so. I note the pattern of his behaviour; the lack of
    working and the lack of continuing family ties.

52.  In assessing the nature of the continuing risk it is  of  course  right
    that I note matters said in his favour.  There was a letter written  by
    Vitaliljs  Tohohonovs  dated  10  February  2016.   He  has  known  the
    appellant for fifteen years and speaks of  his  intelligence  and  good
    analytical and communication skills. He said that he is a good learner,
    energetic and hardworking. He would guarantee a  position  for  him  in
    company Hand2Hand Group Limited. He would  work  as  a  secretary.  The
    company sells internet products.

53.  Such perhaps stands a  little  in  contrast  to  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant himself that he is  hoping  to  go  in  partnership  with  Mr
    Tontohonovs but matters are still at an early stage.  Clearly  it  does
    not help the process that the appellant has been absent for quite  some
    time on and off in Latvia. The appellant wrote a  letter  of  22  March
    2015 to the two child victims, expressing remorse and asking for  their
    forgiveness. There is also a letter from  a  childhood  friend  Gennady
    Filjipakin dated 1 February 2015 describing the appellant as a helpful,
    generous and selfless person and  other  letters  speaking  as  to  the
    appellant being a devoted family man and loyal friend.

54.   The  appellant  has   also   exhibited   a   number   of   educational
    qualifications that he has acquired whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    evidence that he has taken steps to improve himself  and  to  integrate
    into British society.  Clearly those letters of recommendation need  to
    be considered in the overall offending behaviour of the  appellant  and
    his convictions for dishonesty, recklessness and  the  family  disunity
    that now exists, seemingly arising from his conduct.

55.  Looking at the matter holistically I find  that  the  appellant  indeed
    continues to present a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    to public policy or security. I find that  his  current  insecurity  of
    employment and family life contribute significantly to that assessment.
    I do not find to be reasonable prospects of  rehabilitation  given  the
    uncertainties of his situation and of the clear stresses and strains in
    his domestic and family affairs.

56.  I bear in mind that  any  decision  to  remove  must  comply  with  the
    principle of proportionality and in making that assessment  I  bear  in
    mind the interests, not only of the appellant but also  of  his  family
    and particularly the best interests of his two children as enshrined by
    statute. He indicated he is divorced from his wife who wants little  to
    do with him given all the evidence. He is currently separated from  his
    children and, seemingly from the social  service  reports,  that  is  a
    separation that they also desire. Whether that situation continues is a
    matter currently of some speculation but there is nothing, as  I  find,
    to prevent Skype or other contact being made  with  the  children  from
    Latvia,  nor  indeed  anything  to  prevent  proper  proceedings  being
    instituted from Latvia in the courts in this country, if  that  be  the
    wish of the appellant.  No doubt it would then  be  for  those  courts,
    particularly the Family Court, to determine how his evidence should  be
    best received in the course of those proceedings.

57.  Looking at the best interests  of  the  children  I  note,  as  I  have
    indicated, that both seem to be happy, well adjusted children  who  are
    coping well with living with their  mother  in  the  absence  of  their
    father or stepfather.  There is no indication  that  his  absence  from
    them is in any way being detrimental to their wellbeing or  development
    or  that  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  create   any
    significant disruption or difficulty for them.  It is clearly in  their
    best interests that they  are  with  their  mother  in  the  supportive
    environment with their Latvian friends that they currently enjoy.

58.  I bear in mind that the appellant maintains that if returned to  Latvia
    he will not be able to earn money or to work because of the lack of his
    skills.  That to some extent stands in contrast to the  evidence  which
    he has presented, that he has acquired some skills and indeed contrasts
    from  the  letter  from  his  friend   about   his   intellectual   and
    organisational abilities.

59.  He seeks to present himself as somebody who has no  qualifications  and
    abilities, whereas I find that not to be entirely the case.  I  do  not
    find that necessarily he will be without work or employment in  Latvia.
    He has recognised that he needed some support  because  he  has  chosen
    since October of last year to reside for a number of months in  Latvia.
    I do not find that he would have any  difficulty  in  reintegrating  in
    Latvia nor indeed to establish his life there.

60.  Overall, therefore, I consider on the matter  of  proportionality  that
    it is overwhelming in the public interest that the current serious risk
    that he poses should be recognised and that the decision to deport  him
    is entirely proportionate in all the circumstances.

Notice of Decision

61.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The decision  of  the  respondent
    to implement the deportation under the EEA Regulations is upheld.   The
    appeal in respect of  human  rights  and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  is
    dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made to protect the interests of the children


Signed            [pic]                      Date 8 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

