
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00595/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                        mr Yathukulan Paskaramoorthy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bisson, instructed by Lova Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 March 2019 dismissing his  appeal
    against the decision made on 17 September 2018 to  make  a  deportation
    order against him pursuant to Regulation 23(6)(b) and Regulation 27  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  EEA
    Regulations").

 2. Subsequent to the decision of 17 September, on  23  November  2018  the
    respondent made a decision to refuse the appellant's claim for  asylum,
    a decision which the Secretary of State certified pursuant  to  Section
    72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
    Act").

 3. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 6 March 2019.  It was
    conceded that this was not an asylum appeal, there  being  no  evidence
    any asylum appeal had been lodged after  23  November  2018.   It  was,
    however, observed both parties' position that there was some overlap in
    assessing "very compelling circumstances" of what might have been  said
    about asylum (see First-tier Tribunal decision at [11]).

 4. The appellant is married to a German  citizen,  and  had  acquired  the
    right of residence on that basis.

 5. On 23  November  2016  at  Southwark  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of sexual assault on a female by penetration for which he was
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment.  It was  that  conviction  which
    triggered the Secretary of State's  decision  to  commence  deportation
    proceedings against him under the EEA Regulations and it was subsequent
    to the service of a  notice  of  liability  for  deportation  that  the
    appellant claimed asylum.

 6. The applicant's case was that he was at risk  of  unlawful  killing  or
    torture at the hands of the Sri Lankan Army on the basis that the  army
    would want from him information about the LTTE and  its  activities  in
    the United Kingdom.  His case is also that he  had  been  harassed  and
    arrested by the army in 2006  and  2008  on  suspicion  of  causing  an
    explosion; detained; beaten; and, released through army  contacts.   He
    had then first moved to the north of Sri Lanka and  then  to  India  in
    2009 before returning to Sri Lanka in 2010.   He  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2012 while married to his wife  who  is  a  German  citizen,
    returning in 2014 to Sri  Lanka  for  his  sister's  wedding  where  he
    remained for ten days without incident.

 7. On appeal the judge found:-

      i) that the appellant had not been living in the United Kingdom for  a
         continuous period of five years and thus not acquired  a  permanent
         right to reside in the United Kingdom [14] to [16];

     ii) that in light of the attack, the OASys  Report  and  the  probation
         officer's report that the appellant remains at risk to the  general
         public/women and continues to  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat [23] to [32];

    iii) that the appellant's account of what  had  happened  in  Sri  Lanka
         lacked credibility [44]  and  that  the  medical  reports  did  not
         support his assertion [45] concluding that although  he  had  scars
         which may be due to the history  given,  the  overall  account  was
         inconsistent and inconclusive;

     iv) that there was no proper evidence of  mental  health  deterioration
         and whilst there was a suggestion that he had demonstrated suicidal
         ideation in detention, there was no proper reason  to  assume  this
         would arose suspicion on return to  Sri  Lanka,  the  OASys  Report
         recommending significant  support  be  provided  if  mental  health
         issues arose [47];

      v) that there were no compelling reasons why the appellant should  not
         be deported [53]; or there would be nothing  unduly  harsh  in  his
         removal [55] and that there were no compelling reasons  to  take  a
         different view other than the appellant had  repented,  the  strong
         public interest in deportation prevails [56].

 8. On 29 April 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson granted permission on the
    sole ground that the First-tier Tribunal had simply failed to determine
    whether deportation was in  accordance  with  Regulations  27  and  28,
    having appeared to proceed on the mistaken basis that the appellant was
    appealing against an automatic deportation order, it being  noted  that
    there was no actual decision under the EEA Regulations and no  findings
    made in relation to the factors set out in Regulation 27.

 9. In her decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson  expressly  rejected  the
    contention that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in concluding it  had
    no jurisdiction to consider the appellant's asylum claim; in concluding
    that the appellant did not have five years'  continuous  residence;  in
    making a decision contrary to that  of  the  sentencing  judge  in  the
    criminal proceedings; taking into account the OASys Report; failing  to
    give weight to the  responsibility  taken  by  the  appellant  for  his
    offence and his regret there for that; failing  to  take  into  account
    medical reports; failing to accept the appellant's wife's intention  to
    reunite given that there was no evidence of  intention  to  divorce  as
    well as failing to consider the appellant's private life in the  United
    Kingdom and overlooking the  fact  that  he  was  released  on  licence
    therefore indicating that he was no longer a  threat  nor  taking  into
    account the risk of double jeopardy.

10. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal on  18  June  2019  when  the
    appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Paramjorthy  of  Counsel  and  the
    Secretary of State was represented by Mr D Clarke, a Senior Home Office
    Presenting Officer.

11. It was on that occasion common ground  between  the  parties  that  the
    judge had erred in that  he  failed  to  address  the  EEA  Regulations
    properly in reaching his findings and on the  basis  on  which  he  had
    dismissed the appeal, in particular failing to have regard to  Schedule
    1 and failing to dismiss the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

12. It was the Upper Tribunal's view that the findings of fact set  out  at
    paragraphs 12 to 16  and  23  to  32  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision should be retained and the matter should be adjourned remaking
    on a later date.

13. The Upper Tribunal also directed that any further evidence which either
    party sought to rely should be served at  least  ten  days  before  the
    date; a skeleton argument by the appellant was also directed.

14. The appeal thus came before me on 13 August 2019.

15. I heard submissions from both representatives, Mr Bisson accepting that
    there was little he could say in terms of the factors to be taken  into
    account, there being no additional evidence.  He accepted there was  no
    evidence of employment, either at present or previously, and  that  the
    appellant had a sister and brother-in-law in the  United  Kingdom.   He
    was unable to take me to any other evidence of other ties the appellant
    might have in the United Kingdom beyond evidence of the  qualifications
    he had obtained.  He drew attention to the fact that the appellant  had
    continued to attend meetings of AA  but  accepted  that  there  was  no
    evidence material before me to show there  had  been  a  reconciliation
    between the appellant and his wife.

16. Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant continued to be at risk and  that
    there was nothing in his favour to suggest that,  given  the  preserved
    finding  at  paragraph  [32],  that  his  deportation  would   not   be
    proportionate.  He submitted to the contrary, the  Secretary  of  State
    had made out his case.  In response, Mr Bisson drew my attention to the
    OASys Report at page 129 of the appellant's bundle and also the Rule 35
    report referred to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

17. Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:-

         '27.-    (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an
             EEA decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                  even in the absence of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             ...

             (8)  A court or Tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

18. It is important to note Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at [40]

         "I have to say that I have considerable difficulty  with  what  was
         said by the Advocate General in relation to rehabilitation. In  the
         first place, it had no, or very little, relevance to the  questions
         referred to the Court, which concerned the meaning  of  "imperative
         grounds of public security". Secondly, it is only  if  there  is  a
         risk of reoffending that the power to expel arises [emphasis added]
         It is illogical, therefore, to require the competent authority  "to
         take account of factors showing that the decision adopted (i.e., to
         expel) is such as to prevent the risk of re-offending", when it  is
         that very risk that gives rise to the power to make that  decision.
         Secondly, in general "the conditions  of  [a  criminal's]  release"
         will be applicable and enforceable only  in  the  Member  State  in
         which he has been convicted and doubtless imprisoned. ..."

19. The sentence highlighted is confirmed at paragraph [55].

20. In this case, there is a preserved finding of fact that  the  appellant
    does present a risk of reoffending and  that  he  presents  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat. It is thus necessary to go  on
    to consider whether the decision to deport  him  is  proportionate,  an
    assessment to be undertaken applying principles of EU  law  and  noting
    that it is  for  the  respondent  to  demonstrate  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that it is so.

21. In assessing proportionality, I consider that significant weight has to
    be attached to the threat the appellant poses to women.

22. I have considered whether the appellant's health would be a problem  on
    removal to Sri Lanka but I find that it would not.  The findings of the
    judge in the  First-tier  with  respect  to  the  Rule  35  report  are
    sustainable and permission to challenge them was not granted.  There is
    in any event nothing to show from the Rule 35 report that he is at  any
    continuing problem owing to ill health.  Further, there is no  evidence
    that he would be at risk of ill-treatment on return nor  is  there  any
    real evidence of mental ill health.  As Mr  Bisson  conceded,  and  was
    agreed,  the  OASys  Report  which  refers  to  suicidal  ideation  was
    completed on 1 February 2017.  That is over  two  years  ago  when  the
    appellant was in detention.  At best, this is an indication that at the
    time he had considered suicide but there was insufficient  evidence  to
    show that he has any continuing  mental  health  problems  which  would
    require treatment still less that that treatment would not be available
    in Sri Lanka.

23. Other than the fact that the appellant  has  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom there is insufficient evidence  from  them  to  show  any  ties
    between them over and above the fact of the biological relationship, or
    how any relationship would be affected by the deportation.  There is no
    proper evidence from the appellant to show that being able to remain in
    contact with them in the United Kingdom is a matter which should attach
    weight.  There is therefore little or no evidence of  significant  ties
    to the United Kingdom, it being conceded  that  the  appellant  is  not
    employed here.  It is evident from the previous determination and  from
    the appellant's previous evidence that the relationship between him and
    his wife had broken down.  Thus I accept that he made statements to the
    effect that at least he would seek to rekindle the relationship, though
    there is nothing from him or her to confirm that that has occurred.

24. In summary therefore I conclude that given the  lack  of  ties  to  the
    United  Kingdom,  when  balanced  with  the  risk  that  the  appellant
    continues to present,  the  Secretary  of  State  has  shown  that  the
    appellant's deportation is proportionate and I  therefore  dismiss  the
    appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,  the  EEA  Regulations,  as  that
    decision is in all circumstances proportionate.



Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  16 August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


