
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2016                          |On 22 March 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Tuan Quang Nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of reference purposes hereafter the parties are referred to as
    they were when the appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Mr Nguyen appealed a decision of the respondent to make  a  deportation
    order against him dated  15  January  2015.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appeal.  The respondent sought and  was  granted  leave  to
    appeal  that  decision  submitting  that  the  judge  made  a  material
    misdirection in law when making the paragraph 398 assessment under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge looked at exceptional circumstances  (the
    old rule) rather than very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A which were implemented  into
    the Rules on 28 July 2014.  Furthermore the  judge  failed  to  make  a
    finding as to whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's
    partner and children to accompany him to Vietnam only making a  finding
    that it would be unduly harsh to  permanently  separate  the  appellant
    from his family by looking at the  circumstances  of  his  partner  and
    children were they to remain in the United Kingdom  without  him.   The
    judge failed to consider the public interest considerations  applicable
    in all cases when  looking  at  Article  8  through  the  lens  of  the
    exceptions expressed at Section 117C  of  the  2002  Act.   Family  and
    private life was established while the  appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

 3. In granting permission to appeal the judge doing so said  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge misdirected himself in law so far as  the  test
    under paragraph 398 was concerned and also that he  applied  the  wrong
    version of paragraph 399  which  led  to  the  apparent  "inconsistent"
    finding that paragraph 399 does not apply but  then  finding  that  the
    similar provisions expressed at Section 117C(5)(2) do apply.

 4. The judge granting permission went on to say that whilst the  appellant
    met the terms of exception 2 of the 2002 Act it is  arguable  that  the
    judge failed to consider whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's partner and children to accompany him to Vietnam.  Although
    this is not an explicit requirement of Section 117C (whereas it  is  in
    paragraph 399(a)) it is arguable that considering whether the effect of
    deportation on the partner and children would be unduly harsh  includes
    consideration of whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  family  to
    relocate to Vietnam.  In MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the Court of
    Appeal  equated  "exceptional  circumstances"  and   "very   compelling
    reasons"  and  it  is  apparent   that   the   judge   considered   the
    "exceptionality" test was met as well  as  exception  2.   However  the
    judge did not follow the approach laid down in Chege  [2015]  UKUT  165
    which involves taking into account the factors set out in Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act when considering "very  compelling  reasons"  over  and
    above those falling  within  paragraphs  399  and  399A.   He  did  not
    consider the factors set out in Section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act
    when coming to his  assessment  that  there  were  exceptional  factors
    outweighing the public interest in deportation.

 5. For these reasons the judge granting permission found it arguable  that
    if the judge erred in applying the wrong version of the Rules this  may
    have affected his approach throughout. It could not be  said  that  the
    judge would inevitably have come to the same conclusion had he  applied
    the correct version of the Rules and followed the Chege approach.

 6. Mr Norton on behalf of the respondent submitted that the  unduly  harsh
    test had not been properly considered and that if the correct test  had
    been applied there would have been a different result.

 7. The head note in the case of Chege is of assistance in relation to this
    appeal.  It states as follows:-

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:

         i.   is the appellant a foreign  criminal  as  defined  by  Section
             117D(2)(a), (b) or (c);

         ii.  if so, does he fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

         iii. if not are there very compelling circumstances over and beyond
             those  falling  within  399  and  399A   relied   upon,   such
             identification to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness  of  the
             criminality and taking into account the  factors  set  out  in
             Section 117B.

         Compelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a powerful and
         irresistible effect; convincing.

         The purpose of paragraph 398 is to recognise circumstances that are
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.

         It follows from this that if an appeal does not  succeed  on  human
         rights grounds,  paragraph  397  provides  the  respondent  with  a
         residual  discretion  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  exceptional
         circumstances where an appellant cannot succeed by invoking  rights
         protected by Article 8 of the ECHR."

 8. The criticisms made of the  judge's  decision  are  well-founded.   The
    structure of the decision is loose knit and it is not  clear  that  the
    judge has followed the step by step  procedure  that  is  necessary  in
    cases of this sort.  Having said that it is clear that the  judge  gave
    very careful consideration to the competing positions of the  appellant
    and respondent.

 9. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  without  entry  clearance  in
    2003.  He has never had substantive leave to remain.  His asylum appeal
    was refused. In May 2005 he was convicted of conspiracy  to  produce  a
    class  C  drug  namely  cannabis,  and  was  sentenced  to  24  months'
    imprisonment.  The F-tT judge found that the  appellant's  partner  and
    his two children aged 11 and 3 are all UK citizens and that  they  live
    together with the appellant.  The respondent has accepted that it would
    not be reasonable to expect  the  appellant's  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

10. A matter that struck a particular chord with the  judge  was  that  the
    deportation  order  was  not  issued  until  January  2014.  This   was
    approximately eight and a half years after the appellant's  conviction.
    No explanation was offered as to why the respondent had  taken  such  a
    very long time to issue the order.

11. In paragraph 18 the judge recites what the respondent has and  has  not
    accepted namely that it would not be reasonable to expect the  children
    to leave the UK but (under paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b)) that it  would  not
    be unduly harsh for the  children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without the appellant on the basis that the appellant's  partner  would
    be able to care for them.  The judge found that the appellant's partner
    may well have difficulty managing as a single  working  parent,  making
    arrangements for the children to be transported to and from school etc.
     He continues that he is satisfied that if the appellant  was  deported
    there would be another family member who, with suitable adjustments  to
    her working day, would be able to look after the children.

12. The judge then proceeded to  consider  (in  paragraph  19)  the  public
    interest (in deportation) and whether  that  was  outweighed  by  other
    factors.  He makes reference to Section 117C of the 2002 Act and refers
    to two exceptions with regard to those who have been sentenced to  less
    than four years imprisonment.  Exception 2 applies in this  case.   The
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying
    partner and a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, and the effect of the appellant's deportation on  the
    partner or child would be unduly harsh.  The judge  gives  his  reasons
    for finding that exception 2 applies in paragraph 20 of  the  decision.
    He finds that the permanent separation of a family,  so  that  the  two
    children would be brought up in the absence of their father by a single
    working mother with a limited use of English, would  be  unduly  harsh.
    The harshness of the separation is compounded by the delay  in  issuing
    the deportation notice, so that the appellant's  daughter  (especially)
    has become used to the presence of her father and that the family  life
    of the family unit has become firmly established. It  is  a  reasonable
    assumption that given these circumstances the judge felt that it  would
    be unduly harsh for the wife and children to relocate to  Vietnam  with
    the appellant.

13. In paragraph 19 the judge refers to there being "an exceptional  factor
    to this appeal".  It  is  apparent  from  an  overall  reading  of  the
    decision that the delay by the respondent in taking any action  towards
    removing the appellant until many years  after  his  conviction  for  a
    period of less than four years weighed heavily with the judge. This led
    him to conclude  in  the  final  sentence  of  paragraph  19  that  the
    exceptional factors in this appeal  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.  Although he uses the word "exceptional"  it  is  apparent
    that having considered the conviction and sentence, the long period  of
    time before steps were taken to remove the appellant; his  relationship
    with a British citizen who has borne him  two  children  who  are  also
    British citizens, one of whom  is  now  11  years  old,  those  factors
    informed the judge in such a way that he concluded that there are  very
    compelling circumstances over and beyond those falling within  399  and
    399A.

14. As referred to in the headnote of Chege , compelling  as  an  adjective
    has  the  meaning  of  having  a  powerful  and  irresistible   effect;
    convincing.  The judge weighed all these matters and decided  that  the
    public interest in deportation was outweighed by other factors. He  was
    entitled to do so.

Notice of Decision

15. It is for the reasons set out above that I find  that  such  errors  as
    there are in the decision are not such that it  should  be  set  aside.
    The decision therefore stands.

16. There  is  no  application  for  an  anonymity  direction  and  in  the
    circumstances of this appeal I do not find that there is good reason to
    make one.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

