

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00835/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 June 2013                               |On 9 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between


                        CHEICK HAMED TIDIANE SANOUSSY
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by
For the Respondent:    Ms S Marsh   Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier  Tribunal  judge  De  Haney  and  Mr  A
    Armitage) dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    to make a deportation order against him pursuant to  section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of C�te d'Ivoire, born on 21 December  1978.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 April 1999 and  claimed  asylum.
    That application was refused by the respondent on 29 September 2000 and
    his appeal against that decision was  refused  on  20  June  2001.  The
    appellant remained in the United Kingdom and on  5  May  2011  he  made
    further submissions in  respect  of  his  asylum  claim.  Although  not
    accepting that he is a refugee, the respondent  granted  the  appellant
    Indefinite Leave to Remain exceptionally outside the rules.

 3. On 2 March 2012 the appellant was arrested at Dover trying to travel to
    France using a false French Passport. He was later  on  19  April  2012
    convicted in the Crown Court at  Canterbury  of  possession/control  of
    identity documents  with  intent,  and  was  sentenced  to  12  months'
    imprisonment and on 26 September 2012 a decision  was  made  to  deport
    him. The reasons given by the respondent for doing so are  set  out  in
    the refusal letter dated 26 September 2012.

 4. The appellant's case is that to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would be in breach of his right to respect for his private  and  family
    life, and thus contrary  to  this  country's  obligations  pursuant  to
    article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, given the length of  time  he
    has spent here; the nature and  content  of  his  ties  to  the  United
    Kingdom, as he had established a family  life  with  Ms  Naoelle  Amar-
    Bensaber, a French citizen; and, that their relationship was a "durable
    relationship" for the purposes of regulation 8 (5) of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  It  is  no  longer  claimed
    that his removal would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
    pursuant to the Refugee Convention or article 3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and Ms  Amar-
    Bensaber. They dismissed the appeal concluding:

          i. That neither the appellant or Ms  Amar-Bensaber  were  credible
             witnesses [31] and that despite being in the United Kingdom for
             almost 14 years, there was a surprising  lack  of  evidence  of
             what the appellant had done in  this  period  and  very  little
             corroborate his claim to have worked or attended courses [34];

         ii. That the appellant and Ms Amar-Bensaber were not in  a  durable
             relationship, or that they have been in such a relationship and
             living together since  2008  [35],  given  the  inconsistencies
             identified in their evidence  [36] and in the documents adduced
             [37]; the absence of any photographs of the  couple  [38];  the
             failure of the appellant to mention Ms Amar-Bensaber  or  their
             relationship in his submission to the respondent as to  why  he
             should not be deported [39]; the lack of  visits  by  Ms  Amar-
             Bensaber to the appellant while in prison  [39];  the  lack  of
             correspondence between the couple [40]; and, that  it  was  not
             credible that if they were living together he  would  not  have
             told her that he was intending to travel  to  Paris  [41]  (the
             journey during which he was apprehended);

        iii. That the relationship between the couple did not  constitute  a
             family relationship for the purposes of Article 8 [43];

         iv. That there was a presumption that the  appellant's  deportation
             was conducive to the public good [44],  that  provision  having
             been enacted by parliament and that due  deference  was  to  be
             given to the respondent's clear intentions [44]; and, that  his
             deportation was proportionate



 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that  decision.  That
    was rejected by First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre on  26  March  2013.
    The renewed application repeated the initial grounds, and submit that:


          i. That the panel had not addressed the submissions  made  to  it,
             although recording them [2], and was harsh in  their  rejection
             of the relationship between the appellant and his partner  [2],
             arguably erring introducing an error by raising  the  issue  of
             photographs which had not  been  raised  in  the  hearing,  the
             principal submission was that the  panel  had  erred  in  their
             assessment  under  article  8,  given  the   appellant's   long
             residence, the short sentence imposed, and the unlikelihood  of
             reoffending [2];


         ii. That the panel had failed to take into  account  [3]  that  the
             appellant was not a threat to the United Kingdom (recognised by
             the  sentencing  judge),  there  was  no   recommendation   for
             deportation and it is not appropriate to use deportation  as  a
             deterrent; that  the  judge  sentenced  the  appellant  to  the
             shortest imprisonment possible, just reaching the threshold for
             deportation; the length of the sentence and  the  circumstances
             of the offence; that the offence  was  one  of  stupidity,  and
             involved using false documents to leave the country and was not
             a serious crime; that there was no risk  of  reoffending;  that
             this was contrary to the approach commended in  MK (deportation
             - foreign criminal - public interest) [2010]  UKUT  281  (IAC);
             that the new immigration rules  are  contrary  to  the  correct
             approach to article  8  and  that  too  much  weight  had  been
             attached thereto, contrary to Izuazu ( Article 8 -  new  rules)
             [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) and Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  rules)
             Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) ;

        iii. That the panel failed to take into account positive factors  in
             the  appellant's  favour  [4]  or  to  take  into  account  his
             relationship with Ms Amar-Bensaber in  the  evaluation  of  his
             private life;

         iv. That the panel  failed  properly  to  address  the  appellant's
             private life including the 14 years spent here;

          v. That the panel gave more than deference  to  the  Secretary  of
             State [5] and that in the  circumstances,  deportation  was  an
             additional punishment [6]


 7. On 18 April 2013 I granted  permission  to  appeal  for  the  following
    reasons:


        I do not consider that it is properly arguable that, as it  appears
        to be put in the original grounds [2], the panel  reached  findings
        of fact which were not open to them. I consider that the panel  has
        given adequate reasons for their findings of fact  for  sustainable
        reasons.


        It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
        give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding   that   the   appellant's
        deportation was a proportionate  interference  with  his  protected
        private life and I grant permission to appeal on that basis.


   8. The respondent, in her letter of 2  May  2013,  pursuant  to  rule  24
      submits  that  the  panel  directed  itself  appropriately,  and  that
      although succinct, its findings were sustainable.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

   9. I heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr Nicholson relied on
      his  grounds  of  appeal,  submitting  that  the   panel   had   given
      insufficient  attention  to  the  judge's  sentencing   remarks,   the
      shortness of the sentence, the fact that this was a  sole  conviction,
      the lack of reoffending;  and,  had  failed  to  give  proper  or  any
      consideration to either Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
      [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) or MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT
      00393(IAC).  He submitted also that SS Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
      550 could be distinguished, given  the  very  serious  index  offences
      committed by the appellant in that matter.

  10. Ms Marsh submitted that there was no error of law, bearing in mind the
      limited content of the appellant's private  life,  the  strong  public
      interest in deporting criminals as shown by parliament's enactment  of
      the automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act  2007.  She
      submitted also that absent evidence of  a  strong  private  life,  the
      balance was topped in favour of deportation,  and  that  the  sentence
      imposed was to deter others.

  11. While the renewed grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  incorporate
      the original grounds, they do not make any further  challenge  to  the
      finding by the Firs-tier Panel that the appellant and Ms Amar-Bensaber
      had not established a family life together.

  12. Mr Nicholson made  no  substantial  submissions  with  regard  to  the
      findings of fact made by the panel.  I note that it is averred in  the
      grounds of appeal [2] that submissions made had not  been  taken  into
      account, but the submissions particularised [3]  relate  primarily  to
      the  assessment  of  proportionality.  The  panel  set  out  in  their
      determination [23-25] the submissions made on the factual issues,  and
      set out [36  -42]  their  reasons  for  concluding  that  neither  the
      appellant nor M Amar-Bensaber were credible witnesses.

  13. While it may be correct that the issue of lack of photographs was  not
      put to the appellant, it is not clear that this formed any significant
      part of the  panel's  reasoning.  The  panel  sets  out  elsewhere  in
      sufficient detail specific reasons for rejecting the evidence  of  the
      appellant and Ms Amar-Bensaber, noting in  particular  [39]  that  the
      appellant had not mentioned in his submissions dated 12  May  2012  to
      the respondent that he was in a  relationship  with  Ms  Amar-Bensaber
      despite it being his case that they had been living together for  some
      time, and accordingly it is not a material error capable of  affecting
      the outcome of the appeal.

  14. I do not consider that  the  description  of  the  findings  as  harsh
      discloses any error of law. I consider that the findings of fact  were
      open to the panel and that they have given,  in  their  determination,
      adequate reasons which were open  to  them  for  concluding  that  the
      appellant had not established a family life with his partner.

  15. I do, however, consider that the determination fails to disclose  what
      factors they considered in the appellant's favour and which fell to be
      considered. The appellant had been here for 14 years,  had  indefinite
      leave to remain, and was in  a  relationship  with  Ms  Amar-Bensaber,
      albeit one which was not sufficiently strong to constitute family life
      or a durable relationship.  There is no sufficient indication that the
      judge's sentencing remarks, or that propensity to re-offend was  taken
      into account.  While in light of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
      in SS (Nigeria ) it is clear  that  there  is  a  very  strong  public
      interest in deporting foreign criminals, it is  not  inevitable  that,
      had the panel taken the  factors  in  the  appellant's  interest  into
      account that the outcome would have been the same.

  16. As indicated at the hearing, I therefore set aside  the  determination
      of the First-tier Tribunal which has to  be  remade.  I  am,  however,
      satisfied that, as  I  also  indicated  at  the  hearing,  it  is  not
      necessary to remake any findings of fact as I am satisfied that  these
      were not infected by any error of law.

Remaking the determination

  17. In assessing whether the appellant's deportation is  proportionate,  I
      bear in mind the new rules introduced with effect from 7 July 2012.  I
      note  that  it  is  not  submitted  that  the  appellant   meets   the
      requirements of immigration rules and on the facts  of  this  case  he
      does not fall  within  the  provisions  of  paragraphs  399  or  399A.
      Following MF, Izuazu and Ogundimu I proceed to consider  the  case  in
      line with the principles established in the case law.

  18. I am satisfied that the appellant has established a  private  life  in
      this country, and that, given the length of time he  has  spent  here,
      some 14 years,  a  substantial  part  of  his  adult  life,  that  his
      deportation to Cote d'Ivoire would  engage  article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights convention. I accept that this is in accordance with  law,  and
      has the legitimate aim of the prevention of crime and disorder.

  19. In the appellant's favour, I note that he has no previous convictions,
      and while the greater part of his time in  this  country  was  without
      permission, the respondent nonetheless chose to grant  him  indefinite
      leave to remain outside the rules, and thus as a matter of discretion.
       Consequently, less weight falls to be attached to his remaining  here
      unlawfully.

  20. The length of the appellant's residence here is a  significant  factor
      in his favour, albeit that there is limited evidence of  what  he  has
      done during that period. That is perhaps inevitable,  given  that  his
      status here was for the greater part of that time  precarious  and  he
      would have been able to work lawfully or study.

  21. The appellant's relationship with his partner is evidently stable; its
      existence is accepted. I am satisfied that the appellant's deportation
      would interfere with that  relationship,  but  there  is  insufficient
      evidence to show that it would be severed entirely. Nonetheless, it is
      a factor in his favour.

  22. Turning to the  index  offence,  the  sentencing  remarks  from  Judge
      O'Mahony do state the sentence passed  is  the  least  that  could  be
      imposed, but, importantly, taking into account the guidelines. He was,
      evidently, not satisfied that he should depart from them and impose  a
      lower sentence than indicated by the guidelines. There is no  evidence
      before me of any successful appeal against that sentence.

  23. That said, the judge did say that the appellant was not  a  threat  to
      the security of the United Kingdom, but that is not  determinative  of
      whether it is proportionate to deport him. As Mr Nicholson  submitted,
      the  appellant's  crime  is  not  a  particularly  serious  crime,  as
      indicated by the sentence imposed. The appellant did plead guilty  and
      has shown remorse for his actions. There is little  or  no  indication
      that the appellant would re-offend. I accept also that there  was  not
      indication that the passport  was  obtained  in  an  attempt  to  gain
      financially and I note, also in the appellant's favour, that this  was
      an isolated offence.

  24. That said, it would have been obvious to the appellant that he was not
      entitled to use the passport in question. His actions in doing so show
      an element of disregard for the law  and  he  deliberately  chose  his
      course of action.

  25. The appellant will, I accept, be deported to a country  where  he  has
      not lived for some 14 years but there has been little evidence of  the
      difficulties he may face. It is, nonetheless, a factor  which  I  take
      into account.

  26. In SS (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal considered  in  particular  [53-54
      the weight to be attached to the public interest in deporting those to
      whom section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies.

  27. Mr Nicholson seeks to distinguish SS (Nigeria) on  the  basis  of  the
      significantly more serious offending by the appellant in that case who
      had been sentenced to three concurrent terms of 3 years'  imprisonment
      for dealing in drugs. There is some merit in that  submission;  it  is
      not suggested in SS (Nigeria) that  the  relative  seriousness  of  an
      offence is not a  factor,  but  what  cannot  be  disregarded  is  the
      parliament has clearly expressed that the imposition of a sentence  of
      one year's imprisonment is such that the public interest is injured if
      the individual (if a foreign national) is not deported.

  28. There is little merit in the submission that the sentencing judge  did
      not recommend deportation; I am satisfied  that  he  would  have  been
      aware of the automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act and  the
      consequences of imposing a sentence of 12 months' duration. Similarly,
      there is little merit in the submission that deportation is in  effect
      double punishment or that it should not be used as a deterrent.

  29. While I note that the appellant in SS(Nigeria) had lived in the United
      Kingdom for a shorter period than this appellant, in that case, family
      life was in issue, but it is not in issue here.

  30. I consider that in this case, there is a significant  public  interest
      in deporting the appellant.  He  has  been  sentenced  to  a  term  of
      imprisonment of 12 months, and I consider  that,  notwithstanding  the
      facts of his offending, that, in light of the pressing public interest
      in deporting foreign criminals, considerable weight is to be  attached
      to that factor.  I consider that, balancing that with the  factors  in
      his favour which are set out above, and taking into  account  all  the
      submission and evidence put forward on his behalf, that the respondent
      has satisfied me that deporting the  appellant  to  his  home  country
      would be a proportionate interference with his rights under article  8
      of the Human Rights Convention.  I therefore dismiss his appeal.

SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside that decision


    2. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it


      Signed                                             Date 9th July 2013



      J K H Rintoul
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal

