

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/00774/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Birmingham                              |Decision signed:   08.12.2014|
|on    08.12.2014                              |sent out:     09.12.2014     |

                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                                     I K
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Natalie Wilkinson, (counsel instructed by TRP)
For the respondent: Mr Neville Smart


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lee North and a lay member), sitting at  Stoke-on-Trent
    on 16 June, to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen  of  the
    Ivory Coast, born 15 October 1978, who had been taken by his mother,  a
    native of the Cameroons, to live in that country  when  he  was  little
    more than a year old, and had lived there till he left  for  France  in
    2006. The appellant had appealed a deportation order signed on 10 April
    2014, following his conviction and sentence of 18 months'  imprisonment
    for blackmail, on 10 May 2013. He claimed to be a homosexual,  who  had
    suffered persecution for his sexual  orientation  before  he  left  the
    Cameroons, and would face a real risk of doing  so  again  if  returned
    there, or to the Ivory Coast.



 2. Permission was given mainly on the ground that the panel had failed  to
    follow the guidelines in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31  on  the  need,  or
    otherwise for homosexuals (or for that matter anyone else  entitled  to
    the protection of the Refugee Convention)  to  use  discretion  in  the
    exercise of those rights protected by it. They  dealt  with  this  (see
    paragraph 14) on the basis that the appellant had "... both before  and
    after his arrival in the UK chosen to exercise in homosexual  activity,
    if at all, discreetly".

 3. Whether or not there is an  arguable  case  on  the  ground  for  which
    permission was given must depend to  a  great  extent  on  the  panel's
    findings of fact, and the soundness of  them.  Miss  Wilkinson's  first
    point on this aspect was on the way the panel had dealt at paragraph 16
    with the findings in  the  medical  report,  made  as  long  ago  as  5
    September 2006 by Dr Michael Nelki MRCS.

 4. Dr Nelki had found 17 separate areas of trauma on the appellant's body,
    besides a series of stretch marks on his back,  which  were  likely  to
    have been the result of changes in his weight. His general  conclusions
    were that

       The different types of scars  of  different  shapes  and  sizes  over
       different parts of the body indicate a variety of trauma which  would
       be difficult to explain other than from  different  traumas  such  as
       from beatings. ... [the] variety of different types of scars ...  are
       entirely consistent with the description he gave for their causes.

    Dr Nelki defines his terms at appendix C by reference to  the  Istanbul
    Protocol: "consistent with" means  that  the  lesion  could  have  been
    caused by the trauma described, but is non-specific and there  are  few
    other possible causes; "highly consistent" means  that  it  could  have
    been caused by the trauma described, and there are few  other  possible
    causes.

 5. The panel dealt with this evidence at paragraph 16, by saying  that  Dr
    Nelki found the marks on the appellant consistent with the cause given,
    which from appendix C meant that they "... could have  been  caused  by
    the trauma described but there are many other possible  causes".  While
    it might have been more helpful if Dr Nelki had stuck to the  terms  in
    the Istanbul Protocol, in my view the  panel  needed  to  look  at  the
    substance of what he said.

 6. It is clear from  Dr  Nelki's  use  of  the  expression  "difficult  to
    explain" that what he  actually  meant  by  "entirely  consistent"  was
    something at least much  closer  to  "highly  consistent"  than  merely
    consistent. Probably, without trying  to  read  too  much  between  his
    lines, his view was that, taken together, the appellant's scars  should
    be seen in this way, whatever view might  be  taken  of  each  of  them
    individually.

 7. Even that would certainly not  have  been  decisive  on  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant had suffered persecution as he claimed for
    his orientation in the Cameroons, so making  it  less  likely  that  he
    would adopt discretion as a matter of choice, whether returned there or
    to the Ivory Coast. The panel rightly pointed out  a  number  of  other
    obstacles he faced in establishing his credibility about anything,  not
    least his conviction by a jury for blackmail.



 8. However, the panel did need to set out Dr Nelki's findings fairly,  and
    to deal with their real effect, as I have tried to do at  4  and  6.  I
    should not wish for one moment to be taken as suggesting that, in their
    otherwise very well-reasoned  decision,  they  did  not  mean  to  deal
    entirely fairly with the evidence before them; but, for the  reasons  I
    have given, I am not persuaded that they succeeded in this,  though  it
    would help if the writers of medical reports did use the Istanbul terms
    at all times.

 9. The result must be an entirely fresh hearing of the whole appeal before
    another panel, which can most conveniently be arranged  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The panel must include a lay member, as in my  view  the
    appellant would have a justifiable grievance if he lost the opportunity
    of having as full a composition of the fresh panel as there was on this
    occasion.

Appeal , to be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal by a panel consisting  in
a full-time "salaried" judge, and a lay "non-legal" member

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



