
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00069/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 August 2017                      |On 17 August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MICHAEL NORBETT DIT IMBS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Halim, counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
                    Ptnrs, solicitors


                                  DECISION

   1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Mailer who, by a determination promulgated on 26 May 2017, allowed  Mr
      Imbs' appeal against a decision, said to have been  made  pursuant  to
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, that he  should  be  deported.
      That means, of course, that it is the Secretary of State  who  is  the
      appellant before the Upper Tribunal. However, as it will be  necessary
      to reproduce extracts  from  the  decision  of  Judge  Mailer,  it  is
      convenient to continue to refer to the parties as they were before the
      First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The judge concluded that, in determining the appeal, he  should  apply
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 and  not  those  of  2006.  His
      primary finding was that the appellant was entitled  to  benefit  from
      the highest level of protection, so that he could be removed  only  if
      there  were  imperative  grounds  of  public  security.  However,   he
      recognised that there was a dispute  between  the  parties  about  the
      level of  protection  available  to  the  appellant  and  so,  in  the
      alternative, considered the position of the  appellant  should  he  be
      entitled only to the intermediate level of protection, that  requiring
      there to be serious grounds of public policy and public  security  and
      he concluded that the outcome would be the same. At paragraph  175  of
      his determination the judge set out this clear finding of fact:
           "In considering the proportionality of the decision, I  find  on
           the evidence as a whole that the  appellant's  personal  conduct
           would not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
           threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society."
      And on that basis, the judge allowed the appeal.


   3. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  said
      this
           "It is argued the Tribunal erred in:
              a. Considering the appeal under  the  2016  Immigration  (EEA)
                 regulations and not the 2006 Regulations. This is arguable
              b. Finding  that  the  Appellant  had  established  10  years'
                 residence and consequently that imperative grounds  had  to
                 be established. This is linked to the previous ground
              c. Failing to give adequate reasons for its finding  that  the
                 Appellant is integrated. This is not arguable
              d.  Failing  to  take  the  seriousness  of  the   Appellant's
                 offending, in particular his drugs offending, into  account
                 when assessing  whether  the  Appellant  poses  a  genuine,
                 present and sufficiently serious threat. This is arguable
              e. Failing to engage with the margin of appreciation. This  is
                 not a matter with which the Tribunal can or  should  engage
                 and is not arguable.
                 ...
                 Clear and cogent reasons were given by the Tribunal...  for
                 the finding that the Appellant  had  established  permanent
                 residence. Adequate reasons  were  given...  for  accepting
                 that the Appellant had integrated. But it is arguable  that
                 the Tribunal  failed  to  pay  due  regard  to  the  nature
                 seriousness  and  extent  of   the   Appellant's   criminal
                 offending when assessing future threat."
   4. Although expressing a view on the arguability of those grounds,  Judge
      Ford did not restrict the grant of permission and so all  grounds  are
      available to the respondent to be pursued.


   5. At the beginning of the hearing this morning, there was discussion  as
      to what in fact was in issue  and  of  relevance  in  considering  the
      respondent's challenge to the decision to allow this  appeal.  It  was
      common ground and agreed between the parties, correctly, that even  if
      the judge had fallen into error in applying the 2016  Regulations  and
      even if he was wrong to find that the appellant was  entitled  to  the
      highest  level  of  protection  of  "imperative  grounds   of   public
      security", those errors would not be material, in the context of  this
      particular appeal, if he were correct in his findings upon application
      of the immediate level of protection and entitled  to  find  that  the
      appeal fell to be allowed on that basis. The respondent does not  seek
      to  challenge  the  finding  that  the  appellant  had  established  a
      permanent right of residence, for the reasons given by  the  judge  at
      paragraphs 111-113 of his determination.  Mr  Staunton  accepted  also
      that, unless the challenge brought  by  the  respondent  was  able  to
      establish that the finding of the judge that  the  appellant  did  not
      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat then  the
      challenge to the decision of the judge to allow the appeal  would  not
      be made out.


   6. Mr Halim submitted that it was not  material  whether  the  judge  was
      correct to apply the 2016 Regulations rather than the 2006 Regulations
      because, so far as is relevant to the facts of this appeal,  there  is
      no material difference between them.


   7. I am entirely satisfied that the judge was  wrong  to  find  that  the
      appellant qualified for the highest level of protection  from  removal
      on the basis that he had established ten years'  continuous  residence
      prior to the  relevant  decision.  The  continuity  of  residence  was
      interrupted by his imprisonment and even if, which I find very hard to
      accept to be a finding open to the judge, the 19 offences committed by
      the appellant between March 2011 when he was just  15  years  old  and
      November 2016 could somehow be swept away in order to allow a rational
      finding  of  integration,  on  the  judge's  own  findings  of   fact,
      continuity of residence was broken also by the period,  which  was  in
      excess of six months, that he spent with his father  in  Senegal.  The
      judge considered that  it  was  the  2016  Regulations  that  applied.
      Regulation 3 provides, so far  as  is  relevant,  that  continuity  of
      residence for the purpose of the regulations is not broken by  periods
      of absence from the United Kingdom which do not exceed six  months  in
      total in any year.





   8.  In her grounds for  seeking  permission  to  appeal,  the  respondent
      asserts that  the  judge  failed  to  strike  a  balance  between  the
      seriousness of the appellant's past offending and the risk of it being
      repeated. The judge failed to appreciate the serious  nature  of  that
      offending:
           "It is  respectfully  submitted  that  even  a  slight  risk  of
           reoffending could constitute a genuine, present and sufficiently
           serious  threat  particularly  as  the  Appellant's  offence  of
           possession of a controlled class  A  drug  undermines  the  very
           fabric of society. As such the FTTJ findings amount to an  error
           in law and that the Appellant doers represent a genuine  present
           and serious threat to one of the fundamentals of society..."


   9. Developing those grounds this morning, Mr Staunton submitted that  the
      judge had failed to consider the appellant's propensity to offend and,
      given that the appellant has been convicted on 9 occasions of a  total
      of 19 offences between 2011 and 2016 the  judge  fell  into  error  in
      finding that there was no risk of the appellant reoffending. He argued
      that absent from the reasoning of the judge is any indication that  he
      weighed the significance of the offending.  Mr  Staunton  pointed  out
      that at paragraph 171 the judge said:
           "There  is  no  evidence  produced  that  the  appellant  has  a
           propensity to re-offend..."
      But the evidence of that  propensity  was  provided  by  the  list  of
      convictions accumulated by the appellant that was before the judge. It
      is plain from how the respondent expressed  herself  in  the  decision
      under challenge that heavy reliance was paced upon her analasys of the
      appellant's history of offending to establish a propensity  to  commit
      further offences in the future.


  10. In response, Mr Halim submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  the
      judge had made no error of law.  The  judge  had  identified  all  the
      relevant facts and the material relied  upon  by  the  respondent  and
      reached the conclusion that the appellant did not represent a genuine,
      present and sufficiently serious threat. This, he said was a  thorough
      and rigorous determination from which it was clear that the judge  did
      not ignore the  appellant's  convictions  but  took  them  fully  into
      account. The judgement, he said, must be read as a whole and  when  it
      is it is entirely clear why the judge reached the conclusions he  did.
      In particular, Mr Halim emphasised that the judge had not said  simply
      that there was "no evidence" that the appellant had  a  propensity  to
      reoffend. The judge said also that the appellant  was  remorseful  and
      had been taught a lesson by the sentence of imprisonment  imposed  for
      his last offence. The judge discussed also the strong family links and
      relationships that fed into the appellant's resolve.


  11.  Mr  Halim  concluded  his  oral  submissions  by  pointing  out  that
      permission had been granted on the basis that the judge had failed  to
      take the seriousness of the appellant's offending into account but  it
      is clear from a reading  of  the  determination  that  the  judge  did
      precisely that.


  12. Having summarised those submissions, I next consider the determination
      in detail. It is clear that the judge did not overlook the fact of the
      appellant's criminal convictions. At paragraph 4 he recorded that  the
      respondent was placing reliance upon those  convictions  in  advancing
      her case:
           "... between 24 March 2011 and 21 November 2016 he committed  19
           offences resulting in nine convictions. Five of  these  included
           theft, seven related to the police,  courts  and  prison.  There
           were drug offences, the most serious of which was  three  counts
           of possession of Class A drugs in October and November 2016  for
           which he received a total sentence of 21 weeks' imprisonment."
      Next, the judge had regard to the Police National Computer  report  of
      the appellant's convictions and added this:
           "Between March 2011 and  November  2016  he  was  convicted  for
           offences including burglary  and  theft...  His  convictions  in
           November 2016 related to possession of Class  A  drugs;  cocaine
           and heroin. He was also convicted  of  possessing  an  offensive
           weapon in  a  public  place,  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to
           imprisonment for five weeks."
      The judge then summarised the respondent's case, as he  understood  it
      to be,  as follows
           "He had continued to offend without being deterred  by  previous
           convictions or sentences. He had a lack of regard  for  the  law
           and a lack of remorse for his offending behaviour.  He  did  not
           have an understanding of the negative impact  of  his  offending
           behaviour on others.
           Moreover, he was unable to abide by any conditions  placed  upon
           him by the courts. He had failed to comply with the requirements
           of the courts. He accordingly posed a risk to the public.
           He had failed to  provide  evidence  that  he  had  successfully
           completed any programmes such as  an  enhanced  thinking  skills
           course or a drugs course which could possibly reduce the risk of
           his re-offending in the future.
           Nor had he provided any evidence of employment in the UK or that
           he would be able to support himself financially. Accordingly  it
           was considered that he would resort to  criminal  activities  to
           support himself."
      The judge recorded also the submission advanced by the respondent that
      the serious grounds test was met and that it would  be  reasonable  to
      expect the appellant to  return  to  France  where  his  prospects  of
      rehabilitation would not be compromised.


  13. Having first explained why it had not been established that there were
      established imperitive grounds of national security such as to justify
      the decision,  the  judge  considered  the  position  if  instead  the
      appellant were entitled only to the intermediate level of protection:
           "In the event that my conclusion that the appellant is  entitled
           to the highest level of protection is not correct, I  go  on  to
           consider whether there are serious grounds of public  policy  or
           security  justifying  his  removal.  In  accordance   with   the
           Regulations, the appellant must represent a genuine, present and
           sufficiently serious threat to one of the fundamental  interests
           of society.
           The appellant accepts (and I find) that his previous convictions
           are serious. The most serious were  committed  when  he  was  an
           adult - possession of class A drugs -for which  he  received  an
           associated custodial sentence of 21 weeks. However, as submitted
           by (counsel for the appellant), there were  no  convictions  for
           intent to supply, a far more serious offence.
           There  is  no  evidence  produced  that  the  appellant  has   a
           propensity to re-offend. He claimed  to  be  remorseful  stating
           that the custody taught him a lesson. Even though such  a  claim
           may be self serving, I do accept that he feels  ashamed  of  his
           offending behaviour and in particular how it  has  affected  his
           mother.
           I find that he has strong links including family  links  in  the
           UK. I have had regard to statements from his 13 year old sister,
           Roxanne, who stated that he has helped her out so much in  life.
           He is the only male in the family  to  whom  she  can  turn  for
           guidance. It is in Roxanne's best interests for the appellant to
           remain in the UK, which is a  consideration  to  be  taken  into
           account in accordance with Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations."
      After which the judge  made  his  determinative  finding,  as  I  have
      already mentioned:
           "In considering the proportionality of the decision, I  find  on
           the evidence as a whole that the appellant's  personal;  conduct
           would not represent a genuine present and  sufficiently  serious
           threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society."


  14. It is clearly apparent that the conclusion that the appellant did  not
      represent  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious  risk   was
      predicated upon the judge being satisfied that he represented no  risk
      of reoffending. That conclusion was founded upon the view expressed by
      the judge that:
           "There  is  no  evidence  produced  that  the  appellant  has  a
           propensity to offend..."
      That view is simply unsustainable because there plainly  was  evidence
      that the appellant had a propensity to offend, as demonstrated by  his
      record of prolific offending between 2011 and 2016.  His  most  recent
      offence of possession Class A drugs, those being cocaine  and  heroin,
      are typically characterised by the acquisitive offending committed  by
      those who need to acquire such drugs. In her decision letter,  between
      paragraphs 27-44 respondent had set out a lengthy, detailed and cogent
      account  of  the  reasons  for  considering  that  the  appellant  did
      represent a significant risk of re-offending. In brief summary:
           "Your convictions indicate an anti-social attitude  towards  the
           public and community...
           You have been convicted of 3 drug offences relating to  class  A
           drugs... Individuals who form a dependency upon Class A drugs...
           are invariably  driven  to  commit  crime,  sometimes  involving
           violence, in order to support their addiction...
           ... you were convicted of  assault  a  constable  in  which  you
           received a community order...
           The consequences for all  those  involved  in,  or  touched  by,
           violent  crime  are  enormous.  The  nature  of   your   offence
           demonstrates that you have the potential to act  violently  when
           challenged. You have demonstrated through your actions that  you
           are capable of causing harm to  others...  The  nature  of  your
           offence shows that you have the potential to act violently  with
           no provocation...
           You  displayed  reckless,  risk-taking  behaviour  and  lack  of
           thought for the consequences your actions may have  on  yourself
           and  others  when  you  chose  to  drive  a  car  without  valid
           insurance. Driving without insurance is  not  only  illegal  but
           insurance companies are forced to pass on the  costs  associated
           with such claims to other drivers by increasing premiums...
           You have convictions for burglary and  theft  from  a  dwelling.
           Burglary  is  a  serious  offence  that  often  has  long   term
           consequences for the victim...
           The fact  that  you  have  continued  to  offend  without  being
           deterred by previous convictions or sentences indicates that you
           have a lack of regard for the law, a lack of  remorse  for  your
           offending behaviour, and a lack of understanding of the negative
           impact your offending behaviour has on others...
           ... Your offences relate to failing to surrender to  custody  at
           appointed  time,  commission  of  further  offences  during  the
           operational period of a suspended  sentence  order,  failure  to
           comply with the community requirements of a  suspended  sentence
           order and you have committed a  number  of  offences  whilst  on
           bail.
           These convictions quite clearly show  that  you  are  unable  to
           abide by any conditions placed upon you by  the  courts.  It  is
           considered that your history  of  failure  to  comply  with  the
           requirements of the court means you continue to pose a  risk  to
           the public.
           Your convictions indicate an  established  pattern  of  repeated
           acquisitive offending...
           There is no evidence of you have addressed (sic) the issues that
           led  you  to  behave  in  this  manner.  In  the  light  of  the
           aforementioned, it is considered that you pose a significant and
           unacceptable risk of harm to the public in the United Kingdom...
           All the available evidence indicates that you have a  propensity
           to re-offend and that  you  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
           sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  public  to  justify  your
           deportation on grounds of public policy.
           Given the nature of the offences you committed  and  the  threat
           that you pose to society, it is considered that, even if you had
           permanent residence  as  a  result  of  five  tears'  continuous
           residence in the United Kingdom.... The requirement for  serious
           grounds of public policy would be satisfied."


  15. Although, as I  have  mentioned  above,  the  judge  referred  to  the
      respondent's case, there is no indication that the judge engaged  with
      this extensive reasoning on the basis  of  which  the  decision  under
      challenge was arrived at. The judge said that  he  accepted  that  the
      appellant felt ashamed of his offending behaviour but, as can be  seen
      from what the judge said at paragraph 34 of his determination, this is
      precisely what the appellant had said after his very first  conviction
      in 2011 but, demonstrably, that was not something that  prevented  him
      from continuing to commit criminal offences.


  16. For these reasons, I am satisfied that it was a error of law  for  the
      judge to approach his determinative assessment on the basis that there
      was no evidence produced  that  the  appellant  had  a  propensity  to
      reoffend. As at the date of the appeal hearing before the  judge,  the
      appellant remained in immigration detention and so the absence of  any
      further offending since that for which  he  had  received  his  prison
      sentence in November 2016 was not a particularly telling factor in his
      favour. As the judge has not engaged with  the  lengthy  and  detailed
      reasoning offered by the respondent in support of her view that  there
      was clear and compelling evidence of  a  propensity  to  re-offend,  I
      cannot be confident that the outcome of the appeal would have been the
      same had the judge done  so.  Therefore,  the  error  of  law  I  have
      identified was a material one.


  17. For these reasons the decision of Judge Mailer  to  allow  the  appeal
      cannot stand. Mr Halim made clear that if this was to be  the  outcome
      of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal, then as  the  appellant  has  now
      been released on immigration bail there was more to be said before the
      decision on his appeal could be remade. I accept,  given  the  serious
      consequence to the appellant that are in play in these proceedings, he
      should have  the  opportunity  to  provide  evidence  of  his  current
      circumstances. Therefore, the appeal of the respondent  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal succeeds to the extent that the decision and determination of
      Judge Mailer are set aside and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.
Summary of decision:

  18. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer made a material error of law and  his
      decision to allow the appeal is set aside


  19. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.



Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 16 August 2017

