

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00352/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Determination Promulgated            |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 26th January 2015                 |On 27th January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR V M H
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr C Talacchi (Direct Access Counsel)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   Although the First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction, as  there
    are children involved who may be adversely affected by publicity I make
    one.

2.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with
    permission, against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bell
    who in a determination  promulgated  on  24th  July  2014  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State  to
    revoke a deportation order made  in  August  2011.   For  the  sake  of
    continuity I shall refer to Mr V M H as the Appellant and the Secretary
    of State as the Respondent in this determination.

3.   The background to this case is  that  the  Appellant  is  a  Vietnamese
    national who came to the UK, illegally, in 2006.  He has  a  less  than
    impressive immigration history and also after his  arrest  for  growing
    cannabis in May 2010 he absconded and breached his bail conditions.  He
    was arrested for motoring offences in  2011  and  so  faced  the  drugs
    charges.  He was convicted in May  2011  and  sentenced  to  18  months
    imprisonment. The sentencing Judge also recommended deportation.

4.   On the date of his conviction his Vietnamese partner was  pregnant  and
    gave birth to their son on 11th August 2011.  His partner already had a
    daughter born in 2009 to a British man with whom  she  was  then  in  a
    relationship.  That daughter is British and  she  has  regular  contact
    with her father and grandmother.  The Appellant's partner and son  have
    discretionary leave to remain until 2016, it is believed because of her
    parental role in relation to her British daughter.

5.   The Secretary of State made a deportation order on  31st  August  2011.
    The Appellant did not appeal.  However, he made representations on 24th
    February 2012 and 26th March 2013.  They led to a decision to refuse to
    revoke the deportation order taken on 24th October 2013.

6.    The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  argue  that  the  Judge
    misdirected  herself   in   finding   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances given the nature and gravity of  the  offence,  the  fact
    that the partner and son  were  not  settled  and  that  the  partner's
    daughter could be cared for by her British father.

7.   The Judge took account of the  Appellant's  poor  immigration  history,
    his absconding and the gravity of his offending at paragraph 37 of  the
    determination.

8.   The Judge noted that  the  partner's  daughter  had  contact  with  her
    British father but that she lived with her mother and the Appellant who
    had a significant role in her life.  Clearly the desirability  of  that
    child living with her mother was accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State
    when she granted her discretionary leave to  remain.  The  Judge  noted
    that if the Appellant were deported the two children and partner  would
    be unable to go to Vietnam with him  and  that  would  be  against  the
    children's best interests.

9.   The Judge was clearly aware of the provisions of  paragraphs  397,  398
    and 399 of the Immigration Rules and the case of  MF  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192 because she refers to them.

10.  The Judge took note of the fact that the Appellant  has  been  of  good
    character since his release in 2012.

11.  Reading the determination as  a  whole  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge
    applied the law correctly.  She understood that  paragraph  397  states
    that absent one of the exceptions in paragraph 399 it will only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation  will
    be outweighed.  The Judge found there to be exceptional  circumstances,
    gave her reasons for so finding and allowed  the  appeal.   While  that
    conclusion may not have been one that all Judges would have reached, it
    was nevertheless open to her having heard the evidence.

12.  The grounds amount to no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    conclusion that there were exceptional circumstances and a  restatement
    of the Secretary of State's case.  They do not reveal an error of  law.
    Mr Harrison did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

13.  The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

14.  As I indicated at the beginning of this  determination,  as  there  are
    young children involved in this case I make an anonymity  direction  to
    protect their interests.

    Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14(1)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant,
    his partner and her two children are granted anonymity.  No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or  any
    member of their family. This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to contempt of Court proceedings.



Signed        Dated 26th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

