
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00877/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 15th August 2014                        |On 24th October 2014           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                          david albert osagie-erese
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahluwalia, Counsel instructed by Immigration
Advisory
     Services UK
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Nigeria born on 18th  January  1967.
    He claims to have arrived in the UK in August 1987.   On  23rd  October
    2008 he was convicted at Woolwich Crown Court of possession of a  false
    identity document with intent, fraud, and two counts  of  making  false
    representations to obtain benefit for which he  was  sentenced  to  two
    years six months' imprisonment.  As a  consequence,  on  3rd  September
    2009 the Respondent made a deportation  order  against  the  Appellant.
    Earlier the Appellant had unsuccessfully appealed the decision to  make
    that deportation order.  Later the Appellant sought revocation  of  the
    order which application was refused for the reasons given in  a  Notice
    of Decision dated 25th April 2013.  The  Appellant  appealed  but  that
    appeal was dismissed by a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    reasons given in a determination dated 6th March 2014.   The  Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  31st  March  2014  such
    permission was granted.

 2. At an earlier hearing of this appeal before me on 29th May 2014  I  set
    aside its decision.  The appeal comes before me again to  re-make  that
    decision.

The Hearing

 3. At the hearing I heard oral evidence from the Appellant, the mother  of
    his two children named Catherine Wallis, and  two  acquaintances  named
    Linward Henly Campbell and Phillipa Josih.   The  first  two  of  these
    witnesses were cross-examined.  I also heard submissions from Mr  Duffy
    and Mr Ahluwalia.  There is recorded in my Record of  Proceedings  what
    was said in evidence and by way of submission.  I do not  need  to  set
    that out in detail in this Determination.

The Law

 4. Revocation of deportation order cases are to be decided  in  accordance
    with the provisions of paragraph 390 and 390A of HC 395 which refer  to
    paragraphs 398, 399, and 399A.  However, it has  been  the  Appellant's
    case throughout these proceedings that his deportation would amount  to
    a disproportionate breach of his right to enjoy a family life with  his
    two children.  I will limit myself to that issue.  Owing  to  the  date
    when this appeal was finally heard,  that  issue  must  be  decided  in
    accordance with the provisions of Sections 117A, 117B, and 117C of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  In particular, it is the Appellant's  case  that
    his deportation would be disproportionate because Exception 2  embodied
    in Section 117C(5) applies.  This states inter alia that the  Exception
    applies where the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of the  Appellant's
    deportation on the child would be unduly harsh.  If that is  the  case,
    the public interest does not require the Appellant's deportation.

Decision and Reasons

 5. What is not in dispute in this  appeal  is  that  the  Appellant's  two
    children are British citizens and qualifying children.  It was conceded
    by Mr Duffy at the hearing that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to relocate and settle  in  Nigeria  with  their  father,  and
    therefore I have to decide this case on the basis that if the Appellant
    is unsuccessful that will result in  a  long-term  physical  separation
    between him and his children.  It is trite law  that  any  decision  in
    respect of the children must be made  in  the  context  of  their  best
    interests being a primary consideration.

 6. The simple facts are that the Appellant has two children,  Joshua  born
    on 10th September 1999 and Renee  born  on  12th  April  2002.   It  is
    accepted by the Appellant that whatever relationship  he  enjoyed  with
    those children in the past came to an end completely when he  was  sent
    to prison in July 2008.  Indeed, the children did not even know that he
    had been sent to prison.  The Appellant  did  not  regain  his  freedom
    until he had completed his prison  sentence  and  subsequently  granted
    immigration bail in  January  2010.   To  begin  with,  thereafter  the
    Appellant had no contact with his children as it was  opposed  bitterly
    by their mother.  Contact was only resumed as a result  of  proceedings
    in the Family Court.  There was an interim order made on 24th September
    2013, and a final order made on 4th December 2013 whereby the Appellant
    has contact with the children throughout  every  alternative  week-end;
    for one day on other week-ends; and throughout alternative weeks during
    the school holidays.  The children's mother, Catherine Wallis,  is  now
    supportive of such contact and does not seek to  restrict  it  strictly
    according to the terms of the court order.  She is  now  more  flexible
    according to the  needs  of  the  children  as  a  result  of  her  own
    substantial health problems as set out in the letter of Dr Gomez  dated
    7th July 2014.  Although she has a partner, it is likely that she  will
    become more and more dependent upon the Appellant for the care  of  the
    children as her health deteriorates, particularly her sight.

 7. I accept the evidence of the Appellant that since  he  resumed  contact
    with his children he has been able  to  re-establish  his  relationship
    with them and that they are now close and that the  Appellant  plays  a
    significant part in the life of his children.  For example,  he  is  in
    contact with their schools as to whatever problems there may be  there.
    Although there was no specific evidence  before  me  of  the  potential
    damage to the children in losing contact with their father again,  such
    as a social worker's report, I consider it self evident that  it  would
    be disastrous for these children to  lose  contact  with  their  father
    again now that it has been re-established, particularly as they are  at
    an important age with regard to their emotional development.  For these
    reasons, I find that the Appellant's deportation would be unduly  harsh
    on his children.  I make that decision in the context  of  the  serious
    nature of the Appellant's offending, which resulted in  a  sentence  of
    two years and six months' imprisonment, mitigated by the fact that  the
    Appellant has not re-offended during the  period  of  now  almost  five
    years since his release.

 8. As I have found that Exception 2 applies, I must take the view that the
    public interest does not require the Appellant's deportation, and  that
    therefore little weight is to be attached to it.  In that event, I find
    that the public interest is outweighed the detrimental  effect  to  his
    children of his deportation.  I therefore  find  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would amount to a disproportionate breach of the Article  8
    rights of him and his children.

 9. Paragraph 399 of HC 395 does not apply because the  Appellant's  mother
    remains their principal carer.  However, having found  the  Appellant's
    deportation to be disproportionate, I find that to  be  an  exceptional
    circumstance outweighing the limited  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    public interest for the purposes of paragraph 390A of HC  395.   Taking
    into account the factors listed at paragraph 390 of  HC  395,  I  allow
    this appeal.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

11. I set aside the decision.

12. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  find  no
    reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton                      15th August 2014
