



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00853/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2015                            |On 4 January 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     SF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

       1. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
          (DRC).  He has a wife and  three  minor  children.   The  children
          were born in 2005, 2007 and 2009 in the United  Kingdom  (UK).   I
          have made an anonymity order in order to protect  the  privacy  of
          the children.

Background

       2. The background  to  this  appeal  is  lengthy  and  complex.   The
          appellant   claimed   asylum   on   arrival   in   2002.     After
          unsuccessfully appealing against the refusal of his  asylum  claim
          he became appeals rights exhausted in 2004.  On  18  January  2008
          the appellant was convicted of  two  counts  of  possessing  false
          identity documents and was sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment
          with  a  recommendation  for  deportation.   After  the  appellant
          unsuccessfully appealed against a deportation  decision  following
          this, a deportation order was signed against  him  on  21  October
          2008.  The appellant's wife entered the UK  in  2004  and  claimed
          asylum in 2005.  Her appeal against  the  refusal  of  her  asylum
          claim was also unsuccessful.


       3. There then followed an extended period in which the appellant  and
          his wife made a number of submissions as to why he should  not  be
          deported to the DRC, and why  they  should  be  granted  leave  to
          remain together with their three children.  On 16 April  2014  the
          SSHD treated the appellant's representations as an application  to
          revoke the deportation order and refused to do so.  On  that  same
          date the SSHD refused to treat the appellant's wife's  submissions
          as a fresh claim, together with those of their children.


       4. The appellant appealed against the SSHD's decision  to  refuse  to
          revoke the deportation order to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT).
          In a decision dated 14 August 2015, I allowed the  appeal  against
          the FTT decision dated 10 September 2014 to a limited  extent.   I
          accepted that the FTT was entitled to find that the appellant  did
          not face  a  real  risk  of  harm  for  reasons  relating  to  his
          political activities and / or his failed asylum seeker status  but
          that the FTT erred in law in failing to consider paragraph  399(a)
          of the Immigration Rules.  I decided  that  I  should  remake  the
          decision myself at an adjourned hearing

The issues

       5. It has been agreed that the issues before me are  now  limited  to
          the following:


                  i)  As  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  a  period   of
                     imprisonment of 12 months and it is  accepted  that  he
                     has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
                     eldest child, P, who is under the age  of  18  and  has
                     lived in the UK continuously for at least  seven  years
                     immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
                     decision, consideration must be  given  to  whether  it
                     would be unduly harsh for P to live in the DRC  and  if
                     yes, whether it would be unduly harsh for P  to  remain
                     in the UK without the appellant  (para  399(a)  of  the
                     Immigration Rules);


                 ii) As  the  appeal  is  against  a  refusal  to  revoke  a
                     deportation order if para 399 does not apply it whether
                     there  are  exceptional  circumstances  such  that  the
                     public interest in maintaining the deportation order is
                     outweighed by other factors (para 390A).

       6. In defining the above issues I have taken into  account  the  fact
          that P was born in the UK and has lived here continuously for  the
          first 10 years of her life.   She  may  therefore  register  as  a
          British  citizen  pursuant  to  section  1(4)   of   the   British
          Nationality  Act  1981  as  amended,  upon  making  the  necessary
          application.  P is however not a British citizen at present.


       7. At the last hearing I carefully explained  to  the  appellant  the
          relevant legal issues to be addressed and the  nature  and  extent
          of the evidence likely to  be  necessary  in  order  to  establish
          undue harshness  as  defined  and  explained  in  MAB  (para  399;
          "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC).  I provided  copies  of
          this case to the  appellant  and  highlighted  that  in  order  to
          determine whether the consequences for P  will  be  unduly  harsh,
          evidence will need to demonstrate that the  consequences  for  her
          will be excessively severe or bleak taking into  account  all  the
          circumstances.  This requires a  high  threshold  to  be  met  and
          involves  something   more   than   uncomfortable,   inconvenient,
          undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging
          consequences.  The hearing was adjourned to give the appellant  an
          opportunity to provide further up to date  evidence  and  for  the
          respondent to consider it.

Evidence

       8. The appellant has provided a number of  letters  to  support  his
          claim  that  he  should  not  be  deported.   He  has  sought  to
          distinguish his position from the appellant in MAB.


       9. He has however  provided  very  limited  evidence  regarding  his
          children. A recent letter from the children's school repeats that
          which has already been said: the children are in the same primary
          school and are in years 6, 4 and 2 respectively; they have a good
          attendance and have made lots  of  friends;   their  parents  are
          actively involved with the school.


      10. I also heard evidence from both the appellant and his wife.  They
          claimed that the children suffered from coughs and exzema.   They
          did not provide any medical evidence to support their  assertions
          that the children are 'unwell'.  The appellant's wife  also  told
          me that she has found it very difficult to cope since she lost  a
          baby a few years ago.  She described herself  as  'walking  dead'
          but confirmed that she has been able to work as a cleaner for  16
          hours a week since last year.

      11. After hearing evidence from the appellant and his  wife  I  heard
          submissions from Ms Brocklesby-Weller.  She invited  me  to  find
          that the  evidence  came  no  where  near  to  meeting  the  high
          threshold required by the 'undue harshness' test.  I  then  heard
          from the appellant who emphasised that upon return to the DRC  he
          would have no job, accommodation and no contacts and  this  would
          mean that the family  would  be  living  in  extremely  difficult
          circumstances.

      12. At the end of submissions, I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Legal framework

      13. The relevant legal framework to be applied is not in  dispute  and
          can be stated briefly.  The decision under appeal is a refusal  to
          revoke a deportation order.  The appropriate starting point  under
          the Immigration Rules is therefore to be found at paragraph 390.

                 "Revocation of deportation order
                 390.  An application for revocation of a deportation  order
                 will be considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances
                 including the following:
                 (i)   the grounds on which the order was made;
                 (ii)  any representations made in support of revocation;
                 (iii)  the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                       maintenance of an effective immigration control;
                 (iv)   the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                       compassionate circumstances.


                 390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the  Secretary  of  State
                 will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if
                 it does not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances
                 that the public interest  in  maintaining  the  deportation
                 order will be outweighed by other factors."

      14. Paragraph 398(a) applies here because the  appellant  has  claimed
          that his deportation would be contrary to Article 8  of  the  ECHR
          and he has been sentenced to between 12 months  and  less  than  4
          years imprisonment.


      15. It is then  necessary  to  consider  paragraph  399(a)  (the  only
          potentially relevant provision).  This applies if:

                 "the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who  is
                 in the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 (ii) the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                 immigration decision; and in either case
                 (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in  the
                 country to which the person is to be deported, and
                 (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
                 UK without the person who is to be deported..."

      16. The question for me is whether or not it  would  be  unduly  harsh
          for P to live in the DRC, the country to which her  father  is  to
          be deported.  If the answer to  that  is  yes  I  must  also  then
          consider whether it would be unduly harsh for  her  to  remain  in
          the UK without her father.  Although at the time of  the  decision
          a different  and  more  generous  version  of  the  relevant  rule
          applied it is common ground that I must apply the version  I  have
          just summarised, which has been in force since 28 July 2014.


      17. Since MAB was promulgated  another  Tribunal  decision  addressing
          the identical issue has been promulgated  -  KMO  (section  117  -
          unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  00543  (IAC).   KMO  takes  the
          same  approach  to  the  high  threshold  to   be   applied   when
          considering the meaning of 'unduly harsh' but finds that the  word
          'unduly'   requires   consideration   of   the   public   interest
          considerations contained  in  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').   I  prefer  the
          approach set out in MAB and apply its  reasoning  to  the  instant
          case.  I am satisfied that the MAB  approach  is  more  consistent
          with the ordinary meaning of the wording  of  the  relevant  rule.
          If there is ambiguity then the  stricter  reading  should  not  be
          adopted without particularly good reason.  Furthermore in my  view
          the MAB approach  reflects  the  proper  construction  of  section
          117C.  This provides at (3) that the public interest requires  C's
          deportation unless  Exception  2  applies.   Exception  2  applies
          where "...the effect of C's deportation on  the...child  would  be
          unduly harsh".   It follows that where  Exception  2  applies  the
          public interest does not requires  C's  deportation.   The  reason
          for this is that the public interest  has  already  been  factored
          into the parameters of  the  relevant  'Exceptions'  as  reflected
          within the Immigration Rules.

Discussion


      18. The appellant attempted to reargue before me  that  there  was  no
          deportation order or at least should not  have  been  one  because
          the sentencing judge  and  his  criminal  barrister  at  the  time
          indicated that his  offence  was  not  suitable  for  deportation.
          This claim is inconsistent with the judge's sentencing remarks  in
          which he recommended deportation.  The appellant has  also  sought
          to explain that his offending  was  not  serious  and  there  were
          mitigating circumstances.  The sentencing judge bore this in  mind
          but nonetheless sentenced the appellant to  12  months  impronment
          for possessing a false identity  document  with  intent.   In  any
          event the SSHD undoubtedly signed a deportation order against  the
          appellant in October 2008 and was entitled to do so.


      19. The appellant believes that he will be imprisoned upon  return  to
          the DRC because of his  perceived  political  opinion.   This  has
          already been considered and rejected, most recently  by  the  2014
          Tribunal.  The appellant has placed reliance upon  a  letter  from
          'Congo Support Project' dated 26 August 2015.   This  claims  that
          he has been a prominent member of the Congo Support Project  since
          2007, and has been at the 'forefront of  our  campaigning'.   This
          letter also refers to the general insecurity, lawlessness  in  the
          DRC which will be damaging to  the  well-being  of  the  children.
          This letter  merely  repeats  the  appellant's  claimed  political
          activities, much of which has already been rejected.

      20. The appellant's wife wished to highlight in  her  evidence  to  me
          that they believed that they were wrongly refused leave to  remain
          pursuant to the SSHD's 'legacy' exercise.  This has  already  been
          comprehensively addressed and rejected by  the  2014  Tribunal  at
          [27-31].

      21. I now turn to P's likely  circumstances  in  the  DRC  if  removed
          alongside her family members.  P was born in the UK in  June  2005
          and has remained in the UK ever since.  This means  that  she  has
          been continuously resident in the UK for over  10  years  and  can
          apply to be registered as a British citizen.

      22.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
          subsisting relationship parental relationship with P.   The  issue
          that divides the parties is whether or  not  it  would  be  unduly
          harsh for P to live in the DRC  with  her  family,  who  the  SSHD
          confirms will be removed together as a  family  unit.   The  fresh
          claim submissions on the part of  the  appellant's  wife  and  the
          three children have been refused.  This  means  that  P's  parents
          and siblings have no entitlement to remain  in  the  UK.   If  the
          appellant is deported, the family  will  will  be  returned  as  a
          family unit.

      23. The appellant's status upon  return  will  be  that  of  a  failed
          asylum seeker.  It has already been decided that he does not  face
          a real risk of harm for any reason  if  deported.   The  appellant
          and his wife have pointed out that they have no family or  support
          in  the  DRC  having  been  in  the  UK  since   2002   and   2004
          respectively.  Their residence in  the  UK  has  undoubtedly  been
          lengthy but their previous residence in  the  DRC  was  even  more
          lengthy.  The appellant's wife has been employed in the  UK  as  a
          cleaner notwithstanding the health concerns that she described  to
          me.  Those health concerns  were  not  supported  by  any  medical
          evidence before me and were rejected by the 2014  Tribunal.   Even
          if the appellant's wife does  suffer  from  the  difficulties  she
          claims they are  not  sufficiently  severe  to  prevent  her  from
          working.  I am satisfied that the appellant's wife has  been  able
          to work as a cleaner since 2014, when she claims she  was  granted
          permission to work by the SSHD.  The appellant clarified  that  he
          is able to work and has a LGV licence.   I  do  not  accept  their
          evidence that they will be unable to obtain jobs in the  DRC.   In
          so finding I note that the economic conditions are difficult.   As
          noted in BM and others DRC CG [2015] 293 (IAC) the DRC is  one  of
          the poorest countries in the world and life expectancy is  amongst
          the lowest in the word [7].   However  the  present  situation  in
          the DRC is  one  of  relative  peace  and  stability  [10].    The
          appellant and his wife have relevant experience in jobs  that  are
          available in the DRC. Their  experience  in  the  UK  and  English
          language skills should serve them well.  They may not have  family
          or  recent  contacts  to  turn  to  in  the  DRC  but  they   have
          demonstrated resilience over a number of difficult  and  uncertain
          years in the UK, with  few  contacts  and  in  a  country  with  a
          different language and society.  I am satisfied that they will  be
          able to financially  support  themselves  and  their  children  if
          returned to the DRC.

      24. I am satisfied that P belongs to a loving family unit who will  be
          able to support  her  emotionally  and  financially  in  the  DRC,
          notwithstanding the absence of any recent ties between the  family
          members and the DRC.  I  accept  that  the  human  rights  reports
          depict human rights  abuses  and  difficult  social  and  economic
          conditions in the DRC but note from the DRC policy  bulletin  that
          the UNHCR has been facilitating returns to the DRC, and  that  the
          present overall situation is one of relative peace  and  stability
          - see BM (supra).

      25. I fully accept that having never been to the  DRC  and  given  the
          obvious  differences  between  the  DRC  and  the  UK,   and   the
          prevailing conditions in the DRC, it is  likely  to  be  difficult
          for P to live in the DRC, even as part of her loving family  unit.
           She is likely to find  her  living  and  educational  environment
          strange and bewildering.  Her quality of life may well be less  in
          the DRC.  Access to healthcare is likely  to  be  more  difficult.
          The status quo will abruptly and significantly change.  Life  will
          be more uncertain for the whole family including P.

      26. The appellant has claimed that the children do not  speak  Lingala
          or French well.  This is suprising given their parents  both  come
          from the DRC and are  likely  to  have  used  those  languages  to
          communicate at home.   In  any  event  I  am  satisfied  that  P's
          parents will be able to assist her to integrate into  the  DRC  in
          all facets, including  linguistically,  educationally,  culturally
          and socially.  Her parents have told me that P does  not  wish  to
          go to the DRC and wants to remain in the UK with her  friends  and
          in the only community she has ever  known.   They  also  submitted
          that she will be deprived of an education in the DRC because  they
          will be unable to  pay  for  it.   I  note  from  the  information
          contained in the SSHD's decision which is sourced to the US  State
          Report for 2013 that the constitution and  law  provide  for  free
          and compulsory primary education to the age  of  16,  albeit  that
          contributions are expected to teachers' salaries.   This  provides
          that on average 11% of family spending goes to  education.   I  am
          satisfied that at least one of P's parents will be able to  obtain
          a job and that she will be able to access education  in  the  DRC,
          albeit their will be some  disruption  to  her  education  as  she
          changes between the systems in place  between  the  two  countries
          and the education she receives in the  DRC  may  be  of  a  lesser
          quality.

      27. Having considered all the relevant matters in the round  I  accept
          that the impact upon P being removed from the only  community  she
          knows in the UK and having to live in the DRC with the  inevitable
          uncertainty and hardship that this will entail is likely  to  have
          adverse effects upon her and to be harsh.  I accept that it  would
          be preferable and in P's best interests for her to remain  in  the
          UK.  I do not however find that this is a case in which it can  be
          said that P's best interests overwhelmingly  favour  remaining  in
          the UK - see EV Philippines v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

      28. The test that I must apply is a  stringent  one.  I  am  satisfied
          that P's parents shall be able to assist her and her  siblings  to
          adjust to life in  the  DRC  and  they  will  be  able  to  access
          appropriate adequate  accommodation  and  education  in  the  DRC.
          Whilst the effect of leaving the UK after such  a  lengthy  period
          of residence having been born in the UK  is  likely  to  be  harsh
          upon P, I am not satisfied that it will be unduly  or  excessively
          harsh taking into account all the  circumstances  of  P  including
          those individual to her as well as those she will have  in  common
          with her family members once residing in the DRC.  I therefore  do
          not find that 398(a) applies.

      29. I must go on to consider whether  it  would  be  proportionate  to
          deport  the  appellant  under  the  rubric  of   very   compelling
          circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in  399   (when
          applying the second  stage  for  the  purposes  of  para  398)  or
          exceptional  circumstances  (when  applying  390A  as  this  is  a
          refusal to revoke a deportation order case), for the  purposes  of
          Article 8 in light of the matters set out within  section  117  of
          the 2002  Act.   That  this  is  the  correct  approach  has  been
          explained in MAB at [32].  The decision under Article  8  must  be
          made through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  I  must
          nevertheless apply the five-stage Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 test.

      30. As explained above  family  life  will  not  be  interefered  with
          because the family unit shall move together.  Private life of  the
          family members will undoubtedly be interfered with.   The  crucial
          issue in this appeal is whether that interference is justified  in
          the public interest given the appellant's offending under  Article
          8(2). There is no doubt that the decision is  in  accordance  with
          the law and  for  a  legitimate  aim,  namely  the  prevention  of
          disorder or crime  and  for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and
          freedoms of others as well as  the  economic  well  being  of  the
          country.

      31. The public interest is entitled to be given great weight.  As  set
          out in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA at [40]:


                 "The requirement of assessment through the lens of the  new
                 Rules also seeks to ensure the decisions are made in a  way
                 that is properly informed by the considerable weight to  be
                 given to the public  interest  in  deportation  of  foreign
                 criminals, as declared by parliament in the  2007  Act  and
                 reinforced by the  Secretary  of  State  (as  the  relevant
                 Minister  with  responsibility   for   operation   of   the
                 immigration system), so as to promote public confidence  in
                 that system in this sensitive area."


      32. In considering whether there are very compelling circumstances  or
          exceptional circumstances, I must consider the best  interests  of
          the appellant's three minor children as  a  primary  consideration
          but  those  best  interests  may  be  outweighed  by  sufficiently
          weighty matters of the public interest - see ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD
          [2011] UKSC 4. As set out above  I  accept  that  the  appellant's
          deportation would not be in the P's  best  interests.   I  make  a
          similar finding regarding the other two children. I note that  the
          children have spent the entirety of some of their  most  formative
          years in the UK.  It will be in their best interests  to  preserve
          the status quo they have in the UK after such  lengthy  residence.
          On the other hand they shall be together as a loving  family  unit
          in the DRC with a family able and willing to  care  for  them  and
          financially support them.


      33. In carrying out my assessment  of  proportionality,  I  must  have
          regard to the factors set out in section 117C  of  the  2002  Act.
          First, the deportation of the appellant as a foreign  criminal  is
          in the public interest (s.117C(1)).  Secondly,  the  more  serious
          the offence committed by the  foreign  criminal  the  greater  the
          public  interest  in  his  deportation.  The  public  interest  is
          reflected in the well-known three facets, namely  the  seriousness
          of the offence, the expression of society's  revulsion  at  serial
          criminal  offending;  and  in  deterring  those  from   committing
          serious offences, (see, e.g. OH (Serbia) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
          694).  I acknowledge that the appellant's  offending  was  not  at
          the most serious end of the spectrum and included some  mitigating
          features as noted by the sentencing judge, and this resulted in  a
          sentence of  12  months  duration.   Such  a  sentence  cannot  be
          regarded  as  insignificant  and  is  demonstrative  of  society's
          revulsion at identity fraud.  The appellant  has  not  reoffended.
          He has been bailed recently in relation to concerns regarding  the
          asylum support he receives but I  attach  little  weight  to  that
          given that there  has  been  no  finding  /  conviction  /  charge
          regarding those  allegations.   The  appellant  has  however  been
          found to have consistently  told  untruths  regarding  his  asylum
          claim.


      34. Thirdly, section 117C(3) of the 2002 states that, in the  case  of
          a foreign  criminal  such  as  the  appellant  who  has  not  been
          sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,  "the
          public interest requires [that  individual's]  deportation  unless
          Exception 1 or  Exception  2  applies."  Exception  1  in  section
          117C(4) does not apply. It requires that the appellant  has  lived
          lawfully in the UK for most of his  life,  which  he  clearly  has
          not.  I have found that the effect of the appellant's  deportation
          on P (the only qualifying child) would not  be  unduly  harsh  and
          therefore Exception 2 does not apply.


      35. Fourthly, I must also have regard to any  relevant  factors  under
          section  117B.   I   note  that  the  maintenance   of   effective
          immigration control is in the public interest. I  also  note  that
          it is in the public interest that an individual speaks English  as
          does the appellant and his children (and  his  wife  to  a  lesser
          extent).  Likewise,  it  is  in  the  public  interest   that   an
          individual is financially  independent.  I  accept  that,  in  due
          course, the appellant will be employed if he remained  in  the  UK
          as I have already found, he will in all likelihood, on  return  to
          the DRC.  I accept the family has the potential to be  financially
          independent.  It is self-evident that the  private  lives  of  the
          appellant and his wife have been established at a time when  their
          immigration status was precarious  and  little  weight  should  be
          given to this private life.

      36. Whilst the appellant's criminal offending is not very serious,  he
          remains a foreign criminal and his deportation is  in  the  public
          interest.  The maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  is
          also in the public interest.  The appellant is unable to meet  the
          Immigration Rules.  There remains a  significant  public  interest
          in deporting the appellant and in  removing  his  wife  with  him.
          Having considered all the relevant circumstances, which of  course
          are not limited to the matters set out in sections 117B  and  117C
          and also  include  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  I  am
          satisfied that the circumstances relied upon by the  appellant  in
          this appeal to demonstrate very compelling  circumstances  do  not
          rise over and above those described in 399(a).  The  substance  of
          the appellant's claim is, in effect, that his  circumstances  fall
          within 399(a).  As I have already held for reasons set  out  above
          the appellant cannot succeed under this  provision.   For  similar
          reasons  I  am  not   satisfied   that   there   are   exceptional
          circumstances such that the public  interest  in  maintaining  the
          deportation order is outweighed by other factors for the  purposes
          of 390A.

      37. I am not satisfied that there are very compelling  or  exceptional
          circumstances such as to outweigh  the  significant  weight  which
          must be attached to the public interest in this appeal, even  when
          the best interests of the children are taken into  account.   Thus
          I am satisfied that any interference with the private  and  family
          life of the appellant and his  family  members  is  proportionate.
          The appellant has  therefore  failed  to  establish  a  breach  of
          Article 8 of the ECHR.

      38. I have made clear that in reaching my findings I have  noted  that
          P is entitled to  make  an  application  to  be  registered  as  a
          British citizen.  I cannot  of  course  treat  her  as  a  British
          citizen because she is not such at present.  The appellant may  be
          able to apply for a derivative  residence  card  under  regulation
          18A of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 if P  is  registered
          as a British citizen.  A primary carer of a British  citizen  will
          qualify for a  derivative  right  of  residence  under  regulation
          15A(4A)  where  they  satisfy  the  conditions  set  out  in  that
          paragraph.  However as P is not a British  citizen  at  present  I
          need say no more about this.

Decision

      39. Having already found that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
          should be set aside to a limited extent, I remake the decision  by
          dismissing the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules  and
          Article 8 of the ECHR.

Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
16 December 2015



