
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
DA/00440/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 December 2017                         | On 20 February 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MORRIS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                          Mariusz Jacek Wisniewski
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought with permission by Mariusz Jacek  Wisniewski,
    the appellant, against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
    Smith, promulgated on 21 September 2017 ("the FtT decision").   By  the
    FtT decision the judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 20 June  2017  to  deport  the
    appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  Regulations
    23(6)(b) and 27 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations").

 2. The appellant was to be deported on the basis that as  a  result  of  a
    conviction  for  battery  he  represented  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society within the  meaning  of  Regulation  27(5)(c)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  The appellant appeals essentially on the grounds that the
    Home Office decision was contrary to the evidence.  As regards error of
    law he contends that the FtT Judge erred in  law  in  relation  to  the
    burden of proof.

 3. The appellant has not appeared at the hearing today.  He  has,  we  are
    informed, been removed from the country in October 2017.  We have  been
    reminded of the fact that in these circumstances  the  appellant  would
    have or does have a right to attend this hearing under the  Regulations
    but no application to return to the country to attend the  hearing  has
    been made.  Accordingly we proceeded to hear the appeal.

    The Factual Background

 4. The appellant is aged 35 and a Polish national.  He claims to have been
    resident in the UK since 2008, doing a variety of jobs.   However,  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that he  had  been  resident  for  at
    least five years (so that he did not qualify for an enhanced  level  of
    protection from removal).  He had a relationship with a Ms N from  2008
    onwards and together they have a son born in January 2010.  In 2014 the
    appellant was convicted at North Lincolnshire Magistrates' Court of  an
    offence of common assault and placed under  a  supervision  requirement
    under a community order.  That order was revoked on  28  January  2015.
    More significantly, on 17 May 2017 he pleaded guilty to two offences of
    battery at Humber Magistrates' Court.  The victim was  Ms  N.   He  was
    sentenced to sixteen weeks' imprisonment and additionally a restraining
    order and  a  protection  from  harassment  order  were  imposed,  both
    directed towards contact with Ms N.

 5. Notice of Intention to Deport was served on the  appellant  on  26  May
    2017.  From the end of his custodial sentence until his removal he  was
    detained in immigration detention.  In the  Home  Office  decision  the
    Secretary of State stated that the appellant had failed to provide  any
    evidence to support continuous residence in the UK for ten years nor to
    support his claim that he had been exercising treaty rights.  The  Home
    Office decision then went on to set out  the  reason  for  the  finding
    under Regulation 27.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and that  appeal  was
    dismissed.  On 17 October 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale
    granted permission, stating at paragraph 3 of that grant of  permission
    that it is arguable that the FtT Judge fell  into  error  in  directing
    himself on the burden of proof.  The relevant provisions  of  the  2016
    Regulations and certain case law are set out in the FtT judgment.





    The FtT Judgment

 7. The appellant had been in detention and was  unrepresented  throughout.
    He declined to attend the hearing before the FtT.  He sent two  letters
    enclosing some material in support of his position, both in relation to
    past employment and in relation to his son.

 8. The FtT Judge dismissed the appeal.  In summary, he  held,  first,  the
    evidence provided by the appellant at that stage did  not  support  the
    appellant's claim that he had been exercising  his  treaty  rights  for
    longer than five years (paragraph 21).  There was no evidence that  the
    appellant had learnt to control his  violent  temper  and  that  he  is
    capable of again being violent (paragraph 25) and  on  that  basis  the
    appellant represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting the fundamental interests of society, see paragraph 31.

 9. As regards his son there was no sufficient evidence of  recent  contact
    and he had provided no evidence that he was still  part  of  his  son's
    life: "It was reasonable to assume that it has been some time since  he
    has seen his son" (see paragraph 32).  Of particular note  in  the  FtT
    judgment is paragraph 9 of the decision where FtT Judge  Smith  stated:
    "In deportation appeals and appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules  the
    burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard of proof  required
    is the balance of probabilities."

10. In his handwritten grounds of appeal the appellant contends that he has
    been resident in the UK for more than five years and now produces  HMRC
    documents showing him working and paying taxes since 2008.  He says  he
    was advised not to attend the hearing before the FtT Judge.  He accepts
    that the first offence did relate to Ms N but it was not serious,  that
    he has no record of violence since February 2017,  he  has  shown  real
    remorse and is keen to control his anger and that he was  taking  steps
    to address that issue.  He further said that he  was  still  very  much
    part of his son's life.  He had a very strong relationship with him and
    he attached letters and the photographs of his  son  were  recent.   In
    advancing those grounds the appellant has put before the Upper Tribunal
    new and different evidence that was not before the FtT Judge.

11. The Secretary of State's submissions in the letter of 8  November  2017
    were that paragraph 9 of the FtT decision is merely a general paragraph
    inserted into the decision and it is right that the burden  is  on  the
    appellant to show he meets different criteria.   The  FtT  Judge  found
    that the appellant had not displaced the  Secretary  of  State's  claim
    that the appellant fell to be  considered  under  Regulation  23(6)(b).
    The FtT Judge went on to apply  Regulation  27  correctly  and  made  a
    finding  that  the  appellant  represents  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.  The FtT Judge directed himself appropriately and the  grounds
    failed to identify error of law.

12. In oral submissions today the Secretary of State has  added  that  when
    looked at holistically it is clear that the FtT  Judge  did  apply  the
    correct burden of proof.

13. In this appeal two issues arise, first whether the FtT Judge  erred  in
    law in relation to the burden of proof and secondly the position of new
    evidence presented by the appellant to this Tribunal on his appeal.

14.  Dealing  with  the  second  point  first,  the  position  is  that  in
    considering whether or not the  FtT  Judge  erred  in  law  we  address
    matters on the state of the evidence before the FtT Judge at that time.
     Thus it follows that the new evidence now submitted is not relevant in
    considering the first stage of whether there is an error of law in  the
    FtT decision.  Whether or not such new  evidence  would  be  admissible
    would only be relevant if we conclude that there had been an  error  of
    law in the FtT decision.

15. Turning then to the first issue, the burden  of  proof,  it  is  common
    ground that in a  case  arising  under  the  2016  Regulations  and  in
    particular in relation to the question  under  Regulation  27(5)(c)  of
    those Regulations the burden of proving  that  a  person  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society rests on the Secretary of  State,  see
    the case of Arranz [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC).

16. Secondly, in our judgment, at the very least it is  not  clear  on  its
    face that  the  FtT  Judge  directed  himself  correctly  in  law.   No
    reference is made to the burden of  proof  in  relation  to  Regulation
    27(5)(c) and moreover paragraph 9 of the judgment, which itself  refers
    to the 2016 Regulations, positively states that the burden of proof was
    upon the appellant.  In our judgment, that certainly has the appearance
    of a misdirection in law.

17. Thirdly, however, it is clear on the facts  that  the  FtT  Judge  made
    positive findings of fact that the appellant "is capable of again being
    violent", see paragraph 25, and that there is "the very real  potential
    of further violent conduct", see paragraph 31.  That finding was  based
    on material placed before the FtT Judge  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Whilst in paragraph 25 of the FtT  decision  the  judge  refers  to  an
    absence of evidence to the contrary we consider that  on  the  evidence
    which was before him at the time he was entitled to conclude  that  the
    Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof upon her.

18. Whilst we are well aware  of  the  fact  that  pursuant  to  Regulation
    27(5)(e)  of  the  2016  Regulations  a  person's   previous   criminal
    convictions do not in themselves justify a decision of deportation  the
    FtT Judge expressly refers in the FtT decision to  facts  going  beyond
    those criminal convictions which support his conclusion of a very  real
    potential of further violent conduct, in particular as pointed  out  at
    paragraph 23 of the FtT decision: "The offences in  2017  were  serious
    enough to attract an immediate prison sentence coupled with restraining
    and harassment  orders.   The  court  on  that  occasion  were  clearly
    concerned that this appellant may well repeat violent acts to Ms N."

19. For these reasons we consider that the FtT Judge did not in fact  apply
    the wrong burden of proof and thus did not commit any error of  law  in
    this case.  Accordingly this appeal falls to be dismissed.

20. We make two further observations, first that whilst we  recognise  that
    the appellant has now been removed it was or might still be open to him
    to place before the Secretary of State the further  evidence  which  he
    raised in this appeal about both his history of residence and  working,
    his relationship with his son and his efforts  towards  rehabilitation,
    and secondly we refer to Rule  43  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, which gives this Tribunal the power to set  aside
    a  decision  which  disposes  of  proceedings  and  to  remake  it   in
    circumstances where a party was not present at a  hearing  relating  to
    the proceedings.  So the appellant  does  have  the  right,  if  he  so
    wishes, to apply under Rule 43.

Notice of Decision

1.   The First-tier-Tribunal Judge made no material error  of  law  and  her
    decision to dismiss the appeal is to stand.

2.   The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



|                |[pic]                     |
|Signed          |Mr Justice Morris         |
|Dated           |12 February 2018          |







