
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: DA/00413/2017
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Royal Courts of Justice,     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Belfast                                    |                              |
|On: 26 November 2018                       |On: 30 November 2018          |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              EGILS DOMBROSKIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly, promulgated on 18  July  2018,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision to  deported  him  made  on  13  July  2017.
    Permission to appeal was granted on 20 August 2018.

 2. The respondent has subsequently responded  to  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    conceding that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome, and that  it
    should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  remade  in  its
    entirety. Having considered the respondent's concessions, I  agree  with
    them; there are a number of errors in the decision, as identified by the
    grounds and in the respondent's letter which show that the decision  did
    involve the making of an error of law.

 3. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it  aside.   I
    am satisfied also that as the errors  involved  a  failure  properly  to
    adjourn the case, and  the  application  of  an  incorrect  approach  to
    proportionality, as well as to the fact-finding in respect of the child,
    that none of the findings of fact could be sustained; the decision  will
    need to be remade in its entirety and thus it is appropriate to remit it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters.




SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS



 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  on
    all issues.

 3. The hearing on 28 November 2018 is vacated.




Signed                              Date:  26 November 2018

 [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

















