
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00502/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April, 2016                           |On 18th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Adrian Wladyslaw Horwat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her  as  being  "the
    claimant".  The respondent is a citizen of Poland born on 3rd February,
    1995.

2.   On 17th October, 2014 the respondent was convicted  at  Basildon  Crown
    Court of two counts of supplying a  controlled  drug,  namely  class  A
    crack cocaine, and one count of possession  with  intent  to  supply  a
    controlled drug, namely class B cannabis resin.  He  was  sentenced  on
    17th November, 2014 to two years' imprisonment  in  a  young  offenders
    institution on each count to run concurrently.

3.   The claimant made a decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  on  19th
    October, 2015 and the respondent appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    His appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ievins  on  17th
    February, 2016 and the judge purported to allow the appeal on the basis
    that the respondent had been in the United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
    period of at least ten years.

4.   The claimant sought and obtained permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge had failed to apply the decision of  MG  (prison-Article
    28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 392.   The  period
    of ten  years'  residence  must  be  continuous  and  must  be  counted
    backwards  from  the  date  of  the  deportation  decision.    In   the
    respondent's case there is of course a period during which  he  was  in
    prison and so the ten years has to be counted back from 17th  November,
    2014.

5.   The respondent  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  either  3rd  or  4th
    February, 2000.  He entered with his  family  and  his  father  claimed
    asylum, but the application was refused and an application to appeal to
    the Immigration Appellate  Authority  was  unsuccessful.   Neither  the
    respondent nor other family members have ever been granted  leave,  but
    on 1st May, 2004 Poland joined the European Union.

6.   It is possible  therefore  that  the  appellant  may  fall  within  the
    category of those who are entitled to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of their ten years' continuous period of residence,  provided
    of course they meet the requirements on integration.  Numerous findings
    are made between paragraphs 40 and 49 of the judge's determination, but
    nowhere  does  the  judge  apply  his  mind  to  the  question  of  the
    appellant's integration or make findings  sufficient  to  undertake  an
    analysis.  I have concluded, therefore that the matter will have to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order that evidence can be heard
    on the question of the appellant's integration and  a  full  assessment
    made.

7.   The matter should be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than
    Judge Ievins.  A Polish interpreter will be required and I believe that
    a time estimate of two hours is adequate.  The  matter  should  not  be
    listed for hearing before 1st June.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
18th July 2016
