
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00058/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 27 October 2015                   |on 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              DAWID KAZANOWSKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Poland, appeals against a determination  by
    a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  comprising  Judge  Blair  and  Dr
    Winstanley,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  deportation  under   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    various grounds, including the following:

         "At paragraph 82 the Tribunal indicate their view that there was  a
         "real risk that it was  quite  probable  the  appellant  might  re-
         offend."  The use of the words "real risk",  "quite  probable"  and
         "might" leaves the informed reader with no  real  understanding  of
         what  standard  of  proof  the  Tribunal  thought  they  might   be
         applying."

 3. Permission was  granted  on  that  ground  only.   The  judge  granting
    permission observed:

         "It is unclear whether the panel in fact found at paragraph 82 that
         the  appellant's  conduct  represented  a  genuine,   present   and
         sufficiently serious risk to one of the  fundamental  interests  of
         society."

 4. In a Rule 24 response the SSHD said:

         "It is clear from the careful and detailed [determination] that the
         FtT found that the appellant constituted a present threat.  This is
         consistent with the clear findings that there is a  risk  that  the
         appellant may well re-offend, which cuts to the very heart  of  the
         requirements of Regulation 21(5) complained of in the grounds."

 5. Mr Caskie firstly stated the background, thus.  The appellant was  born
    on 7 July 1991.  He was aged 16 at the time of  his  first  offence  in
    2007, and 19 at the age of his  last  offence.   By  the  time  of  the
    hearing on the First-tier Tribunal he had  committed  no  offences  for
    over 4 years and was aged 24.  He spent  the  period  from  March  2013
    until August 2015 out of the UK.  He has no convictions here.   He  had
    moved to another country, formed a stable  relationship  and  become  a
    father.  At the date of the hearing he plainly did not present a threat
    in terms of the regulations.  There was in  reality  no  risk  that  he
    would re-offend.

 6. Mr Caskie then submitted that paragraph 82  left  it  entirely  unclear
    what standard of  proof  the  Tribunal  applied.   It  contained  three
    mutually  inconsistent  possible  standards.   Nothing  else   in   the
    determination could make good that error.  The appellant was no  longer
    "a young thug", but a young man with no history of offending for almost
    half a decade.  The determination  should  be  set  aside.   The  Upper
    Tribunal  should  substitute  a  decision  to  allow  the  appeal,   as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Mrs O'Brien  relied  on  the  Rule  24  response.   She  conceded  that
    paragraph 82 of the determination might have been better expressed, but
    said that it  was  clear  that  overall  the  Tribunal  found,  to  the
    appropriate standard, the balance of  probability,  that  the  personal
    conduct  of  the  appellant  did  represent  a  genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  There was no error such as to require the  Upper  Tribunal
    to interfere.

 8. In reply, Mr Caskie said that it was not conceded that the Tribunal did
    make a finding regarding the threat posed by the appellant, but even if
    such a finding had been made, the  reader  simply  did  not  know  what
    standard had been applied.  The use of the word "might" could be  taken
    to imply that it was for an appellant to establish that  there  was  no
    possibility of re-offending, a standard which no-one could reach.   The
    appellant  is  now  an  adult  with  a  wife  and  child,  in  short  a
    rehabilitated  and  different  person,  and  a   decision   should   be
    substituted accordingly.

 9. I thanked the representatives for their  clearly  focused  submissions,
    and reserved my determination.

10. It was appropriate for the background to  be  set  out,  but  doing  so
    amounted to a concise statement of the appellant's position as it could
    best be represented at first instance.  It did not reflect the facts as
    found.  The Tribunal did not find the appellant a credible or  reliable
    witness (paragraph 45), and saw significant shortcomings  also  in  the
    evidence from his wife  and  in  the  other  evidence.   Those  adverse
    findings were reached after thorough consideration.  Permission was not
    granted to dispute them.  The panel gave a number of good  reasons  for
    not accepting that the appellant's rehabilitation was well established,
    as he claimed.

11. The determination contains a clear self-direction at paragraph 22:

         "The burden of proof is on  the  appellant  to  discharge  and  the
         standard of proof is the balance of probabilities."

12. The gist of the  determination  is  clearly  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant does represent a  risk  in  terms  of  the  language  of  the
    regulations.  See paragraphs 71 - 86, read together, and in  particular
    74, "an established pattern and acquisitive offending  within  a  short
    time frame and moreover ... many of the offences indicated a propensity
    to use violence or threats of violence"; 75, marriage and children  not
    having much bearing on his propensity to break the law; 76, 80, 81, 84,
    little evidence of rehabilitation, or prospects of rehabilitation;  77,
    recent history suggesting a  man  with  a  propensity  to  offend;  86,
    principles of  regulation  21(5)  respected  by  the  decision  of  the
    respondent.

13. The first sentence of paragraph 82 is  muddled.   That  should  not  be
    taken out of context so as to undermine the entire  determination.   It
    is part of the Tribunal's overall assessment that  there  had  been  no
    serious rehabilitation, and that there was an ongoing threat.  I do not
    think it shows that the panel went wrong in law by misunderstanding the
    standard  of  proof,  which  it  had  earlier  stated  accurately.   In
    particular, I do not think it shows that the panel imposed  a  standard
    higher than the law requires  upon  the  appellant,  or  one  which  no
    appellant could realistically meet.  The appellant  did  not  lose  his
    case because too stringent a standard of proof was imposed, but because
    for  good  reasons  his  evidence  of  rehabilitation  was  not   found
    persuasive.  One sentence is imprecise, but determinations  are  to  be
    read as a whole, not as if they were to be expressed in every line with
    the exactitude of a statute.

14. I also note the next part of the determination, paragraphs  87  -  111,
    dealing with the case under Article 8 of the ECHR, but on much the same
    considerations.  See, in particular, paragraph 106, live concerns  over
    risk; little cogent evidence to show risk  properly  managed  here,  or
    that the risk of re-offending could be kept within  reasonable  bounds;
    and 109, "... a present threat at this time.  The factors  relevant  to
    integration  ...  did  not  suggest   ...   reasonable   prospects   of
    rehabilitation".

15. The appellant continues to insist that he is a rehabilitated person who
    presents no threat of reoffending.  However, the panel was entitled  to
    find to the contrary, and on my reading of  the  determination  plainly
    did so, to the appropriate standard of proof, and for reasons which are
    sound in law.  Any error along the way was incidental and immaterial.

16. The determination shall stand.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    28 October 2015


