
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        DA/00170/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 31 October 2013           On   1 November 2013
                                     .......................................


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge J. E. Coker
               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                               Priscilla Dube
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. Saldanha of Howe & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

   1. This appeal was first listed before us on 26 October 2012 pursuant  to
      the 'Decision and Directions' given by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  on
      14 September 2012. The Appellant had appealed against the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal comprising First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cameron
      and Mr. A. P. Richardson JP promulgated on 19 June 2012 dismissing the
      appeal of the Appellant against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  14
      March 2012 to make a deportation order.


   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on  2  October  1977.  She
      arrived in the UK on 13 January 2002 holding a South African  passport
      and was granted six months leave to enter as a visitor until  19  July
      2002. The Appellant made subsequent applications for leave  to  remain
      as a student and was granted successive periods of leave until 31 July
      2004. On 27 July 2004 the  Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
      remain but was refused on 29 September  2004.  On  13  July  2005  the
      Appellant applied for reconsideration of this latter decision but  the
      refusal was maintained. On 3 April  2009  the  Appellant  applied  for
      asylum. Pending consideration of her asylum claim  the  Appellant  was
      convicted on 12 June 2009 at Solihull Magistrates Court on four counts
      of obtaining leave to enter or remain in the UK by means of  deception
      and on 7 August 2009 at Warwick Crown Court she  was  sentenced  to  a
      total of 14 months imprisonment. On 28 August 2009 the  Appellant  was
      served with a Notice of Liability  to  Automatic  Deportation.  On  10
      January 2010 the Appellant completed her custodial  sentence  and  was
      detained under immigration powers. On 3 March 2010 an asylum screening
      interview and a substantive asylum interview were  conducted  and  the
      Appellant was released on bail. The Appellant's application for asylum
      was refused and a decision was taken to  deport  the  Appellant  on  6
      March 2012 and a Deportation Order was signed on 14 March 2012.


   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC on asylum grounds and  human  rights
      grounds. Her appeal was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 19 June 2012.


   4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
      was granted by Designated Immigration Judge McClure on 10 July 2012 on
      the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had relied upon the case of  EM
      (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98, a decision which had been  set
      aside and remitted to the Upper Tribunal for  reconsideration  by  the
      Court of Appeal.


   5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 26 July 2012 in which it
      was indicated that  the  Appellant's  application  for  permission  to
      appeal was not opposed and the Tribunal was invited to  determine  the
      appeal afresh.


   6. The issue of 'error of law' was considered  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Hanson who determined the matter in the following terms:

"1. Having regard to all  the  circumstances,  including  the  Secretary  of
      State's Rule 24 Reply dated 26th July 2012 in which she indicates  she
      does not oppose the appeal following the quashing of EM and Others  by
      the Court of Appeal, the Upper Tribunal,  pursuant  to  rule  34,  has
      decided without a hearing that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      does  contain  an  error  of  law,  as  identified  in  the  grant  of
      permission, read with the grounds of application, and  should  be  set
      aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.
2. The appeal will accordingly proceed to  a  hearing  for  the  purpose  of
      considering evidence relevant to the re-making of the decision limited
      to an assessment of the risk to the appellant on return  in  light  of
      the  current  country  guidance  case  law  and   background   country
      information in light of the preserved findings detailed below.
3. ... (i) The parties shall prepare for the hearing on the basis  that  the
      findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs  69-72,  76,
      89, 92-99 and 101 to 104 shall stand."


   7. The relevant passages in the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  are
      in the following terms:

"69. This is an appeal against the making of an order  under  section  32(5)
      of the UK Borders Act 2007 which states that the  Secretary  of  State
      must make a deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal subject
      to the exceptions in section 33.

70. The appellant  has  submitted  that  she  comes  within  the  exceptions
      contained in section 33 in particular that the decision is  in  breach
      of her convention rights and under the ECHR.

71. No  issue  has  been  taken  as  to  the  appellant  coming  within  the
      definition of a foreign criminal and she has clearly been sentenced to
      a period in excess of 12 months imprisonment.

72. It would appear from paragraph 364A that paragraph 346  does  not  apply
      where the Secretary of State must make a deportation order in  respect
      of a foreign criminal under section 32(5).

...

76. It is clear from  this  determination  [HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
      Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094] that it is now accepted that  the  CIO
      have taken over responsibility for monitoring all returning passengers
      at Harare airport and that all deportees or handed over to the CIO for
      questioning but they are not at that stage at risk it is only if  they
      are detained for further questioning. It also confirmed  at  paragraph
      265 that the CIO will have identified certain persons in advance  from
      the passenger manifest.

...

89. We do not however find the appellant credible  that  she  did  not  know
      about asylum when she came to this country.  She  has  clearly  stated
      that she did not claim in South Africa because she  did  not  consider
      herself to be safe. It is also the case that asylum is an issue  which
      is discussed frequently by the national news and  must  have  been  an
      issue which would  have  been  discussed  between  herself  and  other
      Zimbabweans who were in a position of claiming asylum in this country.

...

92. [Mr Sikholiso Dube - no relation - the pastor at the Appellant's  church
      in the UK] has confirmed during  oral  evidence  that  [the  Appellant
      discussed the issue of her rape in Zimbabwe] in 2004/2005 and that  he
      specifically told the appellant that she should tell the  authorities.
      The appellant therefore was aware of the issues and had discussed  the
      difficulties in 2004, at the latest 2005  but  did  not  claim  asylum
      until 2009. We find that this delay of itself gives rise to an adverse
      credibility finding.

93. The appellant has been consistent with regard to her evidence as to  how
      she was abducted while walking down the street and taken into a  group
      of others who were then taken into the bush area and the woman  raped.
      She has also been consistent with regard to where the money  that  she
      subsequently gave of the agent came from.

94. There are a number of credibility issues with regard  to  this  area  in
      particular the fact that she states that the monies were approximately
      half an inch in depth of notes and that  she  was  not  searched  even
      though she was stripped. There is also an inconsistency with regard to
      her  witness  statement  and  the  evidence  given  in  the  screening
      interview. Within her witness statement she states that the driver who
      took from Zimbabwe to South Africa introduced to the agent whereas  at
      question 8.3 of the screening she states she contacted a friend in the
      UK who put her in contact with the agent.

95. Although there are some inconsistencies in the appellants  evidence  the
      core of her claim has remained consistent. We take  into  account  the
      low burden of proof in relation to asylum claims and we also take into
      account the general position of women in Zimbabwe  and  in  particular
      the use of rape as a method of  control  and  intimidation  generally.
      Paragraph 22.35 of the 2011 COIR confirms this and also confirmed that
      this has been a long-standing problem.

96. The appellant's  evidence  is  therefore  consistent  with  the  overall
      objective evidence available as to the treatment of women and  on  the
      lower standard of proof we are  prepared  to  accept  the  appellant's
      evidence that she was taken on  her  way  home  and  was  subsequently
      raped. There is nothing  inherently  implausible  in  the  appellant's
      statement that the Zanu PF members became drunk and that she was  able
      to flee and again applying the lower standard of proof we are prepared
      to accept that this was the case.

97. The appellant states that she has had a  limited  involvement  with  the
      MDC in Zimbabwe attending some meetings  and  she  states  putting  up
      flyers and giving out leaflets. She accepts that she  was  not  active
      but was a supporter. Her family she states were targeted but only on a
      limited basis in that her mother was beaten up in the market and  they
      had stones thrown at the house that night. The appellant has not given
      any further information as to the  family  itself  been  targeted  and
      there is nothing to indicate  that  they  were  subsequently  targeted
      after she left Zimbabwe either as a result of their own MDC activities
      or as a result of the appellant escaping from Zanu PF.

98. We do not therefore accept even to the low standard of  proof  that  the
      appellant was subsequently looked for by the Zanu PF authorities after
      her escape nor that she would be shown as of interest on  any  records
      kept by the authorities which would be accessed during her arrival  at
      Harare airport. The fact that there have been no further problems  for
      her family would indicate that even at  a  local  level  there  is  no
      further interest in the appellant.

99. The appellant in this country has attended the  vigil  on  one  occasion
      and a local meeting but clearly is not active and she would  not  have
      come to the adverse attention of the authorities due to her actions in
      this country.

...

101. The appellant came to this country in 2002 and has therefore  been  out
      of Zimbabwe for over 10 years. She entered with a false South  African
      passport and there is no evidence before us that she  would  have  any
      valid Zimbabwean documents with which  she  could  return.  She  would
      therefore be returned utilising travel documents obtained  by  the  UK
      authorities.

102. The appellant was born in Bulawayo and lived her whole life there.  Her
      current evidence is that her family including her  two  children  were
      living in that area although she states that she has not  had  contact
      with them since 2008. We do note that in  the  presentence  report  it
      states that she last had contact with her mother in 2007. We also note
      within the presentence report that in 2009 the appellant is stated  to
      have a good relationship with  her  partner  albeit  that  there  were
      tensions due to her remand.  Her  younger  daughter  was  returned  to
      Zimbabwe in the care of her partner's sister. We do not therefore find
      it credible that the appellant  would  not  have  been  aware  of  the
      position of her younger daughter even that  she  was  still  with  her
      partner, her daughter's father, in 2009 and believe that she has  been
      less than truthful in relation to the contact she  has  had  with  her
      family.

103. The appellant is 34 years old and has problems with ulcers and  on  her
      evidence  is  suffering  depression  although  her  doctor   has   not
      prescribed any medication for this. She has lived the majority of  her
      life in Zimbabwe and has family in the Bulawayo area.

104. Taking into account the findings we  have  made  above,  that  is  that
      although we accept that the appellant was abducted and  raped,  we  do
      not accept that she had or currently has an MDC  profile  which  would
      bring her to the adverse attention of the authorities or the  Zanu  PF
      on return to Bulawayo."


   8. At the hearing on 26 October 2012 (when the Appellant was  represented
      by Mr Arkhurst of Counsel and the Respondent by Ms  Tanner)  we  heard
      submissions as to how the decision should be remade  in  light  of  EM
      having  been  set  aside  by  the  Court   of   Appeal.   There   was,
      unfortunately, delay in writing up the determination, and  although  a
      draft was prepared it was overtaken by  promulgation  of  new  country
      guidance in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
      UKUT 00059(IAC). The case of CM was significant in that  it  concluded
      that the findings in EM were not vitiated  by  reliance  on  anonymous
      material, and further reiterated much of the  guidance  given  in  EM:
      this was particularly pertinent to the instant case because the  basis
      of permission to appeal and Judge Hanson's conclusion on error of  law
      were based on the fact that the Court of Appeal  had  quashed  EM  and
      remitted it to the Upper Tribunal. In the  circumstances  we  resolved
      that the case should be relisted for further submissions.  However  it
      seems that there was an error in relisting (the case was listed before
      a different Tribunal), and then unfortunately before it could again be
      relisted a member of the presently constituted  Tribunal  sustained  a
      serious accident. We repeat here the apologies extended to the parties
      at the hearing today.


Today's Hearing

   9. We are grateful for the  measured  and  realistic  submissions  of  Mr
      Saldanha. He acknowledged that the case presently before the  Tribunal
      was in respect of asylum and  that  there  was  no  Article  8  issue.
      Without making any concession he identified that there was an issue as
      to whether the  Tribunal  had  to  remake  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision at all in light of CM's effective restoration of the guidance
      in EM. In the event that the Tribunal were to remake the decision,  he
      relied on two further items of evidence: a report from SW Radio Africa
      dated 16 September 2013 referring to an incident of rape  in  Epworth,
      Mbare, and an arson attack; and a report from Radio Vop Zimbabwe dated
      17 October 2013 referring  to  a  declared  intention  to  revive  the
      training of  youth  militia.  These  were  of  relevance  because  the
      Appellant had been a victim of sexual assault at the hands of militia.
      Mr Saldanha submitted that  the  general  country  situation  was  not
      entirely stable and  that  the  results  of  elections  were  strongly
      contested.


  10. Ms Everett in brief submissions essentially relied upon the fact  that
      the guidance in EM upon which the First-tier Tribunal had  relied  had
      effectively been  reinstated,  and  submitted  that  the  two  reports
      produced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  today  did  not  dislodge  the
      findings and conclusions in CM.


  11. Mr Saldanha did not seek to reply to Ms Everett's submissions.


Analysis

  12. Mr Saldanha's query as to whether the Tribunal needed to  re-make  the
      decision at all - which we acknowledge was expressed as  not  intended
      to be a concession - was nonetheless a realistic  recognition  of  the
      difficulty presented to the Appellant's case by CM. Moreover it raises
      an interesting issue as to the approach that should now  be  taken  to
      the 'error of law' finding made by Judge Hanson.  However,  whilst  we
      explore  this  below,  in  our  judgement  whether  the  case  is  now
      approached on the basis of error of law, materiality of error of  law,
      or remaking the decision, the conclusion is ultimately the  same:  the
      Appellant is not entitled to international  surrogate  protection  and
      the appeal is to be dismissed.


  13. The First-tier Tribunal in relying upon the case  of  EM  was  relying
      upon a case that was subsequently found by the Court of Appeal to have
      been determined in error of law. Although subsequently  the  substance
      of the country guidance given in EM was  found  on  consideration  and
      analysis in the case of CM to be sound, the findings in CM do not have
      the effect of overturning the legally flawed nature of the decision in
      EM. Accordingly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  instant  case  in
      relying upon EM was relying upon a legally flawed decision and its own
      decision was necessarily tainted. Accordingly, we do not consider that
      the subsequent findings in  CM  in  any  way  justify  revisiting  the
      conclusion of Judge Hanson herein that "the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal does contain an error of law ".


  14. What is perhaps now more contentious is whether or not such  an  error
      of law required that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  "should
      be set aside and remade by  the  Upper  Tribunal"  as  stated  in  the
      'Decision and Directions' given by Judge Hanson. Whilst  there  is  no
      longer  an  express  materiality  test   in   statute   or   secondary
      legislation, materiality is nonetheless a  relevant  consideration  to
      the discretion enjoyed by the Tribunal as to how to dispose of a  case
      in the event of error of law. In raising the question of the  need  to
      remake the decision Mr Saldanha is implicitly  recognising  both  that
      discretion, and the effective restatement  of  the  substance  of  the
      country guidance in EM in CM.


  15. In so far as the First-tier Tribunal relied  upon  EM,  its  decision-
      making  was  informed  by  the  substance  of   the   guidance   given
      notwithstanding the legally erroneous basis  of  its  derivation.  The
      effective 'reinstatement' of that guidance renders the legally  flawed
      nature of the First-tier Tribunal's reliance upon EM immaterial to the
      substance  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  considerations  and  fact-
      finding.


  16. This, then,  begs  the  question  of  the  status  of  Judge  Hanson's
      'Decision and Directions' in light of developments that post-date  the
      giving of the 'Decision and Directions'.  We  emphasise  that  because
      both parties recognised that the outcome of the appeal would likely be
      the same regardless, we did not hear  developed  submissions  on  this
      issue. However, it is our view that because the procedure in the Upper
      Tribunal is a continuous process and the interlocutory  'Decision  and
      Directions' given at the error of law stage is not  in  its  nature  a
      final decision, it is open to us to revisit the issue of  whether  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and  remade
      notwithstanding an error of law.


  17. Essentially for  the  reasons  already  identified  -  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's reliance upon the substance of the country guidance  in  EM
      has now been shown by the findings in CM not to have  been  materially
      factually flawed notwithstanding the erroneous nature of the decision-
      making process in EM - it is clear to us, and we do not understand  it
      to be seriously disputed by Mr Saldanha, that the error of law was not
      material to the outcome. In such circumstances we do not  consider  it
      appropriate to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


  18. For completeness, however, we have considered the position if  we  had
      reached a different conclusion on setting aside and were to remake the
      decision. Necessarily our starting point would be the country guidance
      in CM applied to the particular facts of  the  Appellant's  case  with
      reference to the preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal set out
      above.


  19. In respect of the country situation we have also  taken  into  account
      the material submitted by  Mr  Saldanha  today:  Ms  Everett  made  no
      objection to it being admitted into evidence. We  make  the  following
      observations in respect of that additional material:

(i) The two incidents referred to in the report of 16  September  2013  both
      took place in districts of Harare and  are  accordingly  not  evidence
      that undermines anything in the country guidance  in  respect  of  the
      situation in Bulawayo. Further and in any event,  we  note  that  both
      incidents related to the targeting of MDC-T officials. The rape victim
      had been working at a shop owned by an MDC-T official at a  time  when
      the shop had been attacked and burnt by a ZANU PF gang. Whilst  in  no
      way seeking to diminish the nature of the atrocity perpetrated against
      a 19-year-old girl the context of that atrocity was an attack targeted
      on an MDC official and as such is not, in our judgement, evidence of a
      more generalised risk to persons without a  significant  MDC  profile.
      Similarly, the other incident referred to was an  arson  attack  on  a
      kitchen belonging to an MDC-T district youth organising secretary.

(ii) The declared intention reported in the article dated  17  October  2013
      to revive compulsory training of youth  militia,  whilst  ominous  and
      possibly intimidating in nature is seemingly contingent upon obtaining
      funds. As such there is no evidence that training has  recommenced  at
      the date of the hearing before us, or that any such training  has  led
      to an increased level of violence such  as  to  displace  any  of  the
      conclusions in the current country guidance.


  20. In all of the circumstances we accept Ms Everett's submission that the
      two articles produced by Mr Saldanha do not justify a  restatement  of
      the current country guidance.


  21. Accordingly in applying the country guidance to the  particular  facts
      of the Appellant's case it seems to us the following  conclusions  are
      inevitable.

(i) At the point of return, Harare airport, the lack  of  specific  interest
      in the Appellant (see First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 98 and 104), is
      such that there is no real risk to  the  Appellant,  pursuant  to  the
      guidance in HS (returning asylum seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
      00094 (see First-tier Tribunal  at  paragraph  76),  as  affirmed  and
      further commented upon in CM (e.g. see head note at paragraph 4(d)).

(ii) The situation in the Appellant's home area of Bulawayo  where  she  had
      lived her whole life prior to leaving  Zimbabwe,  and  where  she  has
      family (First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 102-104) is  such  that  she
      would not reasonably likely face adverse attention even if she had  an
      MDC profile (CM, headnote at 3(6)) - which she does not.

(iii) The general situation in the country is such  that  the  Appellant  is
      unlikely to face any risk in travelling from Harare to Bulawayo.  This
      is because she has no profile such as to be of specific interest,  and
      because the general situation is such that she is highly  unlikely  to
      be the subject of a 'ZANU PF loyalty test': see CM, headnote at 3(1).


  22. Accordingly, were it the case that we were satisfied that the error of
      law was material to an extent that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal required to be set aside  and  remade,  we  would  remake  it
      dismissing the Appellant's appeal.  However,  for  the  reasons  given
      above, in the event we determine that notwithstanding the error of law
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not to  be  set  aside  and
      stands: the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Decision

  23. The appeal is dismissed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis      31 October 2013

