
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00172/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 13th September 2019              |On: 17th September 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Chima Collins Madu
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    and Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on the 24th May 1982.

    2. He has permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge EB Grant) to dismiss his appeal on a  single  ground.
       It is submitted that Judge Grant erred in adopting in  her  reasoning
       parts of an earlier determination which had itself been set aside  by
       the Upper Tribunal.

    3. The relevant chronology is as follows.

    4. On the 11th April 2018 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rowlands) heard
       the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to
       grant him  a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
       exercising treaty rights. The Appellant was  present  and  gave  oral
       evidence. By his decision of  the  17th  April  2018  Judge  Rowlands
       dismissed the appeal, finding that the  Appellant's  marriage  was  a
       marriage of convenience.

    5. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds  that  by
       his decision, and his conduct during the hearing on  the  11th  April
       2018, that he was biased  against  the  Appellant.  The  matter  came
       before Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, who was satisfied that  a  fair-
       minded observer in possession of all the facts would  perceive  there
       to have been bias,  and  that  accordingly  the  Appellant  had  been
       deprived of a fair hearing.  By his decision  dated  12th  July  2018
       Judge Rintoul decided that in the circumstances the appeal should  be
       remitted to another judge.

    6. That other judge was Judge EB Grant.  By the  time  that  the  matter
       came before her, on the  18th  June  2019,  the  Appellant  had  been
       deported and so was not present  to  give  evidence  in  the  appeal.
       Reference is made to the practical difficulties that this created  at
       paragraphs 7 to 14 of the decision.  The Appellant was  not  able  to
       afford the high cost of a video link, and the Judge was not satisfied
       that there was any realistic prospect  of  the  Appellant  imminently
       being granted entry clearance in  order  to  attend  a  hearing.  She
       therefore proceeded to hear the evidence of  the  Sponsor  and  other
       witnesses and to assess the written materials. In the absence of  the
       Appellant those written materials assumed some significance,  because
       they contained, in the form of interview records, witness  statements
       - and crucially in Judge  Rowlands'  record  -  the  Appellant's  own
       evidence about his marriage. To this end Judge Grant set out  in  her
       determination four paragraphs from the decision of Judge Rowlands, in
       which the evidence of the Appellant is summarised.  She  went  on  to
       dismiss the appeal.

    7. The Appellant submits  that  in  taking  this  approach  Judge  Grant
       infected her own decision with the bias of Judge Rowlands. There were
       two possible ways in which the alleged unfairness could arise.

    8. The first is that  in  the  four  cited  paragraphs  there  was  some
       inaccuracy, there by virtue of Judge Rowlands' bias or otherwise.  If
       the record of evidence was inaccurate it would follow that it  should
       not, in these circumstances, have been relied upon  by  Judge  Grant.
       The Appellant however makes no submission to  that  effect.  Mr  Ume-
       Ezeoke was unable to identify any part of those four paragraphs  with
       which the Appellant took issue.   No error therefore arises there.

    9. The second way in which the citation of  those  paragraphs  may  have
       been unfair, submits Mr Ume-Ezeoke, is that in reading  the  decision
       of Judge Rowlands, Judge Grant may unwittingly have infected her mind
       with his bias; having absorbed his unfair reasoning  she  would  have
       set about her decision making from a partial starting point.

   10. There is absolutely nothing in the detailed and cogent  determination
       of Judge Grant to indicate that  this  might  be  the  case.  As  the
       chronology above indicates, in setting out those four paragraphs  she
       was in fact seeking to give the Appellant a voice in his own  appeal.
       He had given live evidence before Judge Rowlands but could not do  so
       before her. It was therefore  important  for  it  to  be  taken  into
       account. Further Mr Ume-Ezeoke's submission assumes that the mind  of
       a First-tier Tribunal Judge is so suggestible as to render them unfit
       to perform their primary function.   This was the  notion  considered
       by the Court of Appeal in Swash v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1063, who cited with approval the approach
       taken by Collins J in R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       (ex parte Ahmed Aissaoui) as follows:

            "12. ... the IAT had remitted an appeal to be heard de novo by
           another adjudicator. The second adjudicator, when dismissing the
           appeal, recorded in his determination that the determination  of
           the first adjudicator had been on file and that he had "had  the
           advantage of having perused it". The applicant sought permission
           to move for judicial review on  the  ground  that  it  had  been
           improper  for  the  second  adjudicator   to   have   read   the
           determination of his colleague. In dismissing  the  application,
           Collins J held at p. 187:

                "It is no doubt inevitable that the  previous  determination
                will  be  on  the  file.  It  may  be  inevitable  that  the
                adjudicator looks at it. It seems to me  that  there  is  no
                reason in principle why he should not, provided, of  course,
                that he does not allow  it  in  any  way  to  influence  the
                decision that he has to make on a fresh consideration of the
                whole case. It may be that it would be desirable that  steps
                were taken not to include such a  decision  in  the  papers,
                because that would avoid any question of a  suggestion  that
                the adjudicator had been wrongly influenced in  any  way  by
                it; but that does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  in  the  least
                essential and adjudicators can surely be  trusted  to  carry
                out their functions in a proper fashion."

   11. They went on to say that whilst it may be preferable for  judges  not
       to have any regard to decisions  of  colleagues  that  had  been  set
       aside, it did not follow that to do so would automatically give  rise
       to some unfairness.   It was indeed common in civil  proceedings  for
       the judge to be well aware of the entire history of a case.   It must
       be assumed, unless there is evidence to the contrary, that any  Judge
       approaches the task before her with a fair and open mind.  I  am  not
       satisfied  that  Judge  Grant  did  anything  other.  The  appeal  is
       therefore dismissed.




       Decisions

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law  and
       it is upheld.

   13. The appeal is dismissed.

   14. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         13th September 2019
