
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00727/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 December 2013                           |On 23 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                                     f R
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Cecilia Hulse
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   For the purposes  of  this  determination  I  will  use  references  to
    appellant  and  respondent  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  15  September  1982.   He
    originally arrived in the United Kingdom  in  April  2001.   He  has  a
    number of convictions for criminal offences dating back  to  2006.   In
    2009 he was notified of his liability to be deported.  He  successfully
    appealed that decision under Article 8 of the European  Convention  and
    was subsequently granted six months' discretionary leave.

3.   He reoffended.  In December 2010  he  made  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of marriage and on 28 January 2011 he  was  granted
    three years' leave on the basis of family life until 28 January 2014.

4.    He  reoffended.   In  April  2012  he  was  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment for drug offences and following that conviction was served
    with notice  of  liability  to  deport  and  then  in  March  2013  the
    respondent  made  a  deportation  order.   He  appealed   against   the
    respondent's decision upon the basis that he fell  within  one  of  the
    exceptions set out in Section 33 of the 2007 Act and that  his  removal
    would be a breach of his Article 8 rights.

5.   The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Woodhouse sitting with a non-legal  member  ("the  panel")  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 9 September 2013.  There  was  an  oral  hearing.   The
    appellant attended and both parties were represented.

6.   In a determination dated  16  October  2013  the  panel  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal "under the Immigration Rules" but allowed the appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR.  In summary the panel found that the respondent's
    decision would be disproportionate bearing in mind the appellant's wife
    and two children and the appellant's stepchild, being a  child  of  his
    wife's previous relationship.

7.   The  respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal.   There  were  two  grounds
    alleged, namely a failure to give adequate or any reasons  with  regard
    to views expressed by the panel on the appellant's risk of  reoffending
    and secondly that the panel had misdirected itself in law dealing  with
    the best interests of the children and  in  balancing  the  appellant's
    rights with those of the general public.

8.   In a decision dated 8 November, a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted leave to appeal and in doing so said as follows:

         "2.  Within the grounds of application it is argued  on  behalf  of
             the Respondent that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  an
             arguable material error of law by  failing  to  give  adequate
             reasons  for  findings  on  material  matters  in   particular
             asserting that the  panel  failed  to  adequately  assess  the
             Appellant's risk of re-offending which in itself amount to  an
             arguable material error of  law.   It  is  of  note  that  the
             Appellant had  previously  been  the  subject  of  deportation
             proceedings but an appeal in 2009 had been successful.  Within
             months of him being allowed to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
             after the success of his appeal he  had  started  re-offending
             again.  I find that  this  is  a  significant  aspect  of  the
             Appellant's background which should arguably have  been  given
             greater consideration by the panel.


         3.   It is further asserted by the Respondent that the  panel  made
             further arguable material errors of law in their assessment of
             the proportionality of the decision of the Secretary of  State
             and had failed to take sufficient account of the  judgment  in
             the case of MF (Nigeria).


         4.   Having  considered  the  contents  of  the  very  lengthy  and
             detailed determination I have come to the conclusion that  the
             issues raised within the grounds of application  are  arguable
             and on that basis permission to appeal is granted."

9.   Thus the matter appears before me in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Ms  Hulse
    (who appeared below)  represented  the  appellant  and  Mr  Deller  the
    respondent.

10.  At the hearing Ms Hulse produced a  skeleton  argument  which  had  not
    previously been lodged with the Tribunal or served upon the respondent.
     She also produced a bundle of additional  documents.   These  had  not
    been placed before the panel in the First-tier and no  application  was
    made for them to be admitted.  After time being given for the  skeleton
    argument to be read, Mr Deller then made his submissions.

11.  Mr Deller conceded that  the  panel's  determination  was  lengthy  and
    there were clearly-made points  throughout.   The  appellant's  history
    showed an escalation of offences, the panel would need  to  have  given
    careful consideration of the risk of reoffending.  Mr Deller emphasised
    that  the  appellant  had  previously  been  successful   in   avoiding
    deportation and his prison sentence should have been a "wake-up  call".
    Mr  Deller  referred  to  paragraphs  160  to  163   of   the   panel's
    determination as some careful consideration on the  material  had  been
    conducted.  The panel  should  have  undertaken  consideration  of  the
    interaction between the new Immigration Rules and Article 8.  They  had
    mentioned the case of MF before the Upper Tribunal.  There was  nothing
    exceptional in this case.  Whilst the appellant had a solid family  and
    the children would be upset if he left, that is  not  sufficient.   The
    respondent was not saying that all should relocate to  Jamaica.   Would
    the family be "devastated" in the event of deportation.  Each  case  is
    fact sensitive and the respondent says that  in  this  particular  case
    insufficient analysis had been undertaken and the determination of  the
    panel was thereby flawed.

12.  Ms Hulse relied upon her skeleton argument.  There  is  no  requirement
    on a determination to be perfect.  Can it be understood and how has  it
    reached its conclusions?  This was a very detailed  determination,  all
    points were properly addressed.  Whilst drugs are "bad" and this was  a
    serious offence, it was in itself nowhere near the top (nor middle)  of
    seriousness.  The panel had found a genuine family  relationship  which
    appears to be accepted by the respondent.

13.  Ms Hulse emphasised that  whilst  plans  had  been  discussed  for  all
    foreign criminals such as the appellant to be deported,  that  was  not
    currently the case.  Therefore there must be  exceptions  and  in  this
    particular case the panel were correct in  allowing  the  appeal.   The
    panel had gone through everything before  them  and  had  given  proper
    reasons.  The correct weight  had  been  given  to  each  part  of  the
    evidence.  It was a very careful determination  and  was  detailed  and
    properly reasoned.  They reached findings that were open  to  them  and
    the respondent's appeal should be dismissed.

14.  After consideration I announced my decision that I  found  no  material
    error of law for the reasons now set out in this determination.

15.  I may only set aside a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  if  I  am
    satisfied that the judge, or in this case the panel,  made  a  material
    error of law which would have  affected  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    Unless a decision is perverse it is not a  question  of  whether  I  or
    another judge agree or disagree with the findings or would have come to
    a different conclusion.  In this case it is certainly not argued by the
    respondent that the panel's decision was perverse.

16.  In summary the respondent's challenge  to  the  panel's  conclusion  is
    based upon a contention that the panel were wrong in  their  assessment
    of the appellant's likelihood to reoffend (as evidenced by a string  of
    criminal  convictions  and  immigration  history)  and   an   incorrect
    assessment of the best interests of the children.  The respondent  also
    submits that the panel  failed  to  properly  balance  the  appellant's
    circumstances with the public interest and had not properly  considered
    whether or not the appellant's circumstances were exceptional.

17.  The panel's determination runs to some 34  pages  and  174  paragraphs.
    Mr Deller conceded that it was a lengthy document  containing  clearly-
    made points and the  panel  had  given  careful  consideration  on  the
    material referred to at the original hearing.  The  panel  clearly  had
    taken into account the escalating nature of the offences  committed  by
    the appellant.  They were aware, and took into account, the  fact  that
    the appellant had reoffended on two  occasions  following  his  earlier
    successful appeal.  The  respondent  argues  that  the  panel  had  not
    adequately assessed the risk of  the  appellant's  reoffending  in  the
    future.  In fact the panel had taken this into account.   I  note  from
    paragraphs 121 through to 126 and in 152 to 157 the panel made findings
    by drawing in a number of comments from documentation provided to  them
    and in noting the effect of the second sentence of imprisonment imposed
    upon the appellant.   The  length  of  that  sentence  meant  that  the
    appellant's drug misuse could be addressed.  The panel clearly realised
    they had to address the question of risk of reoffending.  They came  to
    conclusions in a well-reasoned manner. I do not  find  that  they  gave
    either no or inadequate reasons as the respondent alleges.

18.  The grounds seeking leave make the point that  the  panel  have  placed
    weight on the children's best interests but they make the further point
    that the appellant himself appears not to have placed  much  weight  on
    those interests.  With respect, I do not consider that to be a relevant
    point.  The best interests of the  children  are  in  fact  their  best
    interests, and it is immaterial what the appellant's  previous  actions
    have indicated.  From paragraph 159 onwards the  panel  set  out  their
    views on the evidence before them and their conclusions on the children
    are well reasoned.  Contrary to what is said in the grounds, the  panel
    did give adequate consideration of the public interest  in  removal  in
    the proportionality assessment.  Paragraphs 171 and 172 are adequate in
    explaining the balancing nature of the panel's duty  in  assessing  the
    evidence.

19.  As to the relationship between Article  8  and  the  "new"  Immigration
    Rules, again I am of the view that the panel adequately addressed  that
    issue.  They were clearly minded (paragraph 141) of the views  set  out
    in  MF  (Article  8  -  new   rules)   Nigeria   [2012]   UKUT   00393.
    Understandably they have not considered the Court of Appeal's views  in
    respect of that case but I am of the view that reference to  the  Court
    of Appeal would have had no material effect upon  the  outcome  of  the
    panel in this appeal.

20.  I am satisfied that the panel addressed all  the  issues  before  them.
    They took into account all  the  evidence  and  they  reached  reasoned
    conclusions which were open to them.

21.  No error of law exists within their determination and  this  appeal  by
    the respondent is dismissed.

22.  The panel in the First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction.   No
    application was made to me in respect  of  that  direction  and  it  is
    hereby continued and maintained.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


