

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00145/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 September 2013                          |On 25 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FV
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Gray & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission by the Secretary  of  State  against  a
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge Price OBE and Ms S E
   Singer.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed an  appeal  by  FV  (hereinafter
   referred to as "the claimant") under Article  8  against  a  decision  to
   deport him.

2) The claimant is a national of Colombia.  He came to the UK in  July  1978
   and later that year met JG, with whom he  entered  into  a  relationship.
   The appellant remained in the UK until 1985 when he and JG, together with
   their daughter and  the  claimant's  stepson,  went  to  Colombia.   They
   returned to the UK early in 1986.  The claimant shortly  afterwards  went
   back to Colombia.  JG and the two children went to visit  him  there  and
   they all travelled back to the UK together in October 1986.  The claimant
   entered the UK on a visitor visa.  Subsequently in 1988 the claimant  was
   deported from the UK.  JG and the two  children  followed  him  two  days
   later  but  JG  was  depressed  in  Colombia  and  missed   her   mother.
   Accordingly JG and the children returned to the UK in December 1988.   In
   1989 the claimant attempted to enter the UK but was removed.  He went  to
   Spain, where JG and the couple's daughter joined him.   As  they  had  no
   work or income in Spain JG and the daughter  returned  to  Scotland.   In
   2000 the claimant entered the UK illegally and was reunited with JG.  The
   couple married in January 2003.  An application was  made  for  leave  to
   remain as a spouse.  This application appears to have been treated by the
   Secretary of State as an application to revoke the deportation  order  on
   human rights grounds.  An application of this nature was refused  with  a
   right of appeal, which was duly exercised.  The appeal was successful  to
   the  extent  only  of  revoking  the  deportation  order.   The  claimant
   therefore returned to Colombia to apply for  entry  clearance.   He  came
   back to the UK in March 2007 with a valid entry clearance.  In  2009  the
   claimant was sentenced to imprisonment for 15 months for  drug  offences.
   This led to an automatic liability to deportation under the 2007 Act.  It
   is the appeal against this decision which was allowed by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

3) The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  from  his
   wife, JG, from  the  couple's  daughter,  BG,  and  from  the  claimant's
   stepson, SG.  On the basis of this evidence the  Tribunal  made  findings
   about the claimant's family and private life in  the  UK.   The  Tribunal
   found that the appellant has been married since 2003 and has  a  daughter
   from that relationship as well as a stepson. It was not disputed that the
   claimant had established private and family life in the UK.  The Tribunal
   found that at the time of the decision appealed against the Secretary  of
   State was not aware that  a  supervision  order  had  been  made  by  the
   Children's Panel in relation to the claimant's grandson, TB, the  son  of
   BG.  In terms of this supervision order TB was required to live with  the
   claimant and his wife, as his grandparents, and his mother lives at  this
   address also.  Both  the  claimant's  daughter  and  stepson  are  single
   parents.  Between them they have  three  young  children,  who  attend  a
   primary school close to the claimant's house.  The claimant provides care
   for the grandchildren and has a close  relationship  with  all  three  of
   them.  He also  cares  for  his  wife,  who  suffers  from  epilepsy  and
   osteoporosis.   The  Tribunal  accepted  that  the  claimant's  wife   is
   dependent on him for  many  aspects  of  her  care.   This  includes  the
   possibility of seizures which would put  her  and  the  grandchildren  at
   risk.  The Tribunal accepted that  the  family  are  particularly  close,
   comprising the claimant  and  his  wife,  two  grown-up  children,  three
   grandchildren, and the claimant's mother-in-law, who also requires  care.



4) The Tribunal acknowledged that  the  claimant  had  committed  a  serious
   offence.  His sentence was reduced by 5 months to 15  months  because  of
   his early guilty plea.  The Tribunal accepted that the motivation for the
   crime was to obtain money to repay debts.

5) The application for permission to appeal on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
   State criticises both the fact finding and the reasoning  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.  It  was  contended  that  the  Tribunal  did  not  record
   accurate evidence in relation to the supervision order by failing to take
   account of its temporary and reviewable nature.  It was further contended
   that  the  claimant's  care  for  his  grandchildren  was  a  matter   of
   convenience  rather  than  necessity  as  the  grandchildren  all  had  a
   responsible parent.  Furthermore the care provided by  the  claimant  for
   his wife was also said to be a  matter  of  convenience.   There  was  no
   evidence that the family was closer than any other.

6) With regard to the legal issues, the grounds contend  that  the  Tribunal
   did not have regard to the case of Sanade &  Other  (British  children  -
   Zambrano - Dereci) [2011] UKUT 48 in relation to  the  deportation  of  a
   foreign criminal convicted of the importation and supply  of  significant
   quantities of Class A Drugs.

7) Prior to the hearing Mr Mullen sought by  correspondence  to  expand  and
   enlarge upon the grounds of appeal.  In  relation  to  the  legal  issues
   considered by the First-tier Tribunal he pointed out in a  letter  of  26
   September 2013 that the Tribunal wrongly applied  paragraph  364  of  the
   Immigration Rules, which applied to discretionary decisions to deport and
   not to a mandatory decision under section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
   2007.  Had the panel considered the matter within the  correct  statutory
   framework there was a very  real  possibility  that  it  would  not  have
   reached the conclusion it did in relation to the weight to be attached to
   the claimant's sentence.  The Tribunal further erred by having regard  to
   paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules, which  had  been  deleted.   The
   Tribunal did not satisfactorily explain why the appeal was decided in the
   claimant's favour and did not consider the full extent of the  claimant's
   immigration history.  The proper weight to  be  attached  to  the  public
   interest in deporting those to whom section 32(7) applied  was  clarified
   in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,  although  this  post-dated  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

8) At the commencement of the hearing I indicated to Mr Mullen  that  I  did
   not  consider  it  necessary  to  formally  amend  the  grounds  of   the
   application for permission to appeal.  The matters raised  by  Mr  Mullen
   were in part extensions of the original grounds, or were already referred
   to in the grant of permission to appeal, or were obvious  points  arising
   from the face of the Tribunal's determination.

9) In his submission at the hearing Mr  Mullen  said  he  would  concentrate
   upon the grounds in the application relating to the supervision order and
   the misdirections in law.  He would not pursue the  grounds  relating  to
   the care of the grandchildren or the claimant's wife or the issue of  the
   closeness of the family relationships.  He submitted that had  the  panel
   properly directed itself with regard to the correct legal provisions then
   on the facts, which were largely agreed, there was  a  strong  likelihood
   that an entirely different outcome would have been reached.  The  panel's
   treatment of the supervision order was wholly inaccurate and on the basis
   of this the panel inferred that the claimant has  established  a  private
   life.  There was no mention by the panel that the supervision order  came
   into effect once the claimant was already under the threat of deportation
   and his immigration status was precarious.  There was no mention  by  the
   claimant of whether he had  disclosed  to  social  workers  that  he  had
   completed a two year sentence for the supply of Class  A  drugs  and  was
   under threat of deportation.  Mr Mullen acknowledged, however,  that  the
   question of disclosure of the claimant's prison sentence did  not  appear
   to have been raised in cross-examination before the First-tier  Tribunal.
   Nevertheless it should have been clear to the panel that the claimant was
   under the threat of deportation when the supervision order was made.

10) Mr Mullen continued that  at  paragraph  30  of  the  determination  the
   Tribunal accepted that the claimant had committed a serious  offence  but
   noted that his sentence was reduced by 5 months.   Mr  Mullen  questioned
   whether this should be weighed in the claimant's  favour.   According  to
   primary legislation a foreign criminal sentenced to  12  months  or  more
   should be deported subject to certain exceptions.  As was pointed out  at
   paragraph 54 of SS (Nigeria), it required a strong claim to overcome  the
   public interest in deportation.  The panel did not take into account  the
   claimant's  immigration  status  and  previous  deportation  order.    In
   relation  to  the  previous  deportation  order,   however,   Mr   Mullen
   acknowledged that the claimant entered the UK in 2007 with a valid  entry
   clearance.  Nevertheless, the claimant could not claim to be ignorant  of
   immigration procedures and he knew he needed to abide by the laws of  the
   land.  The claimant was 51 when he committed the offence in question  and
   could not rely on youth or naivety as an excuse.

11) It was pointed out that the  Tribunal  had  before  it  no  pre-sentence
   report or probation report.  Mr Mullen acknowledged that  none  had  been
   produced.  Nevertheless there was a lack of appreciation of the  evidence
   and the relevant factors had not been properly weighed up.  The  tribunal
   had failed to properly carry out its task.  Its decision could not  stand
   and should be re-made.  The sentencing remarks had been produced (at  M1-
   M4 of the respondent's bundle).  Mr Mullen acknowledged that  a  sentence
   of 20 months was not the most serious for the type of offence  but  there
   was still a statutory presumption in favour of deportation.  He  referred
   to paragraph 48 of SS (Nigeria) on the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
   policy and legislation.  There was a statutory  presumption  set  out  by
   Parliament.

12) On behalf of the claimant, Mr Winter submitted  there  was  no  material
   error of law.  The issue was whether given the findings of fact the error
   was material and would justify setting aside the  decision.   There  were
   sufficient findings made by  the  Tribunal  to  say  the  error  was  not
   material.  The Tribunal set out the correct question at  paragraph  7  of
   the Determination, which was whether the deportation would breach Article
   8.  The Tribunal's reasons should be looked at a whole.  The Tribunal had
   regard to the public interest at paragraph 33 of  the  determination  and
   accepted that the claimant had committed a serious offence.  The Tribunal
   regarded the length of sentence as significant.  In  response  Mr  Mullen
   submitted that the claimant's immigration history and the nature  of  the
   offence were not taken into  account.   The  supervision  order  was  not
   properly considered.

13) Having heard the parties' submissions I considered the issue of  whether
   there was an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  by
   reason of which it should be set aside.  There was no question at all but
   that the Tribunal misdirected itself as to the law at paragraph 31 of the
   determination where it referred to paragraph 364 and  paragraph  395C  of
   the Immigration Rules.   As  has  been  pointed  out  on  behalf  of  the
   Secretary of State, paragraph 364 was of no relevance to a decision under
   section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007,  and  paragraph  395C  had  been
   deleted from the Immigration Rules.  It was submitted on  behalf  of  the
   claimant that this misdirection would not have affected  the  outcome  of
   the appeal as the Tribunal had properly directed itself as to  the  issue
   in relation to Article 8 at paragraph 7 of the determination.  I  do  not
   accept this submission.  As Mr Mullen argued, in order to take the public
   interest properly into account the  Tribunal  would  need  to  apply  the
   provisions of sections 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act.  As was pointed out  in
   SS (Nigeria), although this judgment post-dated the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal, Parliament has set out in legislation a view of where  the
   public interest in deportation lies  in  relation  to  foreign  nationals
   sentenced to 12 months or more in prison.

14) I was satisfied that there was an error of law in the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and  it  was  so  fundamental  to  the  question  the
   Tribunal was asked to decide that the decision had to be  set  aside.   I
   further stated that in my view the decision could be  re-made  without  a
   further hearing.  As Mr  Mullen  acknowledged,  the  facts  were  largely
   agreed, as they had been found by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There  was
   some concern over the temporary and reviewable nature of the  supervision
   order but this did not affect  significantly  the  finding  made  by  the
   Tribunal that the child who was subject  to  the  order  lives  with  the
   claimant and his wife as his grandparents.  The only significant issue in
   dispute was whether the Tribunal had had  proper  regard  to  the  public
   interest when carrying out the balancing exercise  under  Article  8.   I
   asked Mr Mullen to address me on the issue of the weight to be  given  to
   the public interest.

15) In response to this invitation, Mr Mullen indicated  that  the  claimant
   was now serving a prison sentence of four months imposed for a  different
   offence.  I pointed out that the claimant's  conviction  upon  which  the
   current deportation order was  based  was  the  conviction  and  sentence
   imposed in 2009 and the question for the Tribunal was whether this  would
   justify deportation having regard to the claimant's right to  private  or
   family life.

16) Mr Mullen acknowledged that so far as the 2009  offence  was  concerned,
   it was not at the most serious end of the scale.   It  was  less  than  a
   sentence of four years set out in the Immigration Rules as the  threshold
   for more serious offending.  It was still  nevertheless  a  very  serious
   offence and covered by the legislation.  It  was  sufficient  to  justify
   deportation.  Mr Mullen further submitted that it  was  significant  that
   the claimant's wife, child and grandchildren  were  not  present  at  the
   hearing today to support the  claimant.   There  was  no-one  present  to
   express continuing support for him.

17) At this juncture I asked Mr Mullen if he was seeking  to  introduce  new
   evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008.  This, however, was not Mr Mullen's intention.  I pointed out
   that I had already stated that I would re-make the  decision  relying  on
   the facts found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  those  findings  the
   claimant's relationship with his grandchildren was a significant  factor.
   At the same time I  did  not  understand  it  to  be  disputed  that  the
   supervision order in respect of the grandchild  TB  was  not  made  until
   after the appellant  had  been  sentenced,  and  indeed  had  served  his
   sentence and was under threat of deportation.

18) The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place on 23 April  2012.
    If there has been a material change of circumstances since that date  it
   is open to the Secretary of State to make a further decision in  relation
   to the claimant based on the change of circumstances.  The decision  made
   in this appeal is restricted to consideration of the Secretary of State's
   decision of 7 March 2012 to the effect that the claimant was  subject  to
   section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and that none of the  exceptions
   in section 33, in particular section  33(2)  in  relation  to  the  Human
   Rights Convention, applied to him.  Even though the appellant succeeds in
   this appeal, the claimant's leave to enter  expired  in  March  2009  and
   further leave to remain was  refused  in  June  2009.   The  question  of
   whether the claimant is entitled to leave to remain  is  not  before  the
   Tribunal in this appeal.  The future status of the claimant is  a  matter
   for the Secretary of State, taking into account any  material  change  of
   circumstances which may have taken place since  the  hearing  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal in March 2012.

19) The First-tier Tribunal following its hearing  set  out  the  claimant's
   family circumstances, which are compelling.  At the hearing before me  Mr
   Mullen acknowledged that the  Tribunal's  findings  in  relation  to  the
   claimant's family life would not be challenged save in  relation  to  the
   nature of the supervision order and the time at which it was made.  As  I
   have already indicated, I do not  consider  that  the  supervision  order
   significantly affects the fact that both  the  child  concerned  and  his
   mother, who is the claimant's daughter, live with the  claimant  and  his
   wife and are dependant upon them for care and  support.   It  is  further
   accepted that the claimant's wife has serious health  problems.   Mention
   has already been made of her epilepsy and osteoporosis but  the  evidence
   before the First-tier Tribunal was that she also suffers from depression.
    The evidence before the Tribunal was that it would not be safe  for  the
   claimant's wife to care for the grandchildren on her own because  she  is
   subject to seizures.

20) The claimant's family life, of  course,  must  be  weighed  against  the
   public interest, having regard  to  the  offence  he  committed  and  its
   seriousness.  This is where the First-tier  Tribunal  misdirected  itself
   by, in particular, failing to have regard to paragraphs  396-399  of  the
   Immigration Rules.  Under paragraph 396 there is a presumption that it is
   in the public interest to deport a person where the  Secretary  of  State
   must make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of 2007  Act.
   Under paragraph 397 a deportation order will not be made if the  person's
   removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  Human  Rights
   Convention.   Where  deportation  would  not   be   contrary   to   these
   obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
   interest in deportation is outweighed.  Under paragraph 398,  so  far  as
   relevant to this appeal, where a person claims their deportation would be
   contrary to Article 8 and the deportation of the person is  conducive  to
   the public good because they have been convicted of an offence for  which
   they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
   but at least 12 months, then the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that
   claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if neither
   does, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
   interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors.

21) The provision in paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applies
   where the person to be deported has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
   relationship with a child under the age of 18 years, subject  to  certain
   further  conditions.   In  relation  to  this   appeal   the   claimant's
   relationship with the children in his family is as a  grandparent  rather
   than as a parent and it has not been argued before me that in consequence
   of the supervision order he is  to  be  regarded  as  having  a  parental
   relationship with a child.  The further  provision  in  paragraph  399(b)
   applies to a person in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
   partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  citizen.   This  provision
   requires that the person to be deported has lived in the  UK  with  valid
   leave continuously for at least the 15 years  immediately  preceding  the
   date of the immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)
   and  on  the  facts  of  this  appeal,  the  claimant  cannot  meet  this
   requirement.  It has not been  suggested  that  paragraph  399A  has  any
   application to the circumstances of this appeal.

22)  Accordingly,  the  claimant's  position  must  be  considered   outwith
   paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules under Article 8.  In this regard I
   am satisfied that the claimant has a strong arguable case in terms of  MS
   (India) [2013] CSIH 52.  The proper approach in such cases is set out  by
   the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  Although  this
   judgment was handed down shortly after the hearing before me, it confirms
   the proper approach to be taken in relation to the two  stage  test  when
   applying Article 8.  The first stage is to consider the appeal under  the
   Immigration Rules, in terms of which it has already been found  that  the
   claimant cannot succeed.  The second stage is to carry out the  balancing
   exercise in terms of the proportionality of removal under Article 8.   In
   carrying out this balancing exercise I am mindful of the significance  of
   the public interest as set out in the case of SS (Nigeria).

23) There is no question as to the seriousness of  the  claimant's  offence.
   He was found guilty of possession of  a  Class  A  drug  with  intent  to
   supply.  He was sentenced in Glasgow Sheriff Court on 29 September  2009.
   The sentencing remarks of the Sheriff are before me but they make  little
   reference to the nature of the offence except to state that this type  of
   offence,  unless  there  are  exceptional  circumstances,  will  merit  a
   custodial sentence.  But for the guilty plea the sentence would have been
   one of 20 months but this was reduced to 15 months to take account of the
   plea.

24) The First-tier Tribunal was correct to have regard to the length of  the
   sentence in considering the public interest.  Given  the  nature  of  the
   offence the sentence was not a heavy one.  It may be  compared  with  the
   sentence in SS (Nigeria), which concerned three concurrent sentences of 3
   years.  The position in this appeal is that the claimant was convicted of
   a serious offence  which  would  normally  justify  deportation  but  the
   sentence imposed was comparatively light, leaving  open  the  possibility
   that the public interest  in  deportation  might  be  outweighed  by  the
   claimant's family circumstances.

25)  The  claimant's  family  circumstances  as  found  by  the   First-tier
   Tribunal, based on  the  evidence  it  heard  in  April  2012,  are  very
   compelling.  The claimant has been caring  for  his  wife,  who  is  poor
   health and in effect holding together three generations  of  his  family,
   which includes the child of his own daughter and the two children of  his
   stepson.  When I balance the claimant's family life and  the  support  he
   has been providing to the other members of his family against the  length
   of  his  sentence,  I  am  satisfied  that  his  deportation   would   be
   disproportionate in terms of Article 8.

26) One of the issues  raised  by  Mr  Mullen  was  whether  the  First-tier
   Tribunal took into account the claimant's immigration history,  including
   the  previous  deportation  order.   This  history   is   clearly   poor.
   Nevertheless it is not  disputed  that  the  claimant's  appeal  in  2006
   against the decision refusing to revoke the  previous  deportation  order
   was successful.  In consequence he was able to enter the UK in March 2007
   with a valid entry clearance.  I do not consider that  the  events  which
   took place prior to March 2007 would be of sufficient weight to  outweigh
   the significance of the claimant's family life as  constituted  in  March
   2012.

27) As I have already indicated, if there has been a material change in  the
   claimant's family circumstances since that date, that is not a matter for
   this appeal.

Conclusions

28) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

29) I set aside the decision.

30) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

31) The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  a  direction  for  anonymity.
   Nevertheless, having regard to the nature of the claimant's  family  life
   and his involvement with his grandchildren,  I  consider  that  an  order
   should be made under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008  prohibiting  any  report  of  these  proceedings  which  will
   directly or indirectly identify the claimant or any member of his family.



Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination

The First-tier Tribunal found that no fee had been paid or was  payable  and
therefore made no fee award.  I have had no application to make a fee  award
and accordingly I do not make one.


Signed                                             Date
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

