
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00981/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |On 4th December 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                               baboucarr mboob
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Akindele of A & A Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of the Gambia born on 19th  June  1991.
    The Appellant first entered the UK on 31st January  2003  and  on  29th
    September 2011 he was issued with a permanent residence card as the son
    of his father, Yusupha Mboob, a citizen of Finland and therefore an EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.   On  12th  December  2011
    having been convicted of the offences of robbery  and  common  assault,
    the Appellant was sentenced  to  three  years'  detention  at  a  Young
    Offenders Institution.  As a consequence, on 28th  March  2013  it  was
    decided to make a deportation order against  the  Appellant  under  the
    provisions of Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The Appellant appealed that decision, and his appeal
    was heard by a Panel chaired by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Flynn
    (the Panel) on 29th August 2013.  The Panel decided to allow the appeal
    for the reasons given in its Determination dated 25th  September  2013.
    The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 9th October
    2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Panel contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Panel allowed the appeal because it found that the  Respondent  had
    failed to show that there were serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security justifying her decision.  The Panel found the Appellant
    to  be  generally  credible  even   though   he   had   minimised   his
    responsibility for the offences which he had committed and even  though
    it found not credible two witnesses who had been called to  corroborate
    the Appellant's evidence.  The Panel took  as  its  starting  point  an
    OASys Report which had assessed the Appellant as being of a medium risk
    of reoffending and a  medium  risk  of  serious  harm  to  the  public,
    although the Appellant's father might be at greater risk.  This  Report
    identified three risk factors which might affect the Appellant's future
    behaviour being peer  pressure;  cannabis  abuse;  and  family  issues.
    However, the Panel accepted as  credible  the  evidence  of  a  further
    witness, the Appellant's sister Mrs Davies, with whom it  was  proposed
    the  Appellant  would  live.   The  Panel  was  satisfied   that   this
    arrangement,  allowing  Mrs  Davies  to  keep  a  "close  eye"  on  the
    Appellant, would sufficiently address these risk  factors.   The  Panel
    found  that  there  was  every  chance  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    successfully rehabilitated  and  that  there  had  been  some  form  of
    reconciliation between the  Appellant  and  his  father  leading  to  a
    reduction of  the  risk  that  there  would  be  violence  between  the
    Appellant and his father.  The Panel  concluded  that  there  were  not
    serious grounds for concluding that the Appellant represented a present
    threat to the public or any individual.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Saunders argued that the Panel had erred in  law  in
    coming to these conclusions.  He referred to the grounds of application
    and argued  that  the  Panel  had  made  inconsistent  findings  as  to
    credibility.  The Appellant had not just minimised  his  responsibility
    for his  offending.   He  had  sought  to  distance  himself  from  his
    conviction and had shown no remorse.  The Panel  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for its decision that the  Appellant  had  every  chance  of  a
    successful  rehabilitation.   There  was  evidence  that  he  had  been
    involved in fights whilst in prison, but there  was  no  evidence  that
    whilst in prison he had  addressed  his  drugs  problem.   He  had  not
    attended any appropriate courses.

 5. After Mr Saunders had made his submission, I indicated to  Mr  Akindele
    that I found no error of law in the decision of the Panel and therefore
    it was not necessary for me to hear from him.

 6. My reasons for the finding of no error of law are as follows.   I  find
    the Panel's finding as to the credibility of the Appellant  to  be  one
    open to it on the evidence before it and which it fully explained.   It
    may be the case that the Panel found that the Appellant's evidence  was
    not corroborated by that of two of his witnesses, but corroboration  is
    not essential for a finding of credibility.  I  find  the  Respondent's
    arguments as to credibility to be no more than a disagreement with  the
    finding of the Panel.  In any  event,  the  Panel's  finding  that  the
    Appellant did not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat was mainly based upon the contents of the OASys Report  and  the
    evidence of Mrs Davies as to how she proposed to  deal  with  the  risk
    factors referred to in that Report.   The  Respondent  has  not  argued
    before me that the Panel's finding as to the credibility of Mrs  Davies
    was flawed.  Therefore the decision of the Panel that there  was  every
    chance for a successful rehabilitation of the Appellant is founded upon
    the evidence and cannot be described as perverse.   Again  I  find  the
    arguments of Mr  Saunders  to  the  contrary  to  be  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Panel's decision.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I do  not  do
so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

