
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/00398/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard At                             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 04.02.2019                        |On 06.02.2019                        |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                Fabio TAVARES
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Ali Bandegani  (counsel instructed by Cassalys)
For the respondent: Mr Ian Jarvis

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hariqbal Singh Sangha),  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  2
    November 2018, to  an EEA appeal against deportation by  a  citizen  of
    Portugal, born 9 September 1994. The judge  had  written  an  extremely
    painstaking decision, and the only ground of appeal was that he had not
    taken account in it of the latest Offender  Assessment  System  [OASys]
    report, of 1 November 2018.

 2. It is agreed that the 1 November report  had  been  before  the  judge,
    though inevitably not as part of the Home Office appeal bundle: perhaps
    he overlooked it between  the  hearing  on  the  2nd  and  signing  his
    decision on the 26th. Whatever the  reason,  it  was  clearly  relevant
    evidence before him, and wrong in law to overlook it. The question  for
    me, as recognized by the very experienced judge who gave permission  to
    appeal, is whether that error was material in all the circumstances.

 3. History To answer that question, the November report needs to be set in
    context. The appellant arrived in this country in 2005, when he was 11.
    In 2011 and 2012 he was found guilty of offences, apparently  committed
    when he was under  18,  involving  a  class  'B'  drug  (cannabis)  and
    possession  of  a  knife,  for  which  he  was  dealt  with  by   Youth
    Rehabilitation Orders. Within a year of the  second  occasion,  as  the
    judge points out, he was convicted of robbery (by this time  not  as  a
    person under 18),  and  in  April  2013  sent  to  a  young  offenders'
    institution [YOI] for 12 months. That led to  a  deportation  decision;
    but his appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal in May 2014,  and
    that decision upheld by the Upper  Tribunal,  following  a  hearing  in
    November, in February 2015.  The  Home  Office  sent  the  appellant  a
    warning letter about his future behaviour on 2 December that year.

 4. Meanwhile however the appellant had been convicted in November 2014  of
    possession of cannabis with intent to supply, and sentenced to 6 months
    in a YOI, suspended for 2 years. That was followed by the offences  for
    which the appellant was sentenced on  7  April  2017.  The  first  two,
    involving once again possession of cannabis with intent to supply,  and
    of a knife, were committed on 13 January 2015. Next he took part  in  a
    group burglary of a dwelling-house on 29 September that year.

 5. A few days later, on 4 October, the appellant  and  another  young  man
    called Hardy went for a woman walking along the road with her  autistic
    son of 8. Hardy pushed her to the ground, and wrenched two gold  chains
    she was wearing from her neck, as  well  as  her  gold  ear-rings.  The
    sentencing  judge  described  them  as  substantial  chains,  so   that
    significant force had been required: not surprisingly, both the  mother
    and son were  still  seriously  affected  by  what  had  happened.  The
    appellant drove off at the wheel of a car, which the  judge  found  had
    been bought as a get-away car shortly before; but the number was  taken
    by a member of the public.

 6. This led three days later, on 7 October 2015, to  the  appellant  being
    seen by police once again at the wheel of that car. He refused to stop,
    and drove off in a clearly reckless way: the police decided  they  must
    give chase, and did so for about two miles. At that point the appellant
    deliberately drove onto a pavement as he turned  a  corner,  apparently
    without seeing a woman walking along with  her  grandson,  also  8:  he
    ploughed into them, and fled on foot, though he did hand himself in  to
    the police on the 15th.

 7. The grandmother had been very  fit  before  this,  and  played  a  very
    important part in the life of her family; the judge  described  her  as
    having been grievously  injured,  with  both  legs  broken,  and  other
    injuries, all of which required three operations  and  five  months  in
    hospital. The judge gave a detailed description of  how  the  appellant
    had "... simply and starkly, destroyed that former life". The  boy  was
    knocked aside, without significant physical injury, but, as  the  judge
    pointed out, must have been dreadfully affected by what he had seen.

 8. The sentencing judge gave the appellant full credit  for  his  age  and
    pleas: the sentences of imprisonment he passed were as follows, and the
    total was 6 years and 2 months.

          a. cannabis: 10 months (knife 8 months concurrent)

          b. burglary: 10 months, also concurrent

          c. robbery: 2 years, consecutive

          d. causing serious injury by dangerous driving: 3 years 4 months,
             consecutive

    The appellant had been in custody since he handed himself  in,  and  so
    would  have  been  released  on  16  November  2018,  if  not  kept  in
    immigration detention, as he has been.

 9. Discussion Judge  Sangha  found  that  the  appellant  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of  residence  in  this  country;  but,  owing  to  his
    previous imprisonment, not the enhanced protection given by  10  years'
    lawful residence here. He correctly stated the question before  him  as
    being whether the appellant's deportation  was  justified  in  all  the
    circumstances by 'serious grounds of public policy or public security',
    on the principles set out at reg. 27 (5) of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

10. The only relevant authority on the point in hand is MC (Essa principles
    recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC), referred to both in the in  the  grounds
    of appeal, and in the Home Office response to them. The relevant  parts
    of the judicial head-note are as follows, shorn of references to  other
    authorities:

         "5.  Reference to prospects of rehabilitation  concerns  reasonable
             prospects of a person ceasing to commit crime,  not  the  mere
             possibility   of   rehabilitation.    Mere    capability    of
             rehabilitation is not to be equated with  reasonable  prospect
             of rehabilitation.

         ...

         10.  In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
             residence, the future prospects of  integration  cannot  be  a
             weighty factor. Even  when  such  prospects  have  significant
             weight they are not a trump card, as what  the  Directive  and
             the 2006 EEA Regulations require is  a  wide-ranging  holistic
             assessment. Both recognise that the more serious the  risk  of
             reoffending, and the offences that a person  may  commit,  the
             greater the right to interfere with the right of residence."

11. Though the judge did not directly refer to  that  authority,  he  dealt
    with the appeal in accordance with the principles set out in it, and so
    the only question is whether consideration of the November OASys report
    might reasonably have  affected  the  result  he  reached.  The  report
    considered, at some length, by the judge, dated from January 2018: that
    was the only one in the appeal bundle, at annex M. There is a copy of a
    general guidance note to OASys information in immigration appeals at N.
    Although every page of the report at M is dated 22 January 2018,  oddly
    enough the assessment pages are shown as  completed  (M40)  on  31  May
    2017, but signed (M41) on 25 April that year. If so,  then  they  dated
    from a very early stage of the appellant's sentence, passed on 7 April:
    this impression is confirmed by the sentencing judge's reference  (F10)
    to the author of the report before him as 'Mr Fone', clearly a mis-type
    for the name given at M41 as 'Peter Fung'.

12. The difference between the two reports put forward by Mr  Bandegani  as
    potentially significant were as follows: numbers refer to the pages  of
    the November one.

          a. (21) there had been no disciplinary adjudications against  the
             appellant since April 2016, and the last of five warnings "for
             mainly compliance issues" had been in December 2017;

          b. (22) the appellant had expressed remorse and "... has realised
             that he needs to make some changes";

          c. (54) the liaison arrangements for the appellant's release were
             now much  more  comprehensive:  so  far  as  relevant  to  the
             question of rehabilitation, intelligence  on  him  was  to  be
             gathered by the Police Gang Unit, and a  Gang  Worker  was  to
             support him in his  efforts  to  lead  a  crime-free  life;  a
             requirement  to  live  in  Approved  Premises  would   provide
             enhanced monitoring of his movements,  visitors,  associations
             drug use, thinking and behaviour, and help and support for his
             managed reintegration into the community; an adviser from  the
             Shaw Trust was to help him with employment.

13. While  I  was  not  referred  to  any  discussion  of  the  appellant's
    disciplinary record in prison in the January  report,  any  improvement
    was still relatively recent. On his  attitude  to  his  offending,  the
    January  report  (see  M11)   makes   it   clear   that   he   accepted
    responsibility, and (M36, R 6.1) that his perceived  immaturity  seemed
    "... to be changing for the better as he reflects fully on his  actions
    and his future". Mr Bandegani frankly acknowledged that the  only  real
    difference, for present purposes, in the two reports consisted  in  the
    need to measure the appellant's personal  characteristics  against  the
    more comprehensive arrangements for his supervision on release.

14. Looking back at the equivalent arrangements in the January report,  the
    section in question (M38, R11.12) also contains references to  a  named
    police officer, and two named local authority officers, as  responsible
    for monitoring any gang-related activity by the appellant  on  release.
    There was also a reference to a named advisor from another organization
    in connexion with the appellant's employment on release;  so  the  only
    additional  measure  seems  to  have   been   the   Approved   Premises
    requirement.

15. The striking similarity between the  two  reports,  as  the  permission
    judge noted, was in the  risk  assessments  reached.  The  notes  at  N
    explain the methodology: while the Offender  Group  Reconviction  Scale
    [OGRS] predictor score is essentially statistical, "... based on static
    factors, such as age and gender and number of previous sanctions",  the
    Offender General Predictor [OGP] and Offender Violence Predictor  [OVP]
    both incorporate 'dynamic factors', of which examples are given in  the
    following paragraph. Looking at the OVP  reconviction  assessments  for
    the appellant, those were 22% over  one  year,  and  35%  over  two  in
    January (M39), while in November (at p 43) they were 20%  and  32%.  In
    both reports, all three assessments contained very  similar  percentage
    assessments on all three scores, which fell into the 'medium' category.



16. So far as the risk of serious harm is concerned, the Guidance Notes say
    this, at M3: "Alongside static and dynamic predictors  of  general  and
    violent reoffending, the Offender Manager uses all of  the  information
    provided to them from other agencies and specialist tools  and  applies
    their professional judgment, in order to  make  an  assessment  of  the
    offender's risk of serious harm to others as being Low, Medium, High or
    Very High". The January report gives the serious harm  risk  assessment
    as low all round, in or out of custody, apart from that to  'staff'  in
    the community, given as 'medium'. However the risk of serious  harm  to
    the public in the community is given as 'high'.

17. The November report is unequivocal in its date, being dated 1 November,
    but explicitly based (see p 55) on an assessment made  on  30  October,
    following a 'sentence planning board'  on  the  5th.  Once  again,  the
    writer's professional assessment of the appellant was that he  posed  a
    low risk to children, known adults and (this time) 'staff',  either  in
    custody or in the community; but a high risk of  serious  harm  to  the
    public in the community.

18. Conclusions As Mr Jarvis pointed out, the  more  comprehensive  liaison
    arrangements in the November report seem to  be  directed  as  much  to
    controlling any  errant  behaviour  on  the  appellant's  part,  as  to
    providing him with improved support for  rehabilitation.  Mr  Bandegani
    realistically accepted when I put it to him, the  November  report  was
    completed only a fortnight before the appellant's planned  release  (if
    not further detained), and so the writer must have been  alive  to  the
    imminent potential need of controlling the high risk to the  public  he
    still presented. in the  light  of  the  previous  one,  with  enhanced
    measures, if necessary.

19. Looking at the November report in that light, and in the  light  of  MC
    (see 10), the following conclusions can be reached on this  appellant's
    case:

          a. there is nothing in the November report to show  a  reasonable
             prospect of rehabilitation, where there had been none  before,
             rather than a mere capability of it;

          b. though the judge accepted that the appellant has  a  permanent
             right of residence, he did not accept that he had achieved the
             necessary integration over the last ten years for an  enhanced
             right; so the weight to be given to any  future  prospects  of
             rehabilitation could at best be limited.

20. This appellant had a record of offences while under 18;  but  that  did
    not apply to his 2013 conviction for robbery, still less  to  his  2017
    convictions. At least so far as the robbery and the  dangerous  driving
    offences for which he was dealt with in that year are  concerned,  they
    were very serious indeed: the sentencing judge passed the maximum  term
    then allowed by law,  discounted  for  the  appellant's  plea,  on  the
    driving.

21. Taking the November report together with the judge's assessment of  the
    appellant's case, nothing if not holistic with that one  exception,  in
    the light of MC, it cannot reasonably be concluded that it  could  have
    made any difference to his final decision. The result is  that,  though
    overlooking the November report was an error  of  law,  it  was  not  a
    material one.

Appeal
                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                               Dated 04 February 2019
