

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/00596/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 June 2017                          |On 28 June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                 AGRON XHEPA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P. Yong of counsel, instructed by Perry Clements
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born on 23 June 1976, is a national  of  Albania.  He
    first entered the United Kingdom on 9 May 1999.  He applied for  asylum
    that same day but his application was refused and he then remained here
    without leave to do so.

2.   He met his partner in September 2004 and they began  to  live  together
    in October 2006. They travelled to Albania in order to marry  there  on
    17 September 2007. On 16 October 2007  he  was  issued  with  a  family
    permit as her partner and returned to the United Kingdom on 17  October
    2007. Their daughter was born on 18 November 2008.  The  Appellant  was
    then granted a five year residence card,  as  the  partner  of  an  EEA
    national, on 16 June 2009.

3.   However, he travelled to The Netherlands on 13 June 2013 to take  up  a
    short-term work contract. On 18 June 2013 he was arrested  and  charged
    with wilfully transporting 5.1 kg of cocaine in Amsterdam and  appeared
    in court on 18 December 2013. On 30 December 2013 he was convicted  and
    sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment. He was released from  prison  and
    returned to the United Kingdom on 11 September 2014 on a family  permit
    issued by the British Embassy in the Netherlands.

4.   On 15 December 2014, he applied for a permanent residence card  as  the
    partner of an EEA national who was exercising a  Treaty  right  in  the
    United Kingdom. He also applied for a non-permanent residence  card  in
    the alternative.

5.   His application for a  permanent  residence  card  was  refused  on  16
    September 2015 on the basis that he  could  not  establish  five  years
    continuous residence as the partner of an EEA national. The  Respondent
    also refused him non-permanent  residence  on  the  grounds  of  public
    policy. On 27 November 2015 the Respondent exercised her  powers  under
    regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 and decided that she was justified to deport him  from
    the United Kingdom on grounds of public policy. The Applicant  appealed
    on 11 December 2015 on the basis of the family and private life he  had
    established  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  on  16  December  2015  the
    Respondent certified his claim, which meant that he had  no  in-country
    right of appeal. The Appellant brought a claim for judicial review  but
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen refused him permission  on  the  papers  and
    also refused him a stay and he was deported from the United Kingdom  on
    18 February 2016.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury heard the Appellant's appeal  in  his
    absence on 7 October 2016 and dismissed his appeal in  a  decision  and
    reasons, promulgated on 31 October 2016. The Appellant appealed against
    this decision on 17 January 2017.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
    granted permission to appeal on 12 May 2017 on the basis  that  it  was
    arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hanbury's  failure  to  ensure
    that the Tribunal had  the  correct  and  complete  Appellant's  Bundle
    constituted a procedural irregularity of such a serious nature that  it
    amounted to an arguable error of law that might have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.  In  her  Rule  24  reply  the
    Respondent  submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hanbury   had
    directed himself appropriately.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

7.   I heard oral submissions from counsel for the Appellant  and  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer and I have referred to the content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant below.

DECISION

8.   The Appellant is appealing on the  basis  that  there  were  procedural
    irregularities in the manner in which the appeal was conducted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury. Counsel for the Appellant provided me with
    a copy of an email chain that indicated that  the  Appellant's  amended
    bundle had been sent by post to the First-tier Tribunal on 30 September
    2016 and that his solicitors had also attempted to check  that  it  had
    been received.  The  fact  that  the  bundle  had  been  submitted  was
    confirmed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley, who noted that  it  was
    in the Tribunal's file when he granted permission to appeal.

9.   Counsel for the Appellant also informed me that, when  no  confirmation
    of its receipt had been obtained, the Appellant's  solicitors  faxed  a
    further copy to the Tribunal on 6 October 2016. This is confirmed by  a
    number of documents and fax transmission sheets in the Tribunal file.

10.  The failure by the Tribunal to place all  the  evidence  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury amounted in itself to a material procedural
    irregularity. This was also augmented by the manner in which the appeal
    hearing was conducted.

11.  The Home Office Presenting Officer provided me with  a  short  note  of
    the hearing but no transcript was attached to it. I asked  her  if  she
    was challenging the record of proceedings provided by counsel  who  had
    represented the Appellant at the hearing and she said that she was not.
    I also provided both parties with the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  own
    record of proceedings, which was not as comprehensive as counsel's.  It
    is clear from the extracts of counsel's record at pages 243 and 245  of
    the Bundle provided for today's hearing, that counsel had  referred  to
    there being HMRC and tax records in the Appellant's Bundle. This should
    have put the First-tier Tribunal Judge on notice that he had  not  been
    provided by all the documents submitted on behalf of the Appellant,  as
    there were no such documents in the bundle submitted for  the  previous
    hearing, which had been adjourned.

12.  As  a  consequence,  the  description  of  events  at  the  hearing  in
    paragraph 10 of the decision and reasons indicates that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not given sufficient  attention  to  what  documents
    were before him. He said that the Appellant "mentioned at the start  of
    the case that she wished to take instructions on certain wage slips and
    related documents. I assumed that this was  a  reference  to  documents
    which had been disclosed but it transpired at the end  of  the  hearing
    that this reference was in fact two documents contained in a new bundle
    which Ms Tobin had in her possession". It is hard to see how  he  could
    accurately assume these documents were before  the  Tribunal  and  also
    that she was trying to rely on material he had not been provided with.

13.  In the light of the history now  provided  about  the  service  of  the
    amended bundle, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was mistaken in paragraph
    43 of his decision and reasons when he said that the documents at pages
    99 to 197 of the amended bundle were not produced until the  conclusion
    of the hearing or that in order to comply with the overriding objective
    in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 he had to exclude them.

14.  In addition, given the content of these documents, it is  difficult  to
    see how he could conclude in paragraph 46 of his decision  and  reasons
    that this evidence may have only  been  peripherally  relevant  to  the
    hearing.

15.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that it  was  failings  on
    the part of the Appellant's solicitors which had led  to  evidence  not
    being before the Tribunal. For the reasons given above I cannot  accept
    that submission. There may have been no direct proof of service but the
    emails and fax transmission sheets strongly suggest that  service  took
    place.

16.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the  second  part  of  the
    head note in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  105  (IAC).  But
    the first part of the head note states that "where there is a defect or
    impropriety of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance
    this may amount to a material error of law requiring  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside".

17.  The second part of the head note was  not  applicable  to  the  current
    appeal as, unlike E & R v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] EWCA Civ 49, it was not  being  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision was based on ignorance or mistake as  to  the
    facts.

18.  As a consequence, I find  that  there  were  procedural  irregularities
    that undermined the legality of the decision reached by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

19.  In relation to the substance of the appeal,  regulation  19(3)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  states  that  a
    family member of an EEA national may be removed if (b) the Secretary of
    State had decided that the person's removal is justified on grounds  of
    public policy, public security or  public  health  in  accordance  with
    regulation 21.

20.  In Regulation 21 a "relevant decision" is an EEA decision taken on  the
    grounds of public policy, public security or public health.

21.  Regulation 21(3) states that "a relevant decision may not be  taken  in
    respect  of  a  person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    regulation 15 except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security.

22.  In addition, whether or not the Appellant could establish that  he  had
    become entitled to permanent residence on the basis that he had entered
    the United Kingdom, as the partner of  an  EEA  national  exercising  a
    Treaty right as a worker on 17 November 2007 and remained here until he
    travelled to The Netherlands on 13 June 2013, regulation 21(5)  of  the
    EEA Regulations applied.

23.  This states that:

     "Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security it shall...be taken in accordance  with  the  following
    principles-

     (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

     (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
    the person concerned;

    (c)  the person conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;


    (e)  a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.


24.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not adopt a  structured  approach  to
    his analysis of whether these principles applied. But, in so far as  he
    may have been  considering  whether  the  Appellant's  deportation  was
    proportionate in paragraphs 52 to 55 of his decision and  reasons,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge relied in paragraph 52 on a finding that  the
    Appellant had made a significant financial gain from his  offence  when
    there was no evidence that this was the case. He also  failed  to  take
    into account the strength of his family life with his wife and daughter
    but simply asserted that the fact that he had offended  meant  that  he
    was not in a happy family relationship.

25.  There was also no evidence to show that the Appellant  had  used  false
    identities and made a number of bogus asylum  claims,  as  asserted  in
    paragraph 53 of the decision and reasons. Although the fact that he had
    previously claimed asylum in another identity could reasonably be taken
    into account when considering proportionality.

26.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  consider  regulation  21(5)(c)  and
    whether the Appellant represented a genuine and present threat  to  one
    of the fundamental interests of society in paragraph 55 of his decision
    and reasons. However, he failed to take into account the fact that  the
    Appellant had committed one offence and had  not  committed  any  other
    offences since his release. He also failed to  take  into  account  the
    fact that he returned to the family home as soon as he was released and
    obtained employment to  support  his  family.  The  evidence  from  the
    witnesses at the hearing also indicated that he would be able to obtain
    employment here if he was permitted to return.

27.  In paragraph 32 of Essa (EEA  Rehabilitation/integration)  [2013]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

    "...for any deportation of an EEA national or family member of  such  a
    national to be  justified  on  public  good  grounds  (irrespective  of
    whether permanent  residence  has  been  achieved)  the  claimant  must
    represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact  of  a  criminal
    conviction is not enough. It is not  permissible  in  an  EEA  case  to
    deport a claimant on the basis of criminal offending  simply  to  deter
    others. This tends to mean in case of criminal  conduct  short  of  the
    most serious threats  to  the  public  safety  of  the  state,  that  a
    candidate for EEA deportation must represent a present threat by reason
    of a propensity to re-offend  or  an  unacceptably  high  risk  of  re-
    offending.  In  such  a  case,  if  there  is  acceptable  evidence  of
    rehabilitation the prospects of future rehabilitation do not enter  the
    balance, save possibly as future protective factors to ensure that  the
    rehabilitation remains durable".


28.  Therefore, the finding in paragraph 54 that  "the  seriousness  of  the
    offence, the circumstances in which it was committed and  the  sentence
    of the Amsterdam Court fully justified the decision to deport"  is  not
    sustainable in the light of regulation 21(5)(e) of the EEA  regulations
    or the case of Essa.

29.  In addition, in paragraph 55 the First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  that
    the  public  interest  here  in   deportation   outweighs   all   other
    considerations. This is the test  which  applies  to  foreign  national
    offenders. The test to be applied as a result of  regulation  21(5)  is
    more nuanced.

DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury is set aside  in  its
    entirety.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hanbury.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 22 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


