
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00632/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Reason Promulgated          |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             JUBRIL YUSUF GHELLE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on  24  October  1988.
    He arrived in the UK on 2 May 2002, when he was 13 years of age. On  12
    February 2008 he received a sentence of two years in a young offenders'
    institute for an offence of robbery.  As a result, a decision was  made
    on 24 March 2014 to make a deportation order against him.  He  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal. His appeal was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal judge Emerton on 12 February  2015  whereby  the
    appeal was allowed under Article 3 of the ECHR.

 3. In order to put into context the respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submissions before me, it is necessary to summarise the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, in terms of the hearing, the evidence  before  the
    Tribunal and the judge's conclusions.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier judge referred to the history of the appeal  proceedings
    whereby the appeal had previously been adjourned.  When the appeal  was
    listed on 9 May 2014 the appellant had failed to  attend  and  was  not
    represented.  When the matter was next listed on  1  October  2014  the
    appellant's brother attended and provided information  suggesting  that
    the appellant was suffering from  schizophrenia.   He  was  advised  to
    obtain further evidence.

 5. On 29 December 2014, when the matter was again listed for hearing,  the
    appellant failed to appear and the appeal  was  then  relisted  for  12
    February 2015 which was the date of the hearing before First-tier judge
    Emerton.   At  that  hearing  the  appellant  was  represented  by   Mr
    Bandegani, who also appeared before me.  The judge set  out  in  detail
    the documentary evidence that was before him, including information  in
    relation to the appellant's mental health.

 6. At [7] the judge noted that the appellant's counsel confirmed that  his
    instructions were to proceed with the hearing, although he had  advised
    the appellant of the need for a full assessment of his  mental  health.
    It was also confirmed that  the  only  issue  was  risk  on  return  in
    relation to mental health, and that the appellant relied upon  Articles
    3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 7. Notwithstanding that counsel's instructions were to  proceed  with  the
    hearing, it was suggested on behalf of the appellant that there was  an
    "evidential gap" in the appellant's case in terms of his mental health.
     At [10] it is  recorded  that  the  respondent's  representative  also
    accepted that there was a gap in the appellant's evidence.

 8. The hearing was then adjourned for a short while after which the  judge
    announced that he intended to  proceed  with  the  hearing,  not  being
    minded to adjourn the hearing of his  own  motion.   He  explained  the
    basis of that decision.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives had had sufficient time to obtain the necessary medical
    evidence.  He also concluded that there was nothing to suggest  that  a
    likely  lengthy  adjournment  would  necessarily  result  in  obtaining
    "usable" further evidence.   He  concluded  that  it  was  not  in  the
    interests of justice to adjourn, particularly bearing in mind that both
    parties had provided evidence and  there  was  at  least  some  medical
    evidence as to the appellant's condition.

 9. After a further short adjournment it was indicated  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that he would not be giving evidence.  It  was  however  also
    suggested on behalf of the appellant that there was a lack  of  medical
    evidence and the latest country guidance was "inadequate".  In relation
    to Article 8 it was submitted that the appellant needed  more  time  to
    prepare and that it was in the circumstances unfair to proceed, thus an
    adjournment was required.  On behalf of the respondent the  application
    for an adjournment was supported, the suggestion being that  there  was
    not enough evidence upon which to make  a  decision.   The  appellant's
    mental state was the issue, it was said, and better evidence  would  be
    needed.

10. The judge then adjourned again for a  short  while  and  announced  his
    decision to proceed  with  the  hearing,  notwithstanding  the  changed
    instructions on behalf of the  appellant  in  terms  of  whether  there
    should be an adjournment.  Again, the judge explained his  reasons  for
    deciding to proceed with the hearing.

11. It was indicated on behalf of the appellant that there would be no oral
    evidence,  either  from  the  appellant  or  from  his  brother.    The
    appellant's skeleton argument was  relied  on,  without  more,  and  on
    behalf of the respondent there appears to have been brief submissions.

12. At [23]-[26] of the determination the appellant's criminal offences are
    set out, and reference made to the sentencing remarks  in  relation  to
    the offence which prompted the deportation decision.  That  offence  of
    robbery involved a sum of �25,000 in a pre-planned robbery  from  a  G4
    Securicor employee, at knifepoint.  The knife was apparently used by  a
    co-defendant, not by  the  appellant.  It  was  not  alleged  that  the
    appellant was a ring leader.  The appellant had pleaded guilty.

13. Subsequent to the appellant's  release  he  was  convicted  of  further
    offences of possession of a Class A drug, obstruction under the  Misuse
    of Drugs Act, burglary,  theft  and  taking  a  motor  vehicle  without
    consent.  Those further  offences  resulted  in  various  sentences  of
    imprisonment, including two years'  imprisonment  for  the  offence  of
    burglary.  Again, in December  2013  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    possession of Class A and B drugs and received a supervision order  and
    a community order.  It seems that  he  later  breached  the  order  for
    unpaid work.

14. The judge then summarised  the  respondent's  reasons  for  deportation
    decision, and the written evidence before him.  These included  witness
    statements from the appellant and his brother.

15. The appellant's witness  statement  was  summarised  to  the  following
    effect.  The appellant had arrived in the UK  aged  13.   He  had  been
    admitted to hospital in the UK and sought  psychiatric  help.   He  had
    been caused psychiatric problems by taking cannabis  and  other  drugs.
    The statement continued that he would not be able to cope in Somalia if
    he was "in a bad place" without his medicines.  It  was  said  that  he
    could speak limited Somali.  His symptoms of  mental  illness  had  got
    worse and he had been signed off work.

16. The appellant's brother's witness statement was summarised,  indicating
    that his brother thought that the appellant had wanted  to  change  and
    that he would be able to see that the appellant was staying  away  from
    bad influences.  It stated that  there  were  no  remaining  family  in
    Somalia and the family in the UK would  not  be  able  to  support  the
    appellant there.

17. The appellant's skeleton argument was also summarised,  and  the  judge
    interpreted the skeleton argument  as  including  reliance  on  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

18. At [36] of the determination it states as follows:
         "At no stage did Ms Ololade  refer  me  to  the  specifics  of  the
         respondent's case, and she did not respond to any of the  arguments
         set out in the  appellant's  skeleton  argument.   Her  very  brief
         closing submissions were limited to indicating that she relied upon
         the decision of 24 March 2014, the reasons  letter  of  5  February
         2014, section 117C (in respect of  Article  8)  and  MOJ,  and  the
         public interest in removing criminals.  She did not elaborate."

19. In the "Conclusions" section of the determination the judge stated that
    he did not find that either  representative  did  much  to  assist  his
    decision-making.  He  expressed  surprise  that  there  were  no   oral
    submissions from the respondent in response to the appellant's skeleton
    argument, when the skeleton argument had raised specific  points  which
    he might have expected the respondent to wish to answer.  He also  felt
    that the failure to call the appellant's brother as  a  witness  was  a
    "strange one" even if the appellant himself might not have been  called
    because of his mental state.  He went on to  note  that  there  was  no
    suggestion from the respondent that he should not  accept  the  witness
    statements.  He stated that he had  taken  into  account  the  material
    presented and had done his best to determine the appeal in a fair  way.



20. At [39] it is stated that he attached little weight to the  appellant's
    private life in the UK notwithstanding the lengthy period of time  that
    he had been here.  He concluded that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    weight before him suggesting  that  the  appellant,  an  adult,  enjoys
    family life with family in the UK.  He referred to the  fact  that  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraphs 398-399A  had  not  been  addressed  on
    behalf of the appellant.

21. He referred in  detail  to  the  decision  in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC).   He  noted  that  that
    decision does not deal  expressly  with  mental  health  disorders  but
    identified relevant paragraphs in the guidance in MOJ in terms  of  its
    possible relevance.

22. He then considered the appellant's mental health, noting that there was
    nothing in the respondent's evidence shedding much light on that issue.
     The determination refers to a letter from Crystall Solicitors dated 18
    January 2013 which makes very vague references to mental health, and to
    the appellant's questionnaire which also made passing reference to  the
    same issue.  The judge noted that in the asylum  interview  at  Brixton
    Prison on 12 August 2011 the appellant explained that he was  currently
    on medication for a mental health issue and saw the psychiatrist  every
    week.  Apparently he had been  diagnosed  whilst  in  Brixton  but  the
    appellant was not  sure  of  the  details.   A  further  letter  on  11
    September   2013   from   the   appellant's   solicitors   refers    to
    hospitalisation for three weeks.  He noted that the respondent  was  at
    pains to point out that the  respondent's  request  at  that  time  for
    medical evidence and clearer details were met by silence.

23. The judge expressed surprise at [43] that the  appellant's  family  and
    two separate sets of solicitors had still not obtained all the evidence
    which should be available if the appellant is genuinely suffering as he
    alleges.  Nevertheless, he stated that he had reviewed what had in fact
    been provided.

24. At [44] there is a summary of  the  further  evidence.   This  included
    evidence from the appellant's GP in terms  of  GP  records  covering  a
    period from 10 October 2014 to 30 January 2015.  There is reference  to
    the appellant having been diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia and
    having been prescribed Olanzapine, an anti-psychotic.

25. With reference to an assessment by a Dr E Gibbs, a GP  trainee,  it  is
    stated that there was a detailed assessment whereby it records that the
    appellant started hearing voices in 2010 whilst in prison.  A tentative
    diagnosis of psychosis, possibly cannabis related or  schizophrenia  is
    described in that report albeit that schizophrenia was finally recorded
    as the diagnosis.  Information in relation to follow up  had  not  been
    provided to the judge save what is in the GP records.

26. He referred to a discharge summary following admission to Whipps  Cross
    Hospital after the  appellant  had  apparently  punched  a  car  whilst
    intoxicated on 5 August 2013.

27. At [47] there is reference to a letter from a Dr Tim  Green,  dated  10
    February 2015.  He is a consultant clinical psychologist  to  whom  the
    appellant had been referred  by  his  solicitors.   The  appellant  had
    apparently declined to attend the consultation because  he  had  voiced
    concerns as to the nature and purpose of the  assessment  and  had  not
    understood that the report would assist him.  The letter from Dr  Green
    refers to concerns over the appellant's mental capacity and  that  this
    might arise from his current psychotic illness but there  had  been  no
    assessment of personality functioning or possible personality disorder,
    or of his intellectual or cognitive functioning.

28. At [48] it is stated as follows:
         "I do not find that Dr Green's comments shed any real light on  the
         appellant's mental condition, and  are  somewhat  speculative,  not
         being based (it would appear)  on  anything  other  than  what  the
         appellant's solicitors told him.  I am also a little surprised that
         for an appellant who is said to be  suffering  from  schizophrenia,
         the solicitors sought to  rely  upon  a  psychologist  rather  than
         obtaining a  clearer  diagnosis  from  a  consultant  psychiatrist.
         However, as no assessment was in fact carried out for the  purposes
         of the appeal, there is nothing in the point."

29. In the next paragraph it is stated that the medical  evidence  "is  not
    entirely  clear"  but  Judge  Emerton  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    condition in 2010/2011 was of sufficient concern  that  prison  doctors
    prescribed the same anti-psychotic drug that he is currently receiving.
     It was considered that that was some reassurance that the  psychiatric
    issue was not a recent invention for the purposes of the appeal.

30. It was then found at [50] that the medical evidence is
         "... sufficiently clear that I should conclude,  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities (a  higher  level  of  certainty,  in  fact  than  is
         required in respect of Article 3 ECHR) that the appellant has  been
         suffering from various mental issues from 2010 onwards".

    He expressed the view that the appellant and his two sets of solicitors
    could easily have produced better evidence of  the  original  diagnosis
    and treatment but had failed to do so.  However, in the  light  of  the
    diagnosis of 4 September 2014 which had not subsequently been  changed,
    he accepted that the appellant is  suffering  from  schizophrenia.   He
    noted that on behalf of the respondent before him no  submissions  were
    made on the medical evidence or on the appellant's  skeleton  argument,
    although the opportunity to make such submissions was provided.

31. In considering the witness statements, Judge Emerton said  that  whilst
    normally he would attach little weight to assertions of  fact  from  an
    appellant as to his medical condition, especially when the witness  had
    not subjected himself to cross-examination, no  submissions  have  been
    made before him on behalf of the respondent at all as to the weight  to
    be attached to the witness statements and it  had  not  been  suggested
    that the assertions of fact might not be true.

32. He then summarised what is in  the  appellant's  witness  statement  in
    terms of his mental health and the treatment that he had  received  for
    it.

33. Again, returning to the theme of the respondent  not  having  made  any
    submissions on the evidence before him, he stated that he did not  know
    whether or not the respondent's representative had chosen to  read  the
    documents in the case but in any event she had not chosen to share  her
    thoughts on that evidence with him.  No real submissions were  made  on
    behalf of the respondent he stated.  He noted that the refusal  letters
    predated nearly all the medical and documentary evidence provided.

34. The determination then contains a summary of background material as set
    out in the refusal letters in terms of the  availability  of  treatment
    for psychiatric conditions in Somalia.  This included a WHO report with
    reference to the availability of  medication,  which  did  not  include
    Olanzapine, the medication that the appellant had been prescribed  from
    September 2014 onwards as well as previously.  He stated that there was
    no evidence before him suggesting that any of  the  listed  drugs  were
    acceptable alternative treatments for the  appellant's  condition,  and
    the point was not argued on behalf of the respondent.

35. He again concluded  at  [57]  that  the  appellant  is  suffering  from
    schizophrenia and needs ongoing treatment.  He found that the  evidence
    suggests that the drug that the appellant is currently receiving is not
    available in Somalia and that in any event there is  extremely  limited
    access to mental health care there, with the risk of being chained  and
    perhaps starved to death, with little likelihood of effective treatment
    at all.

36. He expressed the view that it would not necessarily be  the  case  that
    the appellant would succeed under Article 3 solely on the basis  of  an
    absence of adequate healthcare, although  he  would  have  an  arguable
    case.

37. Again, with reference to the decision in  MOJ,  he  noted  that  mental
    health is not specifically dealt with, although the  context  suggested
    that it would plainly be relevant.   He  concluded  that  MOJ  was  not
    seeking to set out a comprehensive list of factors  which  were  to  be
    taken into account.

38. In [58] certain findings of fact  are  made.  It  was  found  that  the
    appellant had established that he left Somalia when he was no more than
    13 years of  age,  with  both  parents  dead  or  presumed  dead.   The
    appellant was 26 and had been absent from Mogadishu for some 13  years.
    He stated that on the appellant's own "undisputed evidence" he has  now
    no family in Mogadishu, all surviving close members being  in  the  UK.
    He accepted that the appellant does not know his clan and cannot access
    clan associations for support.  His undisputed evidence was that he can
    now speak little Somali.  He  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that he would have access to financial  resources,  as  his  UK
    family could provide only limited financial support.   He  found  that,
    particularly in view of the appellant's medical condition and  lack  of
    available treatment, as well as limited fluency in Somali, it would  be
    hard for him to obtain employment.

39. Judge Emerton concluded that on most of the factors set out in MOJ  the
    appellant falls squarely within what might be described  as  the  "risk
    factors".  He stated that  his  schizophrenia,  which  is  unlikely  to
    receive treatment, and which might lead to his  being  chained  up  and
    starved  to  death,  would  in  all  probability  make  his   situation
    considerably worse.

40. He concluded therefore, that the appellant's removal  would  amount  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment such as to amount to a breach of Article
    3 of the ECHR.  At [60] he stated that until or  unless  the  appellant
    has been cured of his mental health condition, returning him to Somalia
    would breach his protected rights.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

41. The respondent's grounds point out that the parties to the appeal  were
    in agreement as to the merits  of  an  adjournment  to  facilitate  the
    acquisition of more up-to-date  medical  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's mental health.  Having regard to  the  judge's  observation
    that the medical evidence was not entirely clear, it is argued that the
    conclusion that the appellant was suffering from schizophrenia was  not
    sufficiently made out on the evidence.

42. It is also argued that it was incumbent upon the appellant  to  provide
    cogent evidence of the nature, extent and severity of his condition  in
    accordance with the high threshold in relation to Article 3.

43. It is further contended  that  the  judge  was  required  to  have  had
    sufficient evidence both in relation to the appellant's  condition  and
    of the medical treatment available to him, or any discrimination or ill-
    treatment that he would face as a result of his  condition  on  return.
    The reports referred to by the judge date from 2012  with  a  piece  of
    "press  reporting"  from  2013.   That  evidence  did  not  demonstrate
    sufficiently up-to-date information about the healthcare  available  to
    those suffering from mental health problems.

44. As regards the decision in MOJ it is contended that the judge erred  in
    concluding that the appellant fell within the "risk factors" set out in
    that decision.  His  ability  to  integrate  should  have  been  viewed
    through the prism of the facts as they stood before  the  judge  rather
    than what the judge sought to infer from a  claim  that  had  not  been
    sufficiently demonstrated.  The appellant has family living in  the  UK
    who would be able to offer him remittances and support.  His ability to
    obtain employment, whilst relevant, should have been viewed through the
    possibility of familial assistance.  It is argued  that  there  was  no
    basis to suppose that his family in the UK would  not  assist  him  and
    consequently, no reason to suppose that he would end up in an IDP camp.

45. In submissions Ms Brocklesby-Weller said that she was  not  making  any
    complaint about the fact that there was no adjournment.  However, there
    was no oral evidence and therefore no cross-examination.  At  [48]  the
    judge had rejected the evidence of Dr Green and at [49] had  said  that
    the medical evidence was not entirely clear.

46. The appellant's own representative recognised that there was a  gap  in
    the evidence  and  the  Tribunal  was  not  furnished  with  sufficient
    evidence to make a full assessment of the  appellant's  mental  health.
    It did not appear from the determination that the appellant had engaged
    in treatment apart from in terms of receiving medication.

47. Although the judge said that he had not been helped by the respondent's
    representative, she had relied on the  refusal  letter  and  there  was
    little that could have been said in submissions since no oral  evidence
    was called.  The fact that the  judge  referred  to  the  evidence  not
    having been challenged, could only relate to the appellant's  evidence,
    as the brother's evidence said nothing about his mental health.

48. The judge appears to have put the burden of proof on the  Secretary  of
    State to demonstrate the availability  or  otherwise  of  treatment  in
    Somalia, but it was for the appellant to establish his  case.   It  was
    for the appellant to  demonstrate  that  none  of  the  anti-psychotics
    available would be suitable for him.

49. Given the limited information before the judge  it  was  all  the  more
    important for cogent reasons to be given for him to  have  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 3.  It would  have  been  necessary  to  know  the
    extent to which the appellant is engaging in services in the UK and how
    or to what extent that could be replicated in Somalia.

50. The evidence that the judge relied  on  in  relation  to  the  apparent
    chaining of mental health patients relates primarily to family members.
     The refusal letter refers to emerging mental health facilities and  to
    13,000 people having been provided with treatment.

51. Although it is said at [58] that there was no evidence suggesting  that
    he would have access to financial resources in Somalia, he  has  family
    in the UK.

52. In the UK the appellant is living relatively independently as is  clear
    from [39], and does not have family life  here,  despite  his  apparent
    medical condition.

53. Mr Bandegani relied on the rule 24  response.   The  respondent's  case
    would have to be that there  was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal justifying its conclusions, otherwise the respondent's case is
    nothing more than a simple disagreement with the judge's conclusions.

54. Mr Bandegani referred to various paragraphs  of  the  determination  in
    relation to the judge's recording of the evidence he had before him and
    his assessment of it.  It was not true to say that he had rejected  the
    evidence of Dr Green.  At [48] he simply said that the evidence did not
    assist much.  By that point however, it is clear that  he  had  already
    concluded that the appellant was suffering from schizophrenia as can be
    seen from [45].  Although the judge acknowledged that the evidence  was
    not entirely clear, that was a different matter  from  suggesting  that
    the evidence was not 'clear enough'.

55. Although on behalf of the respondent it was  argued  that  the  refusal
    letter was relied on, on behalf of the respondent at the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal, that predated much of the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier judge.  The respondent's representative chose not
    to answer the points raised in the appellant's skeleton  argument.   It
    was  not  suggested  at  that  hearing  that  the  appellant's  witness
    statement should be rejected.  It is also to  be  remembered  that  the
    judge pointed out at [50] that the  respondent's  representative  chose
    not to make any submissions on the medical evidence.

56. As regards treatment availability, at [55] the judge had simply  stated
    that there was no evidence before him which suggested that any  of  the
    listed drugs are accepted alternative treatments  for  the  appellant's
    condition, and the point was not argued on behalf of the respondent  as
    is pointed out in the determination.  Mr Bandegani referred me  to  the
    background evidence which was taken into account by the judge.

57. In the light of the judge's findings, his conclusions  in  relation  to
    Article 3 with reference to MOJ are free from any error of law.  He had
    made a finding to the effect  that  the  appellant's  family  had  only
    limited  financial  resources  to  provide  support   for   him.    The
    appellant's brother's witness statement, summarised at [33], was to the
    effect that the appellant had no remaining family in  Somalia  and  the
    family in the UK would not be able to support him there.

58. In reply, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  there  was  no  evidence
    before the judge as to the seriousness of the appellant's condition and
    the  decision  letter  had  suggested  that  in  any  event  there  was
    alternative treatment available to the appellant.  Although psychiatric
    services may be sparse in Somalia, they do exist.

    My assessment

59. On behalf of the respondent it is not  contended  that  there  was  any
    error of law in the judge's decision to refuse to adjourn the  hearing.
    The issue of the adjournment relates to the extent to which  the  judge
    had before him sufficient evidence from which to make an assessment  of
    the appellant's case.  Naturally, there is no argument on behalf of the
    appellant in terms of the refusal to adjourn.

60. It is abundantly clear from the judge's determination that his task was
    made very difficult because of the  rather  fragmented  and  incomplete
    medical evidence.  He nevertheless was entitled to decide that  it  was
    not in the interests of justice to adjourn the  hearing,  there  having
    been plenty of opportunity for medical evidence to have been  provided,
    and in circumstances where it was  not  apparent  that  an  adjournment
    would advance matters much.

61. The judge's assessment of the available evidence was extremely detailed
    and comprehensive.  In surveying the  medical  evidence  he  identified
    features of it which were unclear, uncertain or unhelpful.

62. It seems to me that Judge Emerton very carefully drew  the  threads  of
    all the evidence together, not only the medical  evidence  but  in  the
    appellant's witness statement, in the GP's notes, and  from  the  early
    stages of the asylum process, to form his conclusions.  In my judgement
    he was entitled to conclude on that evidence that  the  appellant  does
    have a mental health condition for  which  he  is  presently  receiving
    treatment.  The available evidence before him was that he was likely to
    be suffering from schizophrenia, which is the mental disorder  referred
    to in the evidence.

63. The judge was aware of the fact that untested written evidence would in
    normal circumstances attract little weight.  This is  clear  from  [51]
    where he said that he would normally attach little weight to assertions
    of fact from an appellant as to his mental condition,  especially  when
    the appellant has not subjected himself to cross-examination.   On  the
    other hand, he pointed out that the respondent's representative made no
    submissions at all as to the weight to be attached  to  that  evidence,
    and indeed did not effectively engage with any of the evidence that was
    before the Tribunal.  Simply relying on the refusal letter when much of
    the evidence  post-dated  that  document  was  hardly  likely  to  have
    assisted the judge in his assessment.

64. Judge Emerton also pointed out that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    medical evidence before  him.   On  that  basis,  it  is  not  entirely
    surprising that he attached such weight to it as he thought proper, and
    relied on aspects of it in coming to his view  as  to  the  appellant's
    mental state.

65. Although he did say at [49] that the medical evidence was not  entirely
    clear, that does not mean that it was not sufficient for him  to  found
    his conclusions.  As I have indicated, his assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence was detailed and thorough.

66. It is undoubtedly the case that the judge would have been  assisted  by
    more comprehensive and clearer medical evidence. However, this is not a
    situation of a judge unquestioningly accepting what was put before him,
    without critical analysis.  I am entirely satisfied that Judge  Emerton
    was entitled to conclude as he  did  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    mental health.

67. Similarly, in the absence  of  challenge  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and the witness statement of his brother, and the judge being
    mindful of the limitations on attaching weight to evidence that has not
    been tested, he was similarly entitled to make the findings he  did  in
    terms of the availability of support for the appellant from his  family
    in the UK on his return to Somalia.  He was also entitled to find  that
    the appellant had no family in Somalia who could assist him.

68. Judge Emerton was cognisant of the fact that the  country  guidance  in
    MOJ  does  not  deal  specifically  with  persons  with  mental  health
    conditions.  However,  he  analysed  that  decision  and  tailored  the
    guidance in it to the  appellant's  circumstances.   He  gave  detailed
    consideration to the background evidence put before him in relation  to
    the availability of treatment for the  appellant's  condition.   In  my
    judgement the respondent's complaints about that assessment  amount  to
    no more than a disagreement with the judge's conclusions.

69. The judge did not in my view impose any burden on the respondent in his
    assessment of the extent  to  which  alternative  treatments  that  are
    available in Somalia would be suitable for the appellant, but made that
    assessment on the basis of the evidence that was before him.  There was
    simply no evidence to indicate that the appellant's  current  treatment
    regime could be continued in  Somalia.   More  to  the  point,  he  was
    entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  treatment
    available to him in  the  light  of  his  assessment  of  the  lack  of
    resources for the availability  of  treatment  for  those  with  mental
    health conditions.

70. That being the case, he was similarly entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's return would involve a breach of his human rights in  terms
    of Article 3 of the ECHR.  His assessment was that the appellant  would
    not be  able  to  survive  economically,  his  schizophrenia  would  be
    unlikely to be treated and he  would  not  be  able  to  turn  to  clan
    associations for support.  He also pointed  out  that  he  could  speak
    little Somali.  Plainly, on those findings the appellant would  not  be
    able to take advantage of the 'economic boom' referred to in MOJ.

71. It may be the case that this or that feature of the evidence before the
    First-tier judge could support an alternative view of  the  appellant's
    circumstances on return.  For example, it was submitted  on  behalf  of
    the respondent before me that given that the judge had found  that  the
    appellant does not have family life in the UK, and appears to be living
    independently, that would suggest that he would be able  to  manage  on
    his own in Mogadishu.  However, the fact that there may  be  pieces  of
    evidence here or there which might support the respondent's case  is  a
    far cry from establishing an error of law in the judge's assessment  of
    the evidence.

72. I am not satisfied that there is  any  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision in any respect.  Accordingly the decision to allow the  appeal
    on Article 3 grounds stands.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision to  allow  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      6/01/16

