
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00008/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2019                           |On 20 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 YAHAYA [I]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Harvey, instructed by TMC Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  convenience,
    I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sweden who was born on 8 June  1991.   He
    came to the United Kingdom on 16  August  2000  with  his  parents  and
    sisters when he was 9 years of age.

 3. Between January 2007 and November 2017, the appellant was convicted  of
    26 criminal offences.  However, none of those resulted in any period of
    imprisonment until the most recent.  On 31 August 2017 he was convicted
    at the Chester Crown Court of dangerous driving and was sentenced on 22
    September 2017 to fifteen months' imprisonment  and  disqualified  from
    driving until he passed the ordinary  driving  test.   On  20  November
    2017, he was also convicted at the Black Country Magistrates' Court  of
    two offences of assaulting a police constable and was sentenced to  162
    days' imprisonment.

 4. On 13 December 2017, the Secretary of State made  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  under  reg
    23(6)(b) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052) ("the
    EEA Regulations 2016").

 5. The appellant was released from his term of imprisonment on 27 December
    2017 but remained in immigration detention until April 2018.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 19 March 2018, Judge R R Hopkins allowed the appellant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016 and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.
      Judge  Hopkins  found  that  the  appellant  did  not   represent   a
    "sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
    of society" and that his deportation was not proportionate.

 7. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 8. In response to the grant of permission, the appellant filed a  rule  24
    response.

 9. The appeal was initially listed before me on 6  November  2018.   In  a
    decision sent on 18 December 2018, I set aside Judge Hopkins'  decision
    on the basis that he had materially erred in law in  finding  that  the
    appellant did  not  represent  "a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society".
    The appeal was adjourned in order that a  resumed  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal could take place.

10. At the initial hearing, the Secretary of State's (then)  representative
    (Mr Howells) conceded that the appellant had established that he had  a
    'permanent right of residence' in  the  UK  from  September  2009.   He
    accepted that  the  appellant's  deportation  could,  therefore,  at  a
    minimum only be justified if there  were  "serious  grounds  of  public
    policy and public security" under reg 27(3).  Mr Howells also  accepted
    that at the resumed hearing the  appellant  could  argue  that  he  was
    entitled to the highest level of protection against  deportation  under
    reg 27(4) based upon a  "continuous  period  of  at  least  ten  years'
    residence" prior to the Secretary of State's decision to deport him, so
    that he  could  only  be  removed  on  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security".



The Resumed Hearing

11. The resumed hearing took place before me  on  28  February  2019.   The
    appellant was represented by Ms Harvey, and the Secretary of State  was
    represented by Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

12. At the hearing, I heard oral evidence from the appellant and  from  his
    mother, [HY].  In  addition  to  the  bundle  of  documents  originally
    submitted at the First-tier  Tribunal's  hearing,  the  appellant  also
    relied upon a supplementary bundle of documents,  originally  filed  at
    the time of the initial hearing before me, and I admitted that material
    under rule 15(5A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    (SI 2008/2698 as amended)  without  objection  from  the  Secretary  of
    State.

13. As a result of both representatives' submissions, the principal  issues
    in the appeal were clearly identified.

14. Mr Mills accepted that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    had been upheld in my earlier decision, stood.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a permanent right of residence and that,  on  that  basis
    alone, the appellant could only be deported  on  "serious  grounds"  of
    public policy or public security.

15. Mr Mills also accepted, the First-tier Tribunal's finding, which I  had
    also upheld, that the appellant was at the  time  of  his  imprisonment
    integrated in the UK.

16. Mr Mills accepted that the  appellant  was,  given  that  he  had  been
    resident in the UK since August 2000, entitled to argue that  he  could
    establish a "continuous period of at least ten years' residence"  prior
    to the Secretary of State's decision to deport him taken on 13 December
    2017 and that, accordingly, he  could  argue  that  he  could  only  be
    removed on "imperative grounds of public security".

17. Mr Mills indicated that he was  not  in  a  position,  without  express
    instructions, to concede that the appellant could only  be  removed  on
    "imperative grounds of public security".  He accepted, however, that if
    the appellant could rely on that ground, his offending  did  not  reach
    that high threshold of "imperative grounds of public security" and  his
    appeal should be allowed.

18. In respect of whether the appellant could rely  upon  that  ground,  Mr
    Mills referred me to the Grand Chamber's decision in B  v  Land  Baden-
    Wurttemberg; SSHD v Vomero (Cases C-316/16 and C-424/16) [2018] Imm  AR
    1145 ("B and  Vomero")  at  [65]  et  seq  and  reg  3(4)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016.  He accepted that reg 3(4) was  consistent  with  the
    CJEU's approach in B and Vomero.

19.  Mr  Mills  indicated  that  the  issue  of  whether  the   appellant's
    imprisonment between 22 September 2017 and 27 December 2017 (the  exact
    period  is  3-4  months  see  para  55  below)  broke  the  appellant's
    "continuous residence" turned upon an assessment of the strength of his
    integration prior to imprisonment,  the  period  of  imprisonment,  his
    rehabilitation and behaviour during his detention,  and  his  continued
    integration after release from prison.  Mr  Mills  accepted  there  was
    nothing in the evidence to show that the appellant  had  done  anything
    wrong during his imprisonment and that Judge Hopkins  had  accepted  at
    para [51] of his determination that he was a changed person.  Whilst Mr
    Mills was  not  in  a  position  to  concede  that  the  appellant  had
    established the necessary ten years' continuous residence, he indicated
    in his submissions that I was likely to find that, on the basis of  all
    the factors I have set out and to which he referred me.

20. In her submissions, Ms Harvey relied in particular upon the appellant's
    oral evidence and that of his mother, together with supportive evidence
    from the appellant's ex-partner dated 11 February 2019  in  support  of
    his continued contact with his two  children,  both  British  citizens,
    aged almost 5 (his daughter) and 2 years old (his son).

21. Ms  Harvey  also  relied  upon  the  appellant's  evidence  which,  she
    submitted, demonstrated he was more reflective about his offending  and
    the short period of imprisonment  between  22  September  2017  and  27
    December 2017 did not, she submitted, demonstrate that he had ceased to
    be integrated in  the  UK  and  consequently  he  could  establish  the
    required ten years' continuous residence and could only, therefore,  be
    deported on grounds of imperative public security.

The Law

22. The relevant law, set out in the EEA Regulations 2016 and decisions  of
    the CJEU, was not a matter of dispute between the parties.

23. The appellant is an EEA national and his deportation  must,  therefore,
    comply with EU law as set out in reg 27 of the  EEA  Regulations  2016.
    That provide, so far as relevant, as follows:

         "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
             public health

         27.  (1) In this regulation, a 'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                  person  with  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  and security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                  grounds of public security in respect of an  EEA  national
                  who -

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  ....

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
                  United  Kingdom  include  restricting   rights   otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also been taken in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles -

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)  the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  yon  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned.

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that the threat does not need to imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations and general prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ('P') who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of  origin.

             (7)  ....

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
                  of this regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)  have
                  regard to  the  considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1
                  (considerations of public policy, public security and  the
                  fundamental interests of society etc.)."

24. Regulation 27(8) cross refers to Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations 2016
    which sets out a number of considerations which, in particular, a court
    or Tribunal must "have regard to" in considering the issues  of  public
    policy, public security  and  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.
    Schedule 1 provides as follows:

         "Regulation 27

          CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
                    FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
             or public security values: member of States enjoy considerable
             discretion,  acting  within  the  parameters  set  by  the  EU
             Treaties, applied where relevant  by  the  EEA  agreement,  to
             define  their  own  standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
             extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
             nationality or language does not amount to integration in  the
             United Kingdom; a significant degree  of  wider  cultural  and
             societal integration must be present before a  person  may  be
             regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence or  the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued present in the United Kingdom represents a  genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around the same time as -

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the  fundamental  interest  of
             society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family members of an EEA national was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
             family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

         6.   It is consistent with the public policy  and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including -

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include -

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  relating to the misuses of drugs or crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimensions as mentioned in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protection  shared
                  values."

25. It may be helpful briefly to summarise the correct approach.  It is for
    the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish  the  justification  for   the
    deportation of an EEA national (or relevant 'family member') under  the
    EEA Regulations 2016.  There is  a  hierarchy  of  protections  against
    expulsion or deportation which "increases in proportion to  the  degree
    of integration of the Union citizen in the host Member  State"  (B  and
    Vomero at [48]).

26. First, deportation of an EEA national or 'family member' will  only  be
    justified on grounds of  "public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health" in general.

27. Secondly, however when such an individual  has  a  permanent  right  of
    residence there must be "serious grounds of public  policy  and  public
    security" in order to justify any deportation.

28. Thirdly, in the case of an  EEA  national  who  has  been  continuously
    resident in the UK for at least ten  years  prior  to  the  deportation
    decision, (and that is the relevant date from  which  to  count  back),
    deportation can only be justified on the  most  serious  ground  namely
    "imperative grounds of public security".  In  order  to  rely  on  this
    'most serious ground' the individual must  first  establish  that  they
    have a permanent right of residence (see, B  and  Vomero  at  [49]  and
    [61])

29. In establishing these grounds, the individual's conduct must  represent
    a "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of
    the fundamental interests of society".  That, in general, requires that
    it be established that the individual has a propensity to  reoffend  in
    the future.  However, in exceptionally serious cases, it  may  be  that
    past conduct (which in  general  cannot  alone  establish  a  "present"
    threat) may suffice (see SSHD v Robinson (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA  Civ  85
    at [80] - [86] per Singh LJ).

30. Fourthly, in reaching any assessment, in particularly  in  relation  to
    proportionality,  all  the   relevant   circumstances   including   the
    individual's age, state  of  health,  family  and  economic  situation,
    length of residence in the UK and social and  cultural  integration  in
    the UK, rehabilitation prospects in both countries and any  links  with
    his or her own country, must be taken into account.

31. Fifthly, regard must be had to the considerations set out in Schedule 1
    in the same way as in a  non-EEA  removal  or  deportation  appeal  the
    considerations in s.117B and s.117C respectively  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 must be  taken  into  account  (on  the
    latter see, Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at [49]-[50]).

32. Sixthly, in determining whether an individual has resided in the UK for
    ten  continuous  years,  regard  should  be  had  to  any   period   of
    imprisonment prior to the decision to deport that individual (see B and
    Vomero).  A period of  imprisonment  does  not  automatically  break  a
    period of residence such that it  is  no  longer  'continuous'  (B  and
    Vomero at [71] and [80]).  The issue is whether:

         "those periods of imprisonment have broken  the  integrative  links
         previously forged with the host Member State with the  result  that
         the  person  concerned  is  no  longer  entitled  to  the  enhanced
         protection provided for in [reg 27(4)(a)] - to carry out an overall
         assessment of the situation of that person at the precise time when
         the question of expulsion arises.  In the context of  that  overall
         assessment,  periods   of   imprisonment   must   be   taken   into
         consideration together  with  all  the  relevant  factors  in  each
         individual case, including, as the case may be,  the  circumstances
         that the person concerned resided in the host Member State for  the
         10 years preceding his imprisonment..."

    (see B and Vomero at [70]).

33. In relation to an  EEA  national  who  has  satisfied  the  '10  years'
    continuous residence' requirement prior  to  the  offending,  the  CJEU
    recognised in B and Vomero that it was particularly so that a period of
    imprisonment does not automatically break "the integrative  links  that
    that person has previously forged" and so result in a discontinuity  of
    residence  (at [71]).




34. In relation to the issue of when a period of imprisonment would  result
    in a break in the 'integrative links' with the host Member  State,  the
    CJEU in B and Vomero said this (at [72]- [75]):

         "[72]    As part of the overall assessment, mentioned in  paragraph
             70 above, which, in this case, is for the referring  court  to
             carry out, it is necessary to take into  account,  as  regards
             the integrative links forged by B with the host  Member  State
             during the period of residence before his detention, the  fact
             that, the more those integrative links  with  that  state  are
             solid  -  including  from  a  social,  cultural   and   family
             perspective, to the  point  where,  for  example,  the  person
             concerned is genuinely rooted in the society of that State, as
             found by the referring court in the  main  proceedings  -  the
             lower the probability that a period of  detention  could  have
             resulted in those  links  being  broken  and  consequently,  a
             discontinuity of the ten - year period of  residence  referred
             to in Article 28(3)(a) of the Directive 2004/38.

         [73] Other relevant factors in that overall assessment may include,
             as observed by the Advocate General in point 123 to 125 of his
             Opinion, first, the nature of the offence that resulted in the
             period of imprisonment in question and  the  circumstances  in
             which that offence  was  committed,  and,  secondly,  all  the
             relevant factors  as  regards  the  behaviour  of  the  person
             concerned during the period of imprisonment.

         [74] While the nature of the offence and the circumstances in which
             it was committed shed light on the extent to which the  person
             concerned has, as the case may be,  become  disconnected  from
             the society of the host Member  State,  the  attitude  of  the
             person concerned during his detention may, in turn,  reinforce
             that disconnection or, conversely, help to maintain or restore
             links previously forged with the host Member State with a view
             to his future social integration in that State.

         [75] On that last point, it should also be born in  mind  that,  as
             the Court has already pointed out, the  social  rehabilitation
             of the Union Citizen in the  State  in  which  he  has  become
             genuinely integrated is not only in  his  interests  but  also
             that of the European Union in general (judgment of 23 November
             2010, Tsakouridis, C-145/09, EU: C: 2010: 08, paragraph 50)."

35. The CJEU reiterated the central issue in determining whether  the  most
    serious protection in reg 27(4) applied was whether, as a result of the
    period of imprisonment, it had been shown that the "integrative  links"
    with the host Member State had been broken (see [82]  and  [83]).   The
    'holistic' assessment was reiterated in [83] of the CJEU's judgment:

         "...the condition of having 'resided in the host Member  State  for
         the previous  ten  years'  laid  down  in  that  provision  may  be
         satisfied where an overall assessment of  the  person's  situation,
         taking  into  account  all  the  relevant  aspects,  leads  to  the
         conclusion that, notwithstanding that  detention,  the  integrative
         links between the person concerned and the host Member  State  have
         not been broken. Those aspects include, inter alia, the strength of
         the integrative links forged with the host Member State before  the
         detention of the person concerned, the nature of the  offence  that
         resulted in the period of detention imposed, the  circumstances  in
         which that offence was committed and  the  conduct  of  the  person
         concerned throughout the period of detention."

36. It is essentially the application of that approach definitively set out
    by the CJEU in  B  and  Vomero  which  is  the  focus  of  whether  the
    appellant's imprisonment between 22 September 2017 and 27 December 2017
    - a period of approximately three months (and see para 55 below) -  had
    the effect of breaking the continuity of the period of his residence so
    as to prevent  him  establishing,  dating  back  from  the  deportation
    decision taken on 13 December 2017, a period of ten  years'  continuous
    residence.

37. Regulation 3 of the EEA  Regulations  2016  deals  with  the  issue  of
    "continuity of residence".  Regulation 3(3)(a) sets out  the  'default'
    position that continuity of residence "is broken" when "a person serves
    a sentence of imprisonment".  The effect reflects the  CJEU's  position
    that a period of imprisonment breaks the continuity  of  residence  for
    the  purposes  of  established  the  required  5  years'  residence  in
    accordance with EU law in order  to  establish  a  permanent  right  of
    residence (see Onuekwere v SSHD (Case C-378/12)  [2014]  Imm  AR  551).
    However, reg 3(4) goes on, in effect, to 'disapply' that provision when
    considering reg 24(4), and whether the 10 years' residence  requirement
    is met, in certain circumstances:


         "(4) Paragraph (3)(a) applies, in principle, to an EEA national who
         has resided in the United Kingdom for at least ten years, but it
         does not apply where the Secretary of State considers that-

             (a) prior to serving  a  sentence  of  imprisonment,  the  EEA
         national had forged integrating links with the United Kingdom;

             (b) the effect of the sentence of imprisonment was not such as
         to break those integrating links; and

             (c) taking into account  an  overall  assessment  of  the  EEA
         national's  situation,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to   apply
         paragraph  (3)(a)  to  the  assessment  of  that   EEA   national's
         continuity of residence."


38. Although not expressed in precisely the terms of  the  CJEU  in  B  and
    Vomero, the  effect  is  likely  to  be  indistinguishable.   Mr  Mills
    accepted that in this appeal.  The search remains, adopting a 'holistic
    assessment', whether the integrative links with the UK have been broken
    by the period of imprisonment.

39. With that legal approach in mind, I turn  now  to  the  facts  of  this
    appeal.

Discussion and Findings

40. In reaching my findings, I have had regard to all the  material  before
    me, in particular the witness statements and documents contained in the
    appellant's bundle and supplementary  bundle  together  with  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant and  his  mother.   I  apply  the  'holistic'
    approach in B and Vomero and reg 3(4) of the EEA Regulations 2016.

41. The primary facts were not essentially in dispute.  The appellant  came
    to the UK on 16 August 2000 when he was 9 years old.  He came to the UK
    with his parents (his father is a Swedish citizen) and his two sisters.
     He attended school in the UK.

42. Between January 2007 and November 2017, the appellant was convicted  of
    26 criminal offences.  However, it was not until his conviction  on  31
    August  2017  for  dangerous  driving  that  he  received  a  custodial
    sentence,  namely  fifteen   months'   imprisonment.    He   was   also
    subsequently convicted and sentenced on 20 November 2017 to  162  days'
    imprisonment for  assault  on  a  police  constable.   He  is  properly
    described as a persistent offender.

43. As regards his  index  offence  of  dangerous  driving,  Judge  Hopkins
    described it as a case of "road rage" in which he reversed his  vehicle
    into the victim's vehicle at significant  speed  at  a  time  when  the
    victim's passenger was alighting from the vehicle.  Overall, the  judge
    recognised that the appellant has a  history  of  violence  and  public
    disorder.  I agree with those findings.

44. However, Judge Hopkins accepted that the appellant had come to  realise
    that he could not continue with what the judge described as  "appalling
    behaviour".  Both his parents and sisters have also noticed a change in
    him.  The appellant told the judge that he had come to his senses about
    three months into his sentence, largely prompted by the realisation  of
    the effect his imprisonment has on his relationship with his children.

45. In his oral evidence before me, the appellant (who  since  the  judge's
    decision has been released from detention) lives  with  his  sister  in
    Bristol.  He told me that he has lots of contact with his children, who
    live with their mother in Wolverhampton.  He speaks to them  every  day
    and he sees them four or five times a month  when  he  travels  to  the
    Midlands, previously to see his probation officer,  and  stays  with  a
    friend overnight with the children.  He told me that he  believed  that
    he would not commit any further offences because he wanted to  see  his
    children and did not want to spend his life being in prison.  He  liked
    his freedom too much.  He said that he was a bit na�ve before  but  now
    that had changed.  He said that his probation officer  (whom  he  named
    and with whom he clearly had  a  good  professional  relationship)  had
    helped him.  She had helped him find work although he was not currently
    working and he indicated that he was not sure whether he  could  as  an
    EEA national subject to deportation.  He  said  that  his  relationship
    with his children was good and they did not know about  his  offending.
    He was getting to know his young son since leaving detention.  He  told
    me that the Victim Awareness course had  taught  him  to  look  at  the
    issues from the point of view of victims and how it affects  them.   He
    had found it helpful.  His workbook is included within  the  documents.
    He said that he would like to settle down  and  go  to  university  and
    study engineering.

46. The appellant told me in cross-examination that his former partner  was
    happy that he should continue to have contact with  his  children  upon
    which they had reached an agreement without court involvement.  She had
    a new partner and she was considering going to university.

47. He told me that he had come to the UK from Sweden when he  was  9.   He
    had not been back.  He told me that he could not speak Swedish and that
    he had no family in Sweden.  He told me that his close  family,  namely
    his parents and sisters, lived in the UK.  He had only been  to  school
    for one or two years in Sweden before coming to the UK.

48. In her oral evidence, the appellant's mother told me that to  the  best
    of her knowledge he had not offended and that his relationship with his
    family had improved especially with his children.  She told me that  he
    was "calmer" now.  She told me that he saw his children  and  that  she
    visited him in Bristol where he was living with his sister and she also
    saw her grandchildren.

49. The appellant's mother confirmed that they had  no  family  in  Sweden.
    She told me that her husband was a retired marine engineer and that  he
    was currently in Ghana where they had family.

50. Judge Hopkins found that, prior to his imprisonment, the appellant  was
    integrated in the UK.  In my earlier decision, I rejected the Secretary
    of State's challenge to that finding at paras [26]-[27].  It  is  clear
    that the appellant was firmly integrated into the UK at the time of the
    deportation decision.  He had come to the UK in 2000 aged  9.   At  the
    date of decision he had been in the UK over seventeen  years.   He  had
    attended school in the UK and, as I noted in my earlier decision, Judge
    Hopkins found that  he  had  been  integrated  despite  his  persistent
    criminal offending and he had been integrated to a "significant degree"
    prior to the beginning of his offending, the  bulk  of  which  occurred
    between January 2007 and November 2017.

51. The appellant has no family in Sweden.  I accept on the  basis  of  his
    evidence, that of his mother and the  supporting  documents,  that  the
    appellant has, and  continues  to,  improve  in  his  attitude  to  his
    offending.  Imprisonment has, as Judge Hopkins  remarked,  changed  the
    appellant.   I  accept  the  appellant's  intention  is  to  avoid  any
    offending in the future.   However,  as  Judge  Hopkins  found  in  his
    decision, and whilst the evidence (reinforced before  me)  demonstrates
    that the appellant has "turned a corner" (my words, not those of  Judge
    Hopkins) and that he presents "as very much  less  of  a  threat  now",
    there is nevertheless a risk, albeit a low one, that he may reoffend in
    the future.  As Judge Hopkins found, and I agree, "the risk of his  re-
    offending has [not] completely gone away".

52. Nevertheless,  rehabilitation,  which  I  accept  on  the  evidence  is
    occurring to the appellant and is likely to be assisted by the  support
    of his family (he lives with one sister and his  mother  is  clearly  a
    concerned parent for him), will likely be hampered  by  his  return  to
    Sweden where he has not lived since 2000 (when aged 9), where  he  does
    not speak the language, and where he has no family at all.

53. It is accepted by Mr Mills that there is no evidence to show  that  the
    appellant did anything wrong or had any adverse  adjudications  against
    him whilst in prison.

54. Since the appellant has been released from both his custodial  sentence
    and  immigration  detention  (the  latter  in  April  2018),   he   has
    successfully completed  his  probation  (December  2018)  and  has  not
    committed any further offences.  He has,  in  my  judgment,  sought  to
    continue his life firmly integrated in the UK as best he can  with  his
    children and also, I accept, by seeking work although  there  are  some
    difficulties with that as (and I accept his explanation about this)  he
    is  unsure  whether  he  can  work  as  an  EEA  national  subject   to
    deportation.

55. The appellant's period of imprisonment was relatively brief.  Following
    conviction, it was between 22 September  2017  and  27  December  2017.
    That is a period of three months.  As I understand  it,  the  appellant
    did not serve the usual half of  the  custodial  sentence  as  a  prior
    period of tagged curfew whilst on bail and  a  pre-sentence  period  on
    remand, were taken into account in determining the actual period of his
    sentence  that  he  served  (see  sentencing  remarks  at  A3  of   the
    respondent's bundle).  The exact period of his imprisonment  on  remand
    was not identified before me.  It appears from the  sentencing  remarks
    that it was 22 days.  In determining the appeal, I bear  in  mind  that
    the appellant has, in fact, served a little more than the 3 months  due
    to this period on remand prior to his sentence.  My reference  in  this
    determination to the period of imprisonment being 3  months  is  to  be
    taken as reflecting the actual slightly longer period of 3 to 4 months.

56. In any event, he had lived in the UK for seventeen years prior  to  his
    imprisonment in September  2017  when  he  served  a  short  period  of
    imprisonment of three to four months.  Given his prior firm integration
    in the UK, and given his conduct and positive  attitude  and  intention
    whilst in prison and subsequent to his release,  I  am  satisfied  that
    that period of imprisonment has not broken his integrative  links  with
    the UK.  His life was, and remains, centred in the UK.  That is clearly
    exemplified by his continued relationship with  his  children  and  his
    desire to continue to work in the UK.

57. I am satisfied,  therefore,  that  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision, namely 13 December 2017 the appellant had  been  continuously
    resident in the UK for at least  ten  years,  in  fact  over  seventeen
    years.  He is, therefore, a person to whom reg 27(4) applied.   He  can
    only be deported if there are "imperative grounds of public  security".
    Mr Mills accepts that the Secretary  of  State  cannot  establish  that
    there are any such grounds based upon the appellant's offending or  his
    future risk of offending.  Consequently,  the  appellant's  deportation
    cannot be justified under the EEA Regulations 2016 and on  that  basis,
    his appeal must succeed and is allowed.

Decision

58. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    was set aside in my decision sent on 18 December 2018.

59. I re-make the decision allowing the appellant's appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016 on the basis that it has  not  been  established  that
    there are "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  as  required  to
    justify his deportation in accordance with EU law.

60. In the light of that decision, it is unnecessary to reach a decision on
    the appellant's Art 8 claim.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               15 March 2019

