
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00554/2014
                                                               DA/00555/2014
                                                               DA/00556/2014
                                                               DA/00557/2014
                                                               DA/00558/2014
                                                               DA/00559/2014
                                                               DA/00560/2014
                                                               DA/00568/2014
                                                               DA/00569/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 18 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    MNG, YM, HM, HM, HM, MM, SM, MNM, IMM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondents:      Mr Bandegani, instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors
                    (Brighton)




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of the respondents.  I  shall  refer
    to the first respondent as "the claimant".  The other  respondents  are
    members of the claimant's family.

 2. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 October 2006 with  his
    wife (the second respondent) and three of their  children  (the  fifth,
    sixth and seventh respondents).  They claimed asylum.  They were joined
    by their two eldest children (the  third  and  fourth  respondents)  in
    2009.  Their other four children were born in the United Kingdom.   The
    asylum claim that they made on arrival was refused.  The appeal against
    that refusal was dismissed.  On  1  September  2008  the  claimant  was
    convicted of  obtaining  leave  by  deception  and  assisting  unlawful
    immigration.  There were four offences.  The claimant was sentenced  to
    fifteen months imprisonment  in  respect  of  each  offence,  with  the
    sentences to run concurrently.  As  a  result  of  these  offences  the
    Secretary of State decided to make  a  deportation  order  against  the
    claimant and against the other respondents as his family members.   The
    order was made under the automatic deportation  provisions  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007, on 13 March 2014.

 3. On appeal  against  the  deportation  order,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    examined the history of the claimant  and  the  other  members  of  his
    family, and the evidence before them, in some detail.  The claimant has
    significant sight and mental health difficulties.  His  wife  also  has
    significant  mental  health  difficulties.   The   whole   family   has
    significantly integrated into  the  local  community.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded at para 26(b)(ii) that:

         "A crystal clear picture was painted of a very special and talented
         family, treasured by all who know and deal with them, the  children
         being the examples to their peers."

 4. Further, the eldest child was described by the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    the following way:

         "A quite exceptional young woman who has outstanding results in her
         studies to date and has gone a very long way to  help  others  less
         fortunate than herself... she is studying AS levels at  school  and
         has prospects of study at Oxford and a career in medicine."

 5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal of all the respondents under
    the immigration rules, finding that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect three of the respondents (the three  children  who  had  arrived
    with the claimant and his wife and had therefore lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years at  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision) to leave the United Kingdom and  that  there  was  no
    family member other than the claimant and his wife  able  to  care  for
    them in the United Kingdom.

 6. It is accepted that in doing so, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.
    It applied paragraph 399(a) of the Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 395 (as amended) as it was prior to 28 July 2014.  It  should
    instead have had regard to that paragraph as in effect on and after  28
    July 2014.  The question is no longer whether "it would  be  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom",  but  rather  whether
    "it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which
    the person is to be deported".

 7. The decision that there had been an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination was made by the  Upper  Tribunal  following  a
    hearing on 31 March 2015.  The hearing  was  then  adjourned  to  allow
    fuller argument on what should be the outcome of the appeal.  There was
    a further hearing on 16 June 2015, following which the  Upper  Tribunal
    issued its decision, again allowing the appeals by the claimant and his
    family members.  The Tribunal began by setting out the facts  as  found
    in the First-tier Tribunal, and went on to consider submissions made to
    it on the meaning of "unduly harsh" in paragraph  399.   It  cited  and
    followed MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT 435.   That  was  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal constituted in the same way as  for  the
    appeal being  determined.   That  was  to  the  effect  that  the  word
    "unduly":

         "... requires that the impact  upon  the  individual  concerned  be
         "inordinately" harsh... the  impact  would  be  "unduly  large"  or
         "excessive" .... It is necessarily fact-sensitive but is focused on
         the impact on the individual (whether child or partner) concerned."

 8. Applying this test to the facts revealed by  the  evidence,  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that it would be unduly harsh to expect the fifth,  sixth
    and seventh respondents to return to Afghanistan and that  the  appeals
    of their parents therefore had to be allowed; it would then be  "wholly
    disproportionate" to require the other respondents to be separated from
    the family unit and returned (or in the  case  of  those  born  in  the
    United Kingdom, relocated) to Afghanistan.  Those were the reasons  why
    the Upper Tribunal substituted a determination allowing the appeals.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  Permission was refused by the Tribunal,  but  granted  by  the
    Court of Appeal following its decision in MM  (Uganda)  and  another  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450.   As  the  latter  decision  made  clear,  in
    assessing whether deportation would be "unduly harsh" it  is  necessary
    to take into account the conduct to which the deportation decision is a
    response, for only so will it be possible to determine what  is  or  is
    not "due" or "undue".  By consent, the appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
    was  allowed  and  the  appeal  was  remitted  to  this  Tribunal   for
    redetermination.  It came before me at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre
    on 8 February 2018.

10. There have been factual developments since the appeal was  last  before
    this Tribunal.  The eldest of the claimant's children is now a  British
    citizen, so is not liable to deportation in any  event.   The  claimant
    himself is now blind in both eyes.  Each of his family members  has  of
    course, now been in the United Kingdom for a further period of time.

11. As required by MM, I consider the seriousness of the offences of  which
    the claimant was convicted.  They strike at the  heart  of  immigration
    law and control, and were properly subject to the level  of  punishment
    imposed.  On the other hand, they  are  not  at  the  utmost  level  of
    seriousness, they are unlikely to be repeated, and there is  no  reason
    to suppose that by reason of them the claimant is a  person  who  poses
    any risk to the community in the United Kingdom now.  I set against the
    public interest in securing the deportation of  the  claimant  and  his
    family, the strongly positive findings of the First-tier Tribunal,  and
    the subsequent factual developments.

12. Although it is clear that, as the Court  of  Appeal  noted,  the  Upper
    Tribunal erred in law in failing to take into account how  serious  the
    claimant's offending was, when that matter is looked at in the  context
    of the facts of this case as a whole, it rather  assists  the  claimant
    and his family than otherwise. That is to say,  the  reasoning  process
    adopted by the Upper Tribunal previously ignored the  circumstances  of
    the offence, whereas when they are taken into account it is  seen  that
    this case falls towards the lower end  of  those  cases  in  which  the
    public interest requires deportation.  Looking at  the  matter  in  the
    round as I do, I reach the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh  to
    require those of the claimant's children who had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years at the date of the decision  to  live
    in Afghanistan.  In the circumstances,  it  follows,  for  the  reasons
    given by the Upper Tribunal in its previous determination, and set  out
    above, that the appeals of the claimant and all the  other  respondents
    now fall to be allowed.  The appeal of the respondent who has become  a
    British citizen falls to be allowed for that reason  in  addition.   My
    decision  on  the  appeals  brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   is
    accordingly that they all be allowed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 13 April 2018.

