
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00557/2017 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |                                     |
|9th August 2020                      |On 13th August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 LAMINE DABO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

      1. FtT Judge  A  J  Blake  dismissed  Mr  Dabo's  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision dated 14th August 2017. He sought  permission
         to appeal on the grounds

          a) That the Tribunal had erred in finding the appellant  had  not
             been exercising Treaty Rights during his 10 years residence in
             the UK, and

          b) That the judge had erred in his consideration of the impact of
             his deportation on his three children and their mother.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted, according to  the  'Reasons',  in
         respect of the first ground only although the heading to the  grant
         of permission does not distinguish between  the  first  and  second
         ground.

      3. Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent and,  in
         the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was made for  the
         question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether the
         decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside could  be  determined
         on the papers.

      4. Neither the appellant nor his solicitors complied with  directions.
         The respondent made written submissions and had no objection  to  a
         decision on whether there was an error of law being  taken  on  the
         papers.  There  was  no  response   by   the   appellant   or   his
         representatives to the respondent's  submissions.  I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant  was,  through  his  solicitors,  aware  of  the
         respondent's position  but  has  chosen  not  to  respond  or  make
         submissions. No application  to  extend  time  to  respond  to  the
         respondent's submissions has been made.

      5. I  am  satisfied  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent together with the papers before me[1] are sufficient  to
         enable me to be able to take a decision  on  whether  there  is  an
         error of law in the decision of the  FtT  and  if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside, on the  papers  and  without  hearing
         oral submissions.

      6. Although submitted in the application for permission that there was
         evidence in the bundle  that  the  appellant  had  been  exercising
         Treaty Rights for some period of time, it was not submitted in  the
         skeleton argument before the FtT or in oral submissions that he had
         been exercising Treaty Rights such as to enable him to benefit from
         enhanced protection rights. The  skeleton  argument  merely  stated
         that it was a possibility. Counsel for the appellant before the FtT
         then specifically conceded that the appellant was entitled, on  the
         evidence  relied  upon,  only  to  basic  level  protection  -  see
         paragraphs 69 and 105.

      7. The FtT judge has not, on the evidence before  him  and  given  the
         submissions of counsel, erred in law in reaching  his  decision  in
         the context of the basic level of protection.

      8. In so far as the second ground is concerned, there is no  challenge
         to the finding that the two daughters are French citizens, that the
         appellant had,  prior  to  his  deportation,  limited  intermittent
         contact with his son in Manchester, that there  was  little  or  no
         contact between him and his two daughters during  his  imprisonment
         and after his deportation. The judge noted and took account of  the
         children's medical condition and the wife's pending application for
         settlement.  The  ground  seeking  permission  does  no  more  than
         disagree with the finding that it would not be  unduly  harsh.  The
         weight to be placed on the evidence was a matter for the judge  who
         identified the evidence, considered the impact upon  the  appellant
         and upon the children and wife in the context of the evidence as  a
         whole. The findings reached were plainly open to him.

      9. There is no error of law in the decision by the FtT judge.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT stands.


Jane Coker

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
9 August 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a) the respondent's bundle; together with PNC record (b) the bundle
filed on behalf of the appellant together with NI record and skeleton
argument; (c) the decision of FtT judge Blake; (d) The application for
permission to appeal and (the grant of permission to appeal.

