
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00417/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2013                            |On 31 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant
                                     and


                          Mr Keno st george forbes
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Cleveland and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Framework of this Appeal

[1]  This judgement determines the Secretary of State's appeal  against  the
    decision of the   First-tier Tribunal, which allowed the appeal  of  Mr
    Forbes,  the  Respondent  herein,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision that he be deported from the United Kingdom.

[2]  In the forum of the First-tier Tribunal, the resolution of  the  appeal
    ultimately centred     on a contest between  the  public  interest  and
    certain private interests.  The public interest espoused  and  asserted
    by the Secretary of State was that in deporting the Respondent from the
    United Kingdom in light of his convictions for  certain  serious  drugs
    offences.  The competing private interest was that of the  family  life
    rights as asserted on behalf of the Respondent  and  his  mother  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  As this judgement shall  presently  highlight,  it  is
    essential for tribunals to properly appreciate the true  character  and
    weight of the public interest in play in cases of this kind.

[3]  We  draw  attention  at  the  outset  to  the  offences  of  which  the
    Respondent  was  convicted.   These  consisted  of  eleven  counts   of
    supplying or being concerned in the supply of Class  A  drugs.   It  is
    apparent from the sentencing transcript that these offences  spanned  a
    period of several weeks.   The  sentencing  judge's  rehearsal  of  the
    evidence suggested that the Respondent was a professional  drug  dealer
    and had conducted these  activities  in  a  particular  housing  estate
    during a lengthy period.  The judge described the Respondent as regular
    drug dealer.   The  sentence  imposed  was  three  years  imprisonment,
    concurrent in respect of  each  of  the  eleven  counts.    In  passing
    sentence, on 13 October 2011, the judge described this as  the  minimum
    sentence which he could impose, adding that many  would  regard  it  as
    merciful.  In determining this appeal we are alert to other aspects  of
    the  Respondent's criminal record, in particular his conviction of  two
    separate offences of possessing a controlled class A drug,  on 6  April
    2009,  giving rise to   community  orders.   We  note,  and  take  into
    account, the form of disposal selected by the sentencing court.

[4]   In cases involving the deportation  of  convicted  foreign  criminals,
    the legal equation - to which we shall return later in this judgement -
    has four main elements.   The first is  the  significant  parliamentary
    intervention, by primary legislation.   The second element consists  of
    certain provisions of the Immigration Rules.   Thirdly,   there is  the
    Human Rights Act 1998, in particular Article 8  ECHR.    Fourthly,  and
    finally,  there  now  exists  extensive  and   authoritative   judicial
    guidance.  Within these several sources, all of which combined to  form
    a whole, there are several inter-related public  interests:   society's
    condemnation of serious criminal activity to; the deterrence of further
    offending of this  kind;  the  promotion  of  public  interest  in  the
    criminal justice and immigration systems; the protection of the public;
    and the maintenance of firm immigration control.

[5]  Against this background, we remind  ourselves  that  the  question  for
    this Tribunal   in  every  case  is  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    committed any  material  error  of  law  within   the  compass  of  the
    authorised grounds of the appeal. At this juncture, we draft  attention
    to the two permitted grounds of appeal.  These are, respectively:

      a) The First-Tier Tribunal:


         "... erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons  for  finding
         that the Appellant was in a subsisting relationship with  his  wife
         ......"




      b) The First-Tier Tribunal:


         ".... failed to give adequate reasons for finding this  is  a  case
         where the Appellant's and the children's'  best  interests  are  so
         strong as to outweigh the  Secretary  of  State's  public  interest
         policies."

The Decision in MF (Nigeria)

[6]  These grounds must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules, namely  paragraphs  398,  399  and
    399A.  The legal status  and  effect  of  these  provisions  have  been
    determined by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) - v  -  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  which  post-dated
    the first instance Determination.  The Court of Appeal  held,  firstly,
    that in cases where it is necessary to decide whether  the  deportation
    of a foreign criminal would breach rights under Article 8  ECHR,  great
    weight should be given to the public interest  where  the  offender  is
    unable to satisfy any of the provisions  of  paragraphs  398,  399  and
    399A. The Master of the Rolls continued:


         "[40]     ......  It  is  only  exceptionally  that  such   foreign
             criminals will succeed in  showing  that  their  rights  under
             Article 8(1) trump the public interest  in  their  deportation
             ....


         [42] ..... In approaching the question  of  whether  removal  is  a
             proportionate interference  with  an  individual's  Article  8
             rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in   favour   of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal .....


         [43] The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule.  The general rule in the present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs
             399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
             These compelling reasons are the 'exceptional' circumstances."



     The Court held, secondly, that the new  Rules  constitute  "a  complete
    code".  In the balancing exercise to be performed, the Tribunal applies
    a proportionality test as required  by  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
    The words "other  factors"  refer  to  "all  other  factors  which  are
    relevant to proportionality": paragraph [39].  To summarise:

     a) If a claimant's case  falls  within  paragraph  399  or  399A,  the
        exercise for the Tribunal involves a single stage only.


     b) If  a  claimant's  case  does  not  fall  within  either  of  these
        provisions, it is necessary to  consider,  and  determine,  whether
        there are exceptional circumstances outweighing the public interest
        in deportation:  this introduces a second stage in the exercise.


The decision in SS (Nigeria)

[7]  In order to properly appreciate the potency of the public  interest  in
    play, it is necessary for Tribunals  to  be  alert  in  every  case  to
    another recent decision of the Court of Appeal,  SS  (Nigeria)  -  v  -
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ  550.   The
    central theme of this decision is the powerful weight to be  attributed
    to the Parliamentary intervention in this field.

[8]   By section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007, a "foreign criminal" is  any
    person who has received a sentence of at least 12  months  imprisonment
    after 1st August 2008 or was in custody pursuant to such a sentence  on
    that date and had not been served with a Notice of Deportation.  It  is
    appropriate to interpose here section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971:



         "(5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
             from the United Kingdom if -


               a) the Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or


               b) another person to whose family he belongs is or has  been
                  ordered to be deported."

    Section 32 of the 2007 Act continues:


      "(4)    For the purpose of section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
          1971, the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive   to  the
          public good.


             c) The Secretary of State must make  a  deportation  order  in
                respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."


     Section 33 provides:

          "(1) Section 32(4) and (5) -

                 (a)  Do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
             applies (subject to subsection (7) below) .....

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

               a)  A person's Convention Rights, or


               b)  The  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
                  Convention."

     The remainder of Section  33  is  not  central  the  present  exercise.
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  is
    another important element in the primary legislation framework:


              "(1)    The Secretary of State  must  make  arrangements  for
    ensuring that -


              (a) The functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom ...

           2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -

               a) Any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;


               b) any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer .....


           (3)     A person exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
             considering the function, have regard to any guidance given to
             the person by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  purpose  of
             subsection (1)."

[9]  Delivering the main judgment of the Court in SS, Laws LJ, referring  to
    the deportation of foreign criminals under the 2007 Act, stated:

         "[48]    ... Where such  potential  deportees  have  raised  claims
             under Article 8, seeking to resist deportation by  relying  on
             the  interests  of  a  child  or   children   having   British
             citizenship, I think with respect that insufficient  attention
             has been paid to the weight to be attached, in virtue  of  its
             origin in primary legislation,  to  the  policy  of  deporting
             foreign criminals ......


         [49] The policy's source, however, is as we have seen  one  of  the
             drivers of the breadth  of  the  decision  maker's  margin  of
             discretion when the proportionality of its application in  the
             particular case is being considered."

     Summarising, Laws LJ stated:

         "[55]    .... Proportionality, the absence of  an  'exceptionality'
             rule and the meaning of 'a  primary  consideration'  are  all,
             when properly understood,  consonant  with  the  force  to  be
             attached in cases of the present kind to the  two  drivers  of
             the decision maker's margin of discretion: the policy's source
             and the policy's nature and in particular to the great  weight
             which the 2007 Act attributes to the  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals."

                  [Emphasis added.]


     And in a later passage, Laws  LJ  refers  to  "the  extremely  pressing
    public interest in the Appellant's deportation": paragraph [58].

[10] It is  appropriate  at  this  junction  to  highlight  the  distinctive
    functions of the First-Tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  Where  an
    appeal against an order deporting a foreign criminal is pursued, it  is
    incumbent on the First-Tier Tribunal to consider all relevant evidence,
    to make appropriate findings of fact and, finally, to make its decision
    in accordance with MF (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria).  The Upper  Tribunal,
    however, has a different function.  Where a further appeal  is  brought
    in this forum, permission having been granted, such appeal is, pursued,
    per section 11(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 -

              ".... on any point of law arising from a decision made by  the
             First-Tier Tribunal   ...."


     Thus the question to be determined by the  Upper  Tribunal  is  whether
    the First-Tier Tribunal has erred in law in making  its  decision.   In
    thus deciding, the Upper  Tribunal  does  not  conduct  an  open  ended
    enquiry into or review of the first instance  decision.   Rather,  both
    the  appeal  and  the  ensuing  appellate   tribunal's   decision   are
    circumscribed by the terms in  which  permission  to  appeal  has  been
    granted. In determining such appeals, the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  common
    with the First-Tier Tribunal, must give full effect to the decisions in
    MF (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria) in  every  case.   Those  decisions  will
    invariably have a significant influence in deciding whether the  First-
    Tier Tribunal has erred in law in any of the  respects  falling  within
    the permitted grounds of appeal.   In  conducting  this  exercise,  the
    Upper Tribunal will scrupulously examine the substance of the  decision
    of the First-Tier Tribunal.

THIS APPEAL

 [11]    We turn to address  the  first  ground  of  appeal.   The  evidence
    available to the First-Tier Tribunal  included  that  relating  to  the
    offending and sentencing of the Respondent.  We have outlined  this  in
    paragraphs [3] - [5] above. The Judge's consideration of the Article  8
    ECHR issues began in paragraph [25].   Having  rehearsed  some  of  the
    relevant evidence, the Judge made a finding that there was family  life
    between the Appellant and his wife and children, followed by a  finding
    that there was a subsisting  husband/wife  relationship.   We  consider
    that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  warrant   these   findings.
    Moreover,  the  Secretary  of   State's   decision   letter   expressly
    acknowledged the genuine and subsisting husband/wife relationship.   We
    consider that the relevant passages in the Determination, coupled  with
    the material supporting evidence and the clear acknowledgements in  the
    Secretary of State's letter  confound  the  first  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The reasons for the Judge's finding  about  this  relationship
    are  abundantly  clear.   The  asserted  error  of  law  has  not  been
    demonstrated.

[12] Turning to the second ground  of  appeal,  the  Judge  made  a  further
    finding  that  there  was  an  active  and  subsisting  father/children
    relationship.   This  was  no  bare   conclusion.    Rather,   it   was
    substantiated  by  appropriate  evidence  based  particulars.   It  was
    further fortified by discrete findings that the  Respondent  played  an
    important  role  in  the  life  of  his  children   (with   appropriate
    elaboration) and that the Respondent was motivated  to  turn  his  life
    around.  This particular finding was underpinned by evidence, which the
    Judge rehearsed, of the Respondent's active rehabilitation  efforts  in
    prison.  The Judge made a further discrete finding that the  Respondent
    presents no risk of reoffending.  This finding was amply  justified  by
    evidence of compliance  with  licence  conditions  since  release  from
    prison, his progressive acquisition of  new  skills  and  his  positive
    rehabilitation in prison.

[13] Next, the Judge made  a  further  finding  that  if  the  Appellant  is
    returned to Jamaica his wife and children will,  realistically,  remain
    in the United Kingdom, giving rise to long  term  decimation  of  their
    established family life.  This finding is uncontroversial.   The  Judge
    then specifically addressed section 55 of the 2009 Act.   He  correctly
    recognised that the best interests  of  the  children  were  a  primary
    consideration.  He then made an  assessment  of  those  interests.   He
    found that those interests would be best served by preservation of  the
    family unit.  The judgment  is  littered  with  the  reasons  for  this
    assessment.  We consider that there is no deficiency in the  reasoning,
    both express and reasonably implied.  The Judge  recognised  that  this
    was a borderline case.  The  contest  was  between  the  strong  public
    interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal (on the one hand) and
    the rights of all family members under Article  8  ECHR  and  the  best
    interests of the children (on the other).  The Judge, having  conducted
    an elaborate balancing exercise, as Mr Khan urged  in  his  submission,
    concluded, in terms, that the balance swung narrowly in favour  of  the
    Respondent and the other family members,  in particular  the  children.
    We are satisfied that the Judge's reasoning is apparent in the relevant
    passages of the judgment, which must of course be read as a  whole  and
    we reject the challenge of inadequacy.

[14] Finally, we are satisfied that, in substance, the Judge's decision  was
    based on an appreciation and correct application  of  the  "exceptional
    circumstances" test in paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration  Rules.    We
    remind ourselves that this is not an appeal  on  the  merits.   Rather,
    this is an error of law appeal, conducted within the  confines  of  the
    permitted grounds.  We are satisfied that there was no misunderstanding
    of or misdirection on the relevant law  in  the  Determination  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal.  For the  reasons  elaborated,  we  conclude  that
    neither of the errors of law advanced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State has been established.

DECISION

[15] Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
                           Signed:     [pic]
                                    Mr Justice McCloskey,
                                                  President  of  the   Upper
     Tribunal
                           Dated:      23 October 2013
