
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: DA/00898/2012

                                                        DA/00900/2012






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |                              Determination|
|                                |Promulgated                                |
|On 29th July 2014               |                              On 26th      |
|                                |August 2014                                |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                   Mr g a

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 9th May 2014.  By that decision the First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed an appeal by a father and a daughter whom I will refer to as GA
    and JA, effectively against refusal to revoke deportation  orders  made
    in respect of both GA and JA.

 2. The facts are these.  GA is a national of Ghana.  His daughter was born
    in the UK and has lived here all her life.  She was born  on  13th  May
    2007.  Although born here the daughter is not a British  national.  She
    is a national of Ghana.   However eight months after JA  was  born  her
    mother ceased to care for her and has had no  contact  with  her  since
    that time.  JA was brought up by her grandmother and her  father.  They
    all three live together.   The  grandmother  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 33 years or so and is now  over  60  and  has  other  adult
    children living in the United Kingdom.

 3. On 15th November 2007 the father GA was convicted at Northampton  Crown
    Court of using a false instrument with intent.   He  was  sentenced  to
    fifteen months' imprisonment.  By reason of that  conviction  GA  is  a
    foreign criminal within the meaning of Section 32 of the United Kingdom
    Borders Act 2007.  That Section  provides  for  the  deportation  of  a
    foreign criminal that is a person who is not a British citizen and  who
    has been convicted of  an  offence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  been
    sentenced to at least twelve months' imprisonment.  Parliament requires
    the Secretary of  State  to  make  a  deportation  unless  one  of  the
    exceptions apply.  The exceptions include situations where removal of a
    foreign criminal would breach a  person's  rights  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 4. On 21st February 2008 the appellant, Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department, decided to make a deportation order against the father, GA.
      An appeal against that decision was  dismissed.   On  16th  September
    2009 a request that the  deportation  order  be  revoked  was  refused.
    Further representations were made asking  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    revoke the deportation order.  She declined to do so.  Her reasons  are
    set out in detail in a carefully reasoned letter dated  27th  September
    2012 addressed to GA.  The appellant also decided to make a deportation
    order in relation to JA as she was a family member of a person who  was
    to be deported and was herself liable  to  be  deported  by  virtue  of
    Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971.   Again the reasons for doing
    so are set out in detail in a  carefully  reasoned  letter  dated  27th
    September 2012 and addressed to JA.  That letter, too, should  be  read
    in full.

 5. The respondents appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal summarised the facts. As the Tribunal noted in paragraph 9  of
    its determination the thrust of the appeal was that JA had been born in
    the United Kingdom and had only ever lived in the United Kingdom.   She
    had been cared for by her father and by her  grandmother.   Her  mother
    had played little part in her life and had left JA with the grandmother
    at a young age.  If JA was to leave the United Kingdom she  would  lose
    the close bond she has with the grandmother.  If GA, the father,  alone
    left the United Kingdom she would  then  be  separated  both  from  her
    father and she is already separated from her mother and would have only
    her grandmother.

 6. We note that a joint residence order was applied for  from  the  County
    Court which would require the daughter to reside with  her  father  and
    her grandmother.  In fact no order was necessary  as  all  the  parties
    were in agreement that that was what should happen and as no order  was
    necessary none was made.

 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  its  findings  of  fact  and  its
    conclusions.  It set out references to the CAFCASS report prepared  for
    the family proceedings.  It also had regard to  the  findings  of  fact
    made by the District Judge in those proceedings. He said this:

             "In my judgement it is in the best interests of the  child  to
             reside with the applicant father and  the  second  respondent,
             the grandmother and I see no reason to depart from the view of
             the CAFCASS officer. It is plain to me that the appellant  and
             the second respondent jointly are able to meet  the  physical,
             emotional and educational needs of the child.  I  consider  it
             likely that either could do so in the absence  of  the  other,
             disregarding  the  possibility  that  the  applicant  may   be
             deported.  In my judgement it would have a deleterious  effect
             on Janice's  development  to  be  separated  from  either  her
             grandmother or her father."

 8. That of course was a finding on best interests and it was not a finding
    in the context  of  deportation  where  you  have  to  weigh  the  best
    interests of the child against the very important  public  interest  of
    removing foreign criminals from these shores.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal placed weight on the findings of  the  District
    Judge.  Then at paragraph 19 it addressed the nature  of  the  offence.
    Crimes for which people are sentenced to more than twelve months are by
    their nature serious.   It is understandable that Parliament  has  said
    that when somebody commits a crime for which such a  long  sentence  is
    imposed they should be removed.  However it is also right  to  bear  in
    mind that some crimes are even more serious and the existing  case  law
    recognises that crimes may be serious or  even  more  serious  and  the
    Tribunal at paragraph 19 noted that this  particular  offence  did  not
    involve violence or drugs and was not a sexual crime, all of which  are
    even more heinous. But they noted at the same time the  seriousness  of
    the offence of using a false instrument and the impact upon society  of
    doing so. They also noticed that there was nothing to suggest a risk of
    reoffending and in fairness to the father he has not  reoffended  since
    his release from custody since 2008 and has  not  committed  a  further
    offence.

10. Next, the Tribunal turned to the law. It referred  to  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] 1WLR   554  and  also
    the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department.  It then said this:

         "Our  conclusion  is  that  there  are  compelling  or  exceptional
         circumstances in this case which  require  the  revocation  of  the
         deportation orders made  against  the  two  appellants.   We  place
         weight upon the specialist Family Court as to the best interests of
         the child and the impact of removal on her either of the  appellant
         alone, or with the appellant and away from her  grandmother.  There
         are clear findings of fact that it would have a deleterious  effect
         upon her development and it is in her best interests for the status
         quo to be maintained and for her to  be  brought  up  by  both  the
         appellant and her grandmother.

11. Paragraph 22 and following says this:

         "22. We are fully aware of how the mother left her in the  care  of
             the grandmother  when she was 8 months  old.   This  care  has
             continued and the child has lived with her  ever  since.   The
             child was born in the United Kingdom  and  has  lived  in  the
             United Kingdom   for just over seven years now.  The appellant
             has lived in the UK since he was 17 years old.

         23.  We have fully considered the  importance  to  the  public  for
             criminal offenders to be removed from the United  Kingdom  but
             against this we must consider whether it is proportionate  now
             that we have found there  are  exceptional  circumstances.  We
             place weight upon the observation by the District  Judge  that
             the only reason for not making a residence order is because he
             elected not to consider the immigration situation as such, and
             applying the principles under the Children's  Act  1989  there
             was no reason to make such an order on the basis  the  parties
             are remaining in the UK.

         24.  However, the judge made it clear that he  would  have  made  a
             residence order.  Clearly the impact of  the  removal  of  the
             appellant either  alone,  or  with  the  second  appellant  is
             disproportionate to the best interests of the second appellant
             and the deleterious impact upon her  and  this  outweighs  the
             public interest in the case."

12. The Tribunal therefore allowed the appeal.

13. The Secretary of State has appealed and  there  are  effectively  three
    grounds of the appeal which have been advanced ably this  afternoon  by
    Mr  Wilding  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  The  first  is
    effectively that the panel had not properly engaged with  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules and  with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MF
    (Nigeria).  The second is that the First-tier Tribunal have  failed  to
    recognise  the  particularly  pressing  public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals. The third submission was that the Secretary of State
    had failed to balance the best interests of the child against the wider
    interests of  the  public  and  Mr  Wilding  focused  on  that  in  his
    submissions this afternoon.  Mr Wilding's essential case is that  there
    has not been a proper weighing of  the  best  interests  of  the  child
    against the wider public interest in deportation.  Rather the Tribunal,
    so says Mr Wilding, simply took the assessment of the best interests of
    the child by the District Judge and assumed that that  took  precedence
    over the wider public interest.

14. When granting permission to appeal the judge granting  permission  also
    indicated that the Tribunal may not have reached its own  decision  but
    may simply have applied the findings of the district judge.

15. Turning then to the law, Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    places an obligation on the Secretary of  State  to  deport  a  foreign
    national criminal unless one of the exceptions in this case, Convention
    rights, applies.  The Immigration Rules provide as  follows.  Paragraph
    396 of the Rules says that where a person is liable to deportation  the
    presumption shall be that the public interest requires deportation.  It
    is in the public interest to deport where the Secretary of  State  must
    make a deportation order under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

16. Rule 397 records that a person's deportation will  not  be  ordered  if
    that would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention. Where that does not  arise  it  would  only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation  is
    outweighed.

17. Rule 398 deals with a situation  where  as  here  a  person  relies  on
    Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Act  and  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    assessing that Article 8 claim will consider whether paragraph  399  or
    399A applies and if  it  does  not  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation   will   be
    outweighed by other factors.  Rule 399 deals with a situation when  the
    child has lived in the UK continuously for at  least  the  seven  years
    immediately proceeding the date of the immigration case and  either  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom
    and there is no other family member is able to care of the child in the
    UK.

18. MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1WLR 544 says at paragraph 44 that  the  new  Rules
    are a complete code governing the deportation of foreign criminals  and
    at paragraph 43 says this:

         "The general Rule in the present context is that in the case of   a
         foreign prisoner to whom paragraph 399 and 399A do not  apply  very
         compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public interest
         in  deportation.  These  compelling  reasons  are  the  exceptional
         circumstances."

19. First, considering  the  decision  here  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    address the correct test. They referred expressly to  MF  (Nigeria)  at
    paragraph 20.  They then moved on at paragraph 21  to  say  that  their
    conclusion was there are compelling or exceptional  circumstances.   It
    is clear in our judgment that  the  Tribunal  had  concluded  that  the
    father and the daughter did not fall within Rule  399.   They  did  not
    have the benefit of the protection accorded by Rule 399.  It is correct
    that the Tribunal does not say whether that was because  they  did  not
    think that the child should go to Ghana or whether  they  thought  that
    the grandmother could look after the child in  the  United  Kingdom  if
    they ordered simply that GA go to Ghana.  But what  is  clear  is  that
    those situations did not apply and the benefit of  the  Rules  did  not
    apply.   That is why they went outside the Rules  to  consider  whether
    there were compelling or exceptional circumstances.

20. Secondly, it is, in our judgment it is clear what those  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances are.  The Tribunal spells  them  out,  albeit
    briefly, at paragraph 21.  They placed weight upon  the  assessment  of
    the specialist Family Court as to the best interests of the  child  and
    the impact of removal either GA alone or JA with GA the  appellant  and
    away from her grandmother. They considered, would be  deleterious  upon
    her development. They are saying there no more than  if  you  send  the
    father back on his own that is  going  to  be  disadvantageous  to  the
    child.  If you send the child back with the father then she  loses  the
    contact with the grandmother who has brought her up since the age of  8
    months, and that is going to be deleterious in terms of the  effect  on
    the development of the child.

21. We bear in mind that this is not a case where a grandmother  is  having
    the sort of regular access to a grandchild that often happens.  This is
    a case where the grandmother has effectively brought up the child since
    the age of 8 months and the mother has played no part in her upbringing
    and the exceptional circumstances so far as this Tribunal was concerned
    was that whichever way they approached it, if they simply deported  the
    father the child would not see her father.  If they sent the child back
    with her father she would not see the grandmother who had  brought  her
    up  since  the  age  of  8  months.    Those   were   the   exceptional
    circumstances.

22. Thirdly, then, we consider whether  or  not  they  properly  took  into
    account the very pressing interest in removing foreign  offenders  from
    the United Kingdom. In our judgment they did so.

23. At paragraph 23 they say "We have fully considered  the  importance  to
    the public for  criminal  offenders  to  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom".  However they  had to weigh up the difficulties in separating
    the child from either the father or the grandmother and  weighing  that
    against the very real public interest in deportation  bearing  in  mind
    that this was a serious crime but not the most  serious  crime  in  the
    list of criminal offences that could  have been committed.

24. In those circumstances and in our judgment the First-tier Tribunal  did
    not misdirect themselves or failed to apply the approach recognised  by
    the Court of Appeal in the case law to which we  have  referred.   They
    did consider the public interest in removing  criminal  offenders  from
    the United Kingdom.  They did not simply rely on the assessment of  the
    District Judge in the family proceedings although they gave very  great
    weight to that.  But they did weigh that against the interests  of  the
    public in deportation.  We are very conscious that the fact that  there
    is a child on the scene does not amount to a  trump  card  and  it  not
    determinative.  We bear in mind the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in
    Zaumbas.

25. We recognise that  many  tribunals  might  have  come  to  a  different
    decision.  We recognise that may tribunals might well say they were not
    satisfied about the role the father  had  played  and  would  send  the
    father back to Ghana, leaving  the  child  with  the  grandmother.   We
    recognise that many tribunals would regard the decision in the  present
    case as generous, given that we are dealing  with  a  foreign  national
    criminal.

26. However, the question for us is whether or not the First-tier  Tribunal
    has erred in law.  In our judgment it has not erred  in  law.   It  has
    identified the relevant law.  It has applied the relevant law.  It  has
    weighed the interests of the child and in particular the  interests  of
    not splitting the child from either her father or the  grandmother  who
    has brought her up  against  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of
    foreign criminals. It reached a conclusion which is within the range of
    decisions it could reach and we therefore conduce  that  there  was  no
    error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  and  we  therefore
    dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.







Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Lewis

