

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
DA/00645/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 April 2019                        | On 20 May 2019                    |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                    W S M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by M Reale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Brazil.  He appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  27
    September 2018 to deport him from the United Kingdom.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed, but  subsequently  the  appellant  sought  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant has been in a  relationship  with  Mrs  D  since  October
    2016, and they married on 17 March 2018.  On 8 July 2017 the appellant,
    who was aged 21 at the time, committed two offences of sexual  activity
    with a female child under the age of 16.  The victim was 14  years  old
    at the  time.   He  was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  fourteen  months'
    imprisonment and was also made subject  to  a  Sexual  Harm  Prevention
    Order until further order under s.103 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003.

3.   The deportation decision was made on the basis that  he  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
    justify his deportation on grounds of public policy.  He appealed  that
    decision on the basis that it breached his rights under the EU treaties
    and was contrary to his Article 8 rights.

4.   The judge noted that the maximum penalty  for  the  offence  of  sexual
    activity with a child is fourteen  years'  imprisonment  and  that  the
    sentence imposed on the appellant was nowhere near  that  maximum.   He
    considered however that it reflected five  different  activities  which
    the appellant engaged in with the 14 year old female during the  course
    of the incident, two of which  involved  her  penetration.   The  judge
    noted that there were elements that the appellant was trusted, but  his
    offending was not spontaneous  and  there  was  planning  including  an
    internet search of the term "underage girl".   The  appellant  met  the
    victim on two nights in a row.

5.   The judge went on to say, at paragraph 38 of  his  decision,  that  the
    appellant's offending demonstrated that he had an attraction to females
    below the age of consent and was prepared to  act  on  it.   The  judge
    noted that the appellant had also searched out material on the internet
    under  the  term  "underage  girl".   He  had  prioritised  his  sexual
    gratification over the victim's welfare.  He had made a comment that he
    almost lost interest in her as she was too easy.  The judge  said  that
    he found it hard to accept that the appellant's attraction  to  females
    below the age of consent and his attitude to females, evidenced by  the
    comment he had referred to, would have disappeared as a consequence  of
    the custodial sentence.

6.   The judge took the view that the Sexual Harm Prevention Order  and  the
    prohibitions contained in its schedule demonstrated very  clearly  that
    the sentencing judge took the view  that  the  appellant  continued  to
    present a risk or the order would not have been made.   He  noted  that
    the appellant was expected to be a father at the time when the offences
    were committed.  He also said that he  had  seen  nothing  which  might
    alleviate the concern that the appellant would in future engage in such
    behaviour again in response to another life event which he would surely
    experience.  He had not engaged in any work whilst in custody to  equip
    him to deal with his attraction to females under the age of consent and
    had told the judge, which caused the judge much concern,  that  he  had
    not requested any such help.  As a consequence the judge concluded that
    the appellant's conduct represented a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    As a consequence the appeal was dismissed under the EEA Regulations and
    was also dismissed on human rights grounds.

7.   As noted above, the appellant sought  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal against the judge's decision, and Mr Lee, who  had  drafted  the
    grounds, developed the points made in those grounds in his submissions,
    reflecting the admirable terseness and relevance of those grounds.

8.   He accepted that on any view the offence was serious, but the test  was
    whether there were good reasons for finding a present and  sufficiently
    serious danger to society.  It was argued that the judge had  erred  in
    finding that to be the case.
9.   In his sentencing remarks the judge considered that counts 1 to 4  fell
    into category 1 of the Sexual Offences Definitive Guideline and  counts
    2, 3 and 5 fell into category 2.  The judge was just persuaded that the
    right level of culpability was within category B.  And  commented  that
    this was not grooming behaviour in the conventional sense  and  it  was
    short lived and it was not  an  abuse  of  trust  although  there  were
    elements that the appellant was trusted.  The judge said that the thing
    that caused him the most concern was the label of significant planning.
     It was fully accepted that this behaviour on  the  appellant's  behalf
    was  not  spontaneous.   The  difficulty  was  when   planning   became
    significant but there clearly was planning.  They had met two nights in
    a row and exchanged pictures and at the end of June on the 29th he  had
    done searches on the internet with a search term of  underage  girl  in
    remarkably similar terms to what he then searched for to what  happened
    that night.  This led the judge to conclude that this was at  the  very
    upper end of the range.

10.  Mr Lee went on to make the point that the offence  was  one  where  the
    appellant and the victim were known to each other socially and  it  was
    accepted that he had no previous  convictions,  either  in  the  United
    Kingdom or elsewhere.

11.  Mr Lee took issue with what the judge said at the  start  of  paragraph
    38 of his decision that the appellant's offending demonstrated that  he
    had an attraction to females below the age of consent and was  prepared
    to act on it.  There was no evidence either in the criminal proceedings
    or the immigration appeal of any such propensity.  He  had  known  that
    the victim was under the age of consent, but there was no evidence that
    that was part of  a  wider  propensity  to  seek  sexual  gratification
    through children.  There was not enough to say  that  the  offence  was
    evidence of a particular propensity.  Mr  Lee  noted  in  passing  that
    there were quite a number of countries where 14 was the age of consent.
     This was not a major point but it was not indicative of a propensity.

12.  The judge had touched on the other reason of the  internet  search  and
    the comment that he had almost lost interest in her as she was too easy
    but they were secondary to the first sentence of paragraph 38.   So  he
    was a relatively young man and the offence was committed against a girl
    he knew socially, and there was no question of it being within category
    A of culpability.  In the circumstances it was not open to the judge to
    find there was evidence of propensity and that, it was argued, was  the
    error of law.

13.  In his  submissions  Mr  Kotas  argued  that  the  guidelines  did  not
    necessarily wholly assist with regard to future risk.  They were linked
    to the points set out in the guidelines and he had not  been  sentenced
    with regard to future risk so they were of little help.

14.  It was also argued with regard to paragraph 7 of the grounds  that  the
    factor of significant degree of planning could not properly be said not
    to have been a factor present in  the  offences,  that  being,  it  was
    argued, at odds with what the judge had said with regard to that matter
    in the sentencing remarks.  It was also a point that there was  a  lack
    of rehabilitation while the appellant was in  prison.   The  judge  had
    been entitled to take that into account.
15.  The Sexual Harm Prevention Order was relevant to the  issue  of  future
    risk.  The list set out in the Schedule of Prohibitions made  it  clear
    what the risk was and hence the order had been made and that was strong
    evidence of risk as the Regulation required.  The judge had not  placed
    undue weight on the length of the sentence.  The decision was rational.



16.  By way of reply Mr Lee argued that the point  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    grounds was made out as the judge had accepted that the  case  was  one
    that fell within Schedule B of culpability.  As regards rehabilitation,
    the appellant had spent seven months in custody and he had been  marked
    as a foreign national offender and there was practically no  likelihood
    of him being offered any courses.  As regards whether he  was  a  risk,
    the Sexual Harm Prevention Order was triggered fairly lightly in  cases
    such as this and there  were  good  reasons  also  to  suppose  as  the
    conditions had been made that it would not prove to be a serious danger
    going forwards given the nature  of  prohibitions.   The  decision  was
    unsound.

17.  I reserved my determination.

18.   As  Mr  Lee  has  properly  pointed  out,  the  sentencing  judge  was
    persuaded, albeit it seems on balance, that the case was one which fell
    within Part B of the culpability category.  This  involves  factors  in
    category A not being present  and  those  factors  include  significant
    degree of planning,  grooming  behaviour,  abuse  of  trust  and  other
    matters.  The sentencing judge noted that it was  fully  accepted  that
    the behaviour on the appellant's part was  not  spontaneous  and  there
    clearly had been planning and the appellant had done  searches  on  the
    internet with a search term of "underage girl".

19.  It does not seem to me however that the First-tier Judge was  precluded
    from coming to the conclusions that he  did  at  paragraph  38  of  his
    decision.  He was entitled to attach the weight he did to the fact that
    the appellant carried out an internet search under the  term  "underage
    girl".  The judge noted, at paragraph 37, that there had been planning.
     He did not describe it as a significant degree of planning as the term
    is set out in category A of the culpability list.  The judge was  aware
    that the appellant had not committed other offences, but it was open to
    him to bear in mind the absence of any work done while  in  custody  to
    equip the appellant to deal with the attraction to  females  under  the
    age of consent, and even bearing in  mind  Mr  Lee's  point  about  the
    degree of unlikelihood that such a course would have  been  offered  to
    him, the judge was entitled to express a degree of concern that he  did
    that the appellant had not requested any such help.  It  was  also  not
    without relevance that he had said he almost lost interest  in  her  as
    she was too easy.  It was further open to the judge not to accept  that
    the appellant had successfully reformed or rehabilitated.

20.  Bringing these matters together, I considered that the  judge  did  not
    err as a matter of law.  It was open to him to conclude on the evidence
    before him that the appellant's offending demonstrated that he  had  an
    attraction to females below the age of consent and was prepared to  act
    on it, bearing in mind there had been relevant planning  including  the
    internet search referred to above.  In addition it was of relevance  to
    take into account the making of the sexual harm prevention order.  This
    among other things prohibits the defendant  from  living  in  the  same
    household as any female under the age of 16  except  his  own  children
    unless with the express approval of Social Services for  the  area  and
    also having any unsupervised contact or communication of any kind  with
    any female under the age of 16 except his own children other  than  one
    such as is inadvertent and unavoidable in the course  of  lawful  daily
    life or to the consent of the  child's  parent  or  guardian  (who  had
    knowledge of his conviction) and with the express  approval  of  Social
    Services for the area or using any  device  capable  of  accessing  the
    internet unless it has the capacity to retain and display this  through
    internet use and makes the device available on request  for  inspection
    by a police officer and also  prohibited  from  deleting  the  internet
    history on any such device.  The making  of  the  order  is  a  further
    matter of relevance.  I bear in mind Mr Lee's point that  it  might  be
    argued that the fact of the order is a point going to reduce risk,  but
    the making of the order itself can I think be properly be seen as  part
    of an appropriate evaluation as to the nature and degree  of  the  risk
    posed by the appellant.  In conclusion therefore I am of the view  that
    the judge did not err in law in his assessment of the claim  under  the
    EEA Regulations (no challenge to the Article  8  decision  having  been
    made) and accordingly his decision dismissing the appeal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
