
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00620/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 3 January 2018                      |On 10 January 2018       |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               IKECHUKWU OKORO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Farhat, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


       1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
          Department ('SSHD') against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
          ('FTT') dated 18 September 2016, in which it  allowed  Mr  Okoro's
          appeal against the SSHD's decision to make a deportation order.


       2. Mr Okoro is a German national and therefore  an  EEA  citizen,  in
          relation to whom the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ('the
          2006 Regulations') are applicable.

FTT decision

       3. In a detailed and carefully drafted  decision  the  FTT  expressly
          acknowledged the seriousness  of  and  escalation  in  Mr  Okoro's
          offending.  This includes a sentence on 20 February 2015  of  four
          years imprisonment for attempting to export class A drugs  and  an
          offending history  dating  back  to  1999,  including  convictions
          relating to illegal drugs  in  Germany  and  the  USA.    The  FTT
          accepted that at the time  of  the  offence,  Mr  Okoro's  conduct
          represented  a  genuine,  present  threat  affecting  one  of  the
          fundamental interests of society but that since  that  time  there
          has been  substantial,  credible  rehabilitation,  which  together
          with his family's links to the UK,  is  such  that  there  are  no
          longer serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  security  for  his
          deportation at the date of  hearing.   The  appeal  was  therefore
          allowed under the 2006 Regulations.


       4. The FTT heard detailed oral evidence from Mr Okoro, his wife,  his
          pastor and a friend, and its findings of fact are based  upon  the
          oral evidence together  with  the  detailed  documentary  evidence
          relating to the offending history and  subsequent  rehabilitation,
          and the description of the likely impact of deportation  upon  his
          two children (aged 13 and 12), as contained in  the  report  of  a
          consultant clinical psychologist.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

       5. The SSHD appealed  against  the  FTT's  decision  on  two  grounds
          initially. In ground one the SSHD submitted that the FTT  did  not
          provide adequate reasons for the finding that Mr Okoro's  attitude
          to offending was sufficiently positive  to  rule  out  a  risk  of
          reoffending.  In ground  two  the  SSHD  submitted  that  the  FTT
          failed to take into account  the  seriousness  of  the  offending.
          The FTT refused to grant permission to appeal, observing that  the
          grounds merely disagree with the  FTT's  findings.   In  her  very
          brief oral submissions before  me  Ms  Everett  acknowledged  that
          these grounds as drafted, tended to  disagree  with  the  decision
          and did not identify any error of law on the part of the  FTT  and
          therefore said no more about them.


       6. Her oral submissions focussed entirely  upon  two  matters  to  be
          gleaned from the renewal grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
          ('UT'), which I  set  out  below.   When  granting  permission  to
          appeal UT Judge Kekic observed  that  the  renewal  grounds  raise
          several compelling points, which she summarised as follows:

                 "(1) failing to appreciate that the appellant had lost  his
                 permanent residence under the EEA Regulations on account of
                 his absence from the UK whilst serving a prison sentence in
                 the USA so that the enhanced right of  protection  did  not
                 apply, (2) failing to give weight  to  the  fact  that  the
                 appellant's previous offending history had not  been  known
                 to the sentencing  judge,  his  representative  or  to  the
                 officer who prepared the Oasys report, (3) failing to  give
                 weight to the appellant's serious and numerous lies over  a
                 prolonged period  of  time,  and  (4)  failing  to  resolve
                 inconsistencies between the evidence of the  appellant  and
                 his witnesses."

       7. Ms Everett focussed almost entirely upon  the  first  issue.   She
          submitted that the FTT erred in law in  not  considering,  of  its
          own motion,  whether  Mr  Okoro  remained  entitled  to  permanent
          residence as at the date of hearing.  She acknowledged  that  this
          is a difficult submission to maintain as  it  is  clear  that  the
          SSHD's own position at the FTT hearing was that he  had  permanent
          residence (but had not  resided  in  the  UK  for  10  years)  and
          accordingly the FTT applied the test the  SSHD  considered  to  be
          appropriate at the time.  Ms  Everett  did  not  take  me  to  any
          authority to support her submissions.


       8. The only other ground relied upon by Ms  Everett  relates  to  the
          third issue identified by the UT when  granting  permission.   She
          submitted that the FTT failed to adequately  explain  what  weight
          was attached to Mr Okoro's lies.

       9. Mr Farhat reminded me that the burden of proof  lay  on  the  SSHD
          and that it was not open to  the  SSHD  to  argue  that  permanent
          residence was lost,  when  that  was  not  the  position  advanced
          before  the  FTT  and  Mr  Okoro  was  re-issued  with   permanent
          residence in October 2016, after his offending  history  and  time
          out of the UK was known to the SSHD.

      10. At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.


Discussion

Permanent residence

      11.  I  accept  Mr  Farhat's  submissions  and  reject  Ms   Everett's
          submissions on this issue.  It is important to bear in  mind  that
          the SSHD's case was set out in a very  detailed  (147  paragraphs)
          decision letter, served on 6 December 2016.   This  sets  out  the
          relevant chronology.  This expressly acknowledges at [4]  that  Mr
          Okoro was issued with a residence permit for an indefinite  period
          on 8 June 2006 and this was re-issued  on  26  October  2016.   At
          this stage, the SSHD was well aware that  Mr  Okoro  had  spent  a
          significant period in the USA, having been sentenced to 27  months
          imprisonment there in 2010 - see [10].  The SSHD directed  herself
          to the relevant law on the threshold required  to  deport  an  EEA
          citizen at [14-18].  At [24] the SSHD  accepted  that  by  8  June
          2006 Mr Okoro had been living in the  UK  for  a  period  of  five
          years in accordance with the 2006 Regulations and was issued  with
          a residence permit to that  effect.   The  SSHD  did  not  however
          accept that he had been continuously resident in  the  UK  for  10
          years  and  as  such  consideration  was  not  given  to   whether
          deportation is justified on imperative grounds [25 and  26].   The
          SSHD then said this at [27]:


                 "As you have acquired permanent residence  under  the  2006
                 Regulations consideration has been given  to  whether  your
                 deportation is  justified  on  serious  grounds  of  public
                 policy." (my emphasis)


      12. At the hearing the SSHD relied upon the decision letter - see  the
          FTT decision at [23].  Mr  Farhat  reminded  me  that  at  a  case
          management hearing the level of protection afforded  to  Mr  Okoro
          was directly considered and it was agreed that  he  had  permanent
          residence but not 10 years residence.  The FTT  hearing  therefore
          proceeded on the accepted basis that Mr Okoro  retained  permanent
          residence,  and  as  such  the  correct  test  to  apply  was   as
          summarised in the decision letter i.e. whether there  are  serious
          grounds of public policy justifying deportation.


      13. Regulation 15(2) of the 2006 Regulations makes it clear that  once
          acquired, the right of permanent  residence  shall  be  lost  only
          through  absence  from  the  UK  for  a   period   exceeding   two
          consecutive years. Ms Everett argued that Mr Okoro probably  spent
          two consecutive years outside  of  the  UK  at  the  time  he  was
          sentenced by a USA court in  2010.   The  renewal  grounds  assert
          that his claim that he served 23 of 27 months of his  sentence  is
          not supported by evidence and that in any  event  he  returned  to
          the UK via Germany and probably spent a month there.

      14. In my judgment, the submission that the  FTT  failed  to  consider
          whether Mr Okoro lost his right to  permanent  residence  meets  a
          number of insuperable hurdles.  First, the  FTT  was  entitled  to
          not enquire any further  into  the  issue  as  it  was  agreed  in
          writing and  orally  that  Mr  Okoro  continued  to  benefit  from
          permanent residence as  at  the  date  of  hearing.   Second,  the
          factual  matrix  remained  the  same  for  the  purposes  of   the
          chronology relevant  to  Mr  Okoro's  residence  at  all  material
          times.  When drafting the decision letter and agreeing the  issues
          at the  case  management  hearing,  the  SSHD  knew  that  he  was
          imprisoned in the USA  in  2010.   The  SSHD  re-issued  him  with
          permanent residence in October 2016.  The bland statement  in  the
          renewal grounds that the SSHD  was  not  aware  of  the  offending
          history when he applied for permanent residence  is  difficult  to
          reconcile with  the  full  chronology  set  out  in  the  decision
          letter.

      15. Third, and in any event, there was  simply  no  evidence  that  Mr
          Okoro was absent from the UK for over two years.  His evidence  is
          summarised  at  [11]  of  the  decision:  he  served   23   months
          imprisonment in the USA before returning to the  UK  via  Germany,
          where he spent a few days.  The SSHD's assertion  in  the  renewal
          grounds that it is "probable" he spent more  time  in  Germany  is
          wholly speculative, in circumstances wherein the burden  of  proof
          remains upon the SSHD.


      16. It follows that in  applying  the  test  that  it  did,  i.e.  the
          serious grounds of public policy justification, the  FTT  has  not
          erred in law.

Other grounds of appeal

      17. I have no hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  FTT  decision  is
          adequately reasoned.  It  is  clear  from  reading  the  carefully
          drafted decision as a whole that the FTT was fully  aware  of  and
          accorded weight to all relevant matters.


      18.  The  FTT  was  well-aware  of  and  took  full  account  of   the
          seriousness of Mr Okoro's offending history,  which  it  described
          at [25] as "deplorable and serious".  The FTT  correctly  directed
          itself at [26] that the offending got  worse  and  escalated,  and
          that his entire offending history,  as  summarised  at  [1-3]  was
          relevant.  The FTT expressly accepted the serious consequences  of
          the offending on society and  found  that  without  rehabilitation
          there would have been serious grounds for finding his  conduct  to
          represent a genuine and present threat at [27  to  28].   The  FTT
          did not underplay the significant public  interest  considerations
          in support of deportation.

      19. The case however turned on FTT's  acceptance  that  Mr  Okoro  was
          "well advanced" in his rehabilitation and does  not  constitute  a
          threat [31] such that "what started out as a genuine  and  present
          serious threat to the fundamental interest of  society,  has  been
          counteracted  by  the  substantial  weight  to   the   appellant's
          rehabilitation", together with the principles  of  proportionality
          [32].  The FTT has  provided  detailed  reasoning  for  this.   In
          particular, the FTT  accepted  much  of  Mr  Okoro's  evidence  as
          summarised at [5] to [15] and made the following findings at  [29]
          and [31]:

              i) Mr Okoro has genuinely  changed  after  his  last  offence.
                 This can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  he  had  life
                 threatening surgery as a result of swallowing  the  illegal
                 drugs  and  that  he  has  successfully   participated   in
                 offending behaviour coursework not previously available  to
                 him.


             ii) This change has been evidenced by  his  commitment  to  his
                 family   "this   time   round",   genuine   remorsefulness,
                 rehabilitation, further  education,  training  and  settled
                 employment with good prospects at London Underground and is
                 corroborated by  family  members,  friends,  his  continued
                 successful employment and his pastor.

      20. The findings reached might be described as generous given that  Mr
          Okoro was released from his prison  sentence  relatively  recently
          and there was therefore a short period of time in  which  to  test
          his commitment to rehabilitation, but they are not  perverse.   In
          any event, it  has  not  been  submitted  that  the  findings  are
          perverse or irrational.  Rather it is claimed  that  the  findings
          are inadequately reasoned and weight  has  not  been  attached  to
          relevant matters.

      21. The FTT acknowledged that Mr Okoro was not  honest  when  relaying
          the full extent of his offending for the  purposes  of  the  Oasys
          report [26].  The  FTT  accepted  the  submission  that  the  full
          extent of the offending was not known to the sentencing judge  and
          his sentence may have well been higher had  the  judge  known  [27
          and 29].  It therefore cannot be said that the FTT did not  attach
          any weight to the lies told by Mr Okoro.

      22. Finally, the FTT was  entitled  to  accept  the  wife's  evidence,
          which was supported by a report prepared by a consultant  clinical
          psychologist.





Decision

      23. The FTT decision does not contain an error of law.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer                                                          Date:
5 January 2018

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
