
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00181/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th September 2016               |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                EUGENIJUS [Z]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Heikkila, instructed by The Aire Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Lithuania born on 7th August  1971.   His
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 13th April 2016 to  make  a
    deportation  order  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  J
    Gillespie in a decision promulgated on 19th July 2016.

2.   The Respondent appealed on the ground that the judge had undertaken  an
    incomplete, inadequate and perverse balancing exercise under  paragraph
    21 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006,  which  amounted  to  an
    error of law.

3.   The judge found that the Appellant presented somewhat of a risk to  the
    public of continued petty theft and alcohol abuse  as  a  vagrant,  but
    concluded that this was not a sufficiently serious threat to one of the
    fundamental interests of society. It was submitted  by  the  Respondent
    that  this  finding  was  completely  unreasoned  and  was   manifestly
    perverse.  Further, the judge had gone on to look for  reasons  not  to
    deport the Appellant rather than carry out a  holistic  proportionality
    assessment. The judge appeared to suggest that  administrative  removal
    may be more appropriate, but ignored the fact that  EEA  nationals  who
    are liable to administrative removal, who have ceased to  be  qualified
    persons, do not consistently offend for over twelve months in order  to
    be removed.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on the basis that:  "It  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself (a) in failing to provide adequate reasons  in  the
    balancing exercise why the  Appellant  does  not  pose  a  sufficiently
    serious threat to a fundamental interest of society  when  there  is  a
    risk to the public of continued petty theft  and  alcohol  abuse  as  a
    vagrant and (b) by suggesting that administrative removal may  be  more
    appropriate which arguably ignores the fact that  those  EEA  nationals
    who are liable to such removal who have ceased to be qualified  persons
    do not consistently offend for over 12 months in order to removed.



Submissions

5.   Mr Clarke relied on the two points made in  the  grounds,  namely  that
    the judge's reasoning was inadequate and perverse and he erred  in  law
    in considering administrative removal. The judge found at paragraph  21
    that the Appellant was at risk of continued  petty  theft  and  alcohol
    abuse as a vagrant, but concluded that this did not amount to a serious
    threat to one of the fundamental interests of society. The finding  was
    perverse because the judge found that the Appellant was a  genuine  and
    present threat which  engaged  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society and since  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  he  had
    permanent residence the lower threshold was applicable. On the facts it
    was not open to the judge to find that the risk was not a  sufficiently
    serious one given that he conceded that the Appellant was a risk to the
    public of continued  petty  theft  and  alcohol  abuse  as  a  vagrant.
    Accordingly,  the  judge's  reasoning  was  erroneous   and   perverse.
    Further, the judge erred  in  law  in  taking  into  account  that  the
    Appellant could be subject to administrative removal, which appeared to
    be a reason to justify the previous decision that the Appellant was not
    a serious threat because there was an alternative form of removal.

6.   Ms Heikkila submitted that the Appellant was a skilled person and  that
    his problems started when his relationship broke down. His  pattern  of
    offending mirrored his personal struggle and the Appellant had  pleaded
    guilty on each occasion. The Appellant had argued on appeal that he had
    permanent residence and was exercising  treaty  rights.   However,  the
    judge found that this was not in fact the case.   It  was  also  argued
    that the Appellant's deportation  was  not  proportionate  because  the
    Appellant was not a serious  threat.  There  was  plentiful  and  clear
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle that his offending  related  to  his
    personal distress and he was unable to cope with  the  breakup  of  his
    relationship.  His offending was out of  character  and  it  was  self-
    evident that he was at no risk of future offending.  Shoplifting one or
    two bottles of wine was not a serious threat to one of the  fundamental
    interests of society.  The second point did not amount to an  error  of
    law. The judge had merely offered an alternative and this was not  part
    of his consideration of whether the Appellant posed a  serious  threat.
    The judge had thoroughly assessed the Appellant's case  and  considered
    all matters taking into account all relevant  factors.   There  was  no
    material error of law in the judge's conclusions.

7.   In response, Mr Clarke submitted that the judge had made findings  that
    the Appellant was a genuine  and  present  threat  and  that  the  risk
    continued that he would engage in petty theft and alcohol  abuse  as  a
    vagrant and therefore the judge's conclusion that he was not a  serious
    threat to a fundamental interest of society was in fact perverse.



Discussion and Conclusions

8.   The judge set out at great  length  in  paragraphs  13  to  17  of  his
    decision his factual  findings  and  on  the  basis  of  those  factual
    findings it was open to the judge to conclude that  the  Appellant  did
    not have permanent residence in the UK  and  therefore  the  applicable
    test in his case was whether  there  were  serious  grounds  of  public
    health or public security.  The judge properly directed himself in  law
    and was aware that certain principles set out in Regulation 21(5)  must
    be complied with:

    (i)  where a relevant decision on grounds of public  policy  or  public
         security must be  justified  the  decision  must  comply  with  the
         provision of proportionality;

    (ii) it must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  conduct  of  the  person
         concerned;

    (iii)    that conduct must  represent  a  sufficiently  serious  threat
         affecting a fundamental interest of society;

    (iv) matters of general prevention do not justify deportation on  these
         grounds; and

    (v)  a person's criminal  convictions  in  themselves  do  not  justify
         deportation.

9.   The judge found that the reasons  put  forward  by  the  Respondent  to
    justify deportation  were  that  the  Appellant  had  ceased  to  be  a
    qualified person in the UK, he took  alcohol,  committed  a  series  of
    petty offences and slept rough whilst under the influence  of  alcohol.
    Although the judge accepted that the Appellant was somewhat of  a  risk
    to the public of continued petty theft and alcohol abuse as a  vagrant,
    the judge concluded that this was not a serious threat to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. He  did  not  consider  it  to  be  a
    sufficiently serious threat in terms of the Regulations such  as  would
    justify deportation.

10.  I am of the view that given the judge's earlier findings of  fact,  his
    conclusions  at  paragraph  21  amount  to  adequate   reasons.   Those
    conclusions were not perverse  given  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    offending behaviour.  The fact that he may  well  be  at  risk  to  the
    public of continued petty theft and alcohol abuse as a vagrant was  not
    in the judge's view  a  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  I find that this conclusion was open
    to the judge on the evidence before him and it is quite clear  that  he
    had properly applied the provisions of Regulation 21(5)  which  he  set
    out at paragraph 20.  Accordingly I find that there was no error of law
    in relation to the first ground.

11.  I also find that there was no error of law in relation  to  the  second
    ground because the  judge  merely  points  out,  after  coming  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant was not a sufficient serious threat, that
    should the Respondent wish to remove the Appellant the proper course in
    a case such as this would be administrative removal.  Justification for
    deportation was not  made  out  and  if  the  Appellant  did  not  have
    permanent residence and was not exercising Treaty rights then it  would
    be perfectly open to the Respondent  to  administratively  remove  him.
    The judge did not take into account this alternative course  of  action
    which was open to  the  Secretary  of  State  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant was not a serious threat to one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  It is quite clear from what the judge states at  paragraph
    21 that this was an alternative course of action open to the Respondent
    and not a reason for allowing the Appellant's appeal.

12.  The judge's concludes at paragraph 21: "In my judgment, so  lacking  in
    seriousness is the threat, if any, posed by the appellant to society in
    the United Kingdom, and so substantial  in  the  right  of  freedom  of
    movement is the extreme of deportation, that this method of enforcement
    would not accord with the principle of proportionality." Accordingly, I
    find that there was no error of law in the judge's  decision  to  allow
    the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and  I  dismiss
    the Respondent's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 23rd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
