
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00376/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2014                           |On 20th May 2014             |
|Prepared 24 April 2014                        |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                       CHRISTIAN CAMILO BAQUERO BERNAL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss O Ukachi-Lois, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
                    Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the  determination  of  the  substantive  appeal  of  Christian
    Camilo Baquero Bernal who  had  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to make  a  deportation  order  against  him.   That
    appeal had been allowed in the First-tier but after  a  hearing  on  13
    January 2014 I set  aside  the  determination  in  the  First-tier  and
    ordered that the appeal be heard afresh.

2.   My  decision,  which  included  the  appellant's  immigration  history,
    details of his sentence and conviction  and my finding that  there  was
    an error of law in the determination  of the Judge of  the  First-tier,
    and my directions after that hearing was were follows:-

                          "DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

         1.   The Secretary of State appeals,  with  permission,  against  a
             decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mayall who  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  8  August  2013  allowed   the
             appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
             State made on 8 February  2013  to  deport  the  appellant  to
             Colombia.


         2.   The decision to deport followed the appellant's conviction for
             possession with intent to supply a controlled drug class  A  -
             cocaine, for which he had been sentenced to a  period  of  two
             years' imprisonment on 3 February 2012.  The decision was made
             under the automatic deportation provisions in Section 32(5) of
             the UK Borders Act 2007.


         3.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before  me  I
             will for ease of reference refer to her as the  respondent  as
             she  was  the  respondent  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.
             Similarly, I refer to Mr Christian Camilo  Baquero  Bernal  as
             the respondent as he was  the  respondent  in  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.


         4.   The appellant had arrived in Britain in July 1999  with  entry
             clearance as a student.  In December that year he applied  for
             asylum.   That  application  was  refused  and  the  appellant
             apparently left Britain before re-entering as a visitor on  19
             December 2000.


         5.   Thereafter the appellant overstayed until July  2011  when  he
             made an application for leave to remain as the spouse of Jenny
             Jimenez Delgardo Villota, a  Colombian  citizen  whom  he  had
             married by proxy in March 2011.


         6.   In November that year he was convicted of the  drugs  offences
             noted above being sentenced the following February.


         7.   Judge Mayall quoted extensively from the  letter  setting  out
             the reasons for  deportation  and  the  consideration  of  the
             Secretary of State of the application of  paragraphs  398  and
             399A of the Rules, and the  conclusion  of  the  Secretary  of
             State that there were no exceptional circumstances which would
             mean that deportation would not be appropriate:  the fact that
             the appellant  and  Ms  Villota  had  a  son  was  taken  into
             consideration.


         8.   Judge Mayall noted the evidence of the appellant that  he  had
             been together with Ms Villota for  ten  years,  that  she  had
             indefinite leave to remain and that their son, J, was aged  5.
             The appellant had stated that since his  release  from  prison
             his son's behaviour had improved, he  was  involved  with  his
             local church and that he looked after his son while  his  wife
             was working.


         9.   The appellant's wife also gave evidence stating that her  son,
             who had been born in Britain was a British citizen naturalised
             after she had been granted indefinite leave to  remain.    The
             basis of her leave to remain was  that  she  had  applied  for
             residence  under  Regulation  8  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
             Regulations 2006 in 2008.


         10.  Judge Mayall recorded that he  had  noted  during  submissions
             that he was concerned as to  the  immigration  status  of  the
             appellant's wife and son and the process  by  which  they  had
             obtained indefinite leave to remain  and  British  citizenship
             respectively.  The appeal had been adjourned at that stage for
             further information.  A bundle of  documents  which  had  been
             produced at the appellant's wife's appeal was submitted by the
             Presenting Officer.  It became apparent that  the  appellant's
             wife had been granted leave to remain after an appeal  against
             a refusal had been allowed by another Immigration Judge.   The
             appellant's wife had claimed that she was living in  a  family
             unit with her brother and his wife and that the appellant, the
             father of her child, did not live with her.   Her  appeal  was
             allowed in May 2010.  Judge Mayall commented that -


                  "Although the evidence was that there was contact  between
                  her and the appellant and that  J  had  contact  with  his
                  father it was clear that the evidence was  that  they  did
                  not and had not lived together."


         11.  Although the appellant's  representative  was  told  that  the
             appellant's wife could give further evidence  to  clarify  the
             position that opportunity was not taken up.


         12.  In paragraphs 42 onwards the judge set out some  relevant  law
             and in particular quoted from the judgment in N (Kenya) v SSHD
             [2004] EWCA Civ 1094.  It was clear that he was also aware  of
             the judgments in AM [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, JO  (Uganda)  [2010]
             EWCA Civ 10 and AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348.  Indeed  he
             also quoted from the judgment  of  Laws  LJ  in  SS  (Nigeria)
             [2013] EWCA Civ 550.


         13.  In paragraphs 55 onwards the judge set out his  assessment  of
             the evidence.  He started by stating that he did  not  believe
             that the appellant and his wife "were entirely frank with us".
              He stated that it was clear that the story put forward by the
             wife in  support  of  her  application  for  indefinite  leave
             differed substantially from that before the Tribunal.  It  was
             stated that there was a stark contrast between the  claim  and
             that the couple had been living together for  many  years  and
             the claim put forward by the wife at her appeal that they were
             not living together and she was a dependant of her brother and
             his wife.


         14.  Judge Mayall stated that  therefore  the  evidence  should  be
             approached with caution. However, he went on to say  that  the
             evidence pointed towards the fact that whatever may have  been
             the position in the past the couple were living together as  a
             family unit with their child.


         15.  He did, in paragraph 57 state:-


                  "In these circumstances we are  prepared  to  accept  that
                  this family unit does now exist as  a  family  all  living
                  together as husband, wife and child.   We  think  it  more
                  likely that the evidence that was given before Immigration
                  Judge White was false.   We  bear  in  mind  that  it  was
                  necessary for the wife to establish  the  dependence  upon
                  the EEA national which would have been much more difficult
                  if the picture had been presented of her  living  together
                  with her husband and child."


         16.  However, Judge Mayall stated that the child was not  at  fault
             and did have British citizenship and that it was accepted that
             they all lived together as a family unit.


         17.  Having accepted the appellant was fully involved in  the  life
             of his child and had  childcare responsibilities as  his  wife
             was working, the judge stated that there was  a  very  serious
             offence.   He  noted  drug  paraphernalia  was  found  in  the
             appellant's home where he claimed to be living with  his  wife
             and child  but  noted,  however,  that  the  trial  judge  had
             accepted the appellant's conduct was totally out of character.


         18.  The trial judge, he stated, had found that the  appellant  had
             been duped by someone at the time he was  estranged  from  his
             wife and miserable, who had lured him into taking cocaine  and
             then after the appellant had  reconciled  with  his  wife  and
             freed himself from his addiction, had come back and threatened
             him and demanding money from him.  The appellant had foolishly
             agreed to take possession of the drugs to hold for this  other
             person in return for that person to stop pursuing him.


         19.  The judge accepted the appellant had cooperated fully.  He had
             given himself up to the police and had never attempted to hide
             or minimise his role.


         20.  The pre-sentence report indicated the risk of the appellant re-
             offending was low.  Judge Mayall  went on to  state  that  the
             letter of refusal was contradictory in  that  it  accepted  it
             would be unreasonable to expect J to  leave  Britain  but  the
             reason the appellant could be  deported  was  that  there  was
             another family member who was able to care for him.  He  noted
             that the letter had said that should they wish it was open  to
             the appellant's wife to return to Colombia with him.


         21.  In paragraph 65 he stated that:-


                  "It was contended that there were  two  alternatives  i.e.
                  that the mother could remain to look after J in the UK  or
                  that the whole family could relocate.  This seemed, to us,
                  to be inconsistent with the acceptance that  it  would  be
                  unreasonable to expect J, as a British citizen,  to  leave
                  the UK".


             Having accepted however that  the  appellant  could  not  come
             within the provisions of paragraphs 399A or 399B and that  the
             appellant could not qualify under the private life provisions,
             Judge Mayall stated that that was not the end of  the  matter.
             He stated:-


                  "Indeed it is strictly immaterial  whether  he  meets  the
                  provisions of Rule 399 or not.  The sole issue is  whether
                  one of the exceptions applies.  The  only  exception  that
                  could possibly apply is that to remove  him  would  be  an
                  unlawful interference with his Article 8 rights."


         22.  Having stated that he was applying the guidance set out in the
             judgment of Laws  LJ  in  SS  (Nigeria)  he  stated  that  the
             interests of the child as a matter of primary  importance  had
             to be balanced with the  "great  weight  which  the  2007  Act
             attributes to the deportation of foreign  criminals".   Having
             found that this was not an easy exercise  he  stated  that  it
             would not be reasonable to expect J to leave Britain as he was
             born here and is  a  British  citizen.   He  stated  the  only
             realistic alternative is that the appellant  is  deported  and
             his mother stays to look after J.  That would split the family
             and remove the bond between father and child and would not  be
             in J's best interests.


         23.  He went on to state:-


                  "Sometimes  the  public  interest  in  deporting   foreign
                  criminals requires that.  This may be especially so if the
                  father, for example, is a poor role model  to  the  child.
                  There  is  some  evidence  of  that   given   that   drugs
                  paraphernalia were found in the  family  home.   We  have,
                  however, found that, at least now, the appellant is a good
                  father.  There is  an  obvious  strong  bond  between  the
                  father and the child.  In addition  there  is  an  obvious
                  strong bond between the appellant and  his  wife.   Taking
                  into account the fact that this appears, at least,  to  be
                  one-off offence and that we have concluded that there is a
                  low  risk  of  further  offending  we  have  reached   the
                  conclusion that the public interest,  in  this  particular
                  case, does not require that the family be split up in that
                  way."


         24.  The appeal was therefore allowed on human rights grounds.


         25.  The Secretary of State appealed stating that the Tribunal  had
             applied a two stage test which was clearly wrong.  The grounds
             of appeal referred to the judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA
             Civ 1192 quoting at length from that judgment.


         26.  The second ground of  appeal  stated  that  the  Tribunal  had
             failed to give reasons or adequate reasons  for  finding  that
             the appellant's case was exceptional and  that  therefore  the
             appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.


         27.  It was submitted that  "exceptional"  meant  circumstances  in
             which if the requirements  of  the  Rules  had  not  been  met
             refusal  would  result  in  an  unjustifiably  harsh  outcome.
             Reference was made to the Supreme Court's  judgment  in  HH  v
             Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic (Genoa) [2012]  UKSC
             and in particular to the judgment of Lady Hale  in  which  she
             had stated at paragraph 32:-


                  "The second main criticism of the approach in later  cases
                  is that the courts have not been examining  carefully  the
                  nature and extent of the interference in family  life.  In
                  focussing on 'some quite exceptionally compelling feature'
                  (para 56 in  Norris),  they  have  fallen  into  the  trap
                  identified by Lord Mance,  tending  'to  divert  attention
                  from consideration of the potential impact of  extradition
                  on the particular persons involved . . . towards a  search
                  for factors (particularly external factors) which  can  be
                  regarded as out of the run of the mill' (para  109).  Some
                  particularly grave consequences are not out of the run  of
                  the mill at all. Once again, the test  is  always  whether
                  the gravity  of  the  interference  with  family  life  is
                  justified by the gravity of the  public  interest  pursued
                  (see also Lord Wilson, at para 152). Exceptionality  is  a
                  prediction, just as it was in R (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of
                  State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL  27  and  not  a
                  test. We are all agreed upon that."


         28.  It was submitted that it was only in exceptional circumstances
             that removal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences
             notwithstanding the public interest in removal  and  that  the
             new Rules would not achieve an Article 8 compliant result.  It
             was submitted that it was not exceptional  circumstances  just
             because the criteria set out in the family  and  private  life
             provisions of the Immigration Rules had been missed by a small
             margin.


         29.  The grounds went on to state that the Tribunal had  failed  to
             provide adequate reasons to show that  there were  exceptional
             reasons why the  appellant,  his  wife  and  child  could  not
             continue their family life elsewhere.  It was submitted  there
             were no reasons why the wife and child could not  relocate  to
             Colombia.


         30.  Reference was made to SS (Nigeria) where it was stated that an
             Article 8 claim made in reliance of the interests of  a  child
             of British citizenship by a foreign criminal seeking  to  risk
             deportation under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 needed
             to be  very  strong  to  prevail  given  the  pressing  public
             interest in removal and the great weight to be attached to the
             deportation of foreign criminals.  Moreover there  is  nothing
             to support the Tribunal's finding that the  appellant  was  at
             low risk of re-offending.  There are no reasons  provided  for
             their finding that the appellant had addressed his drug  habit
             which was the cause of his offending and therefore it remained
             that he was at risk of re-offending.


         31.  In his submissions Mr Bramble accepted that the  determination
             of the Tribunal had been  promulgated  some  time  before  the
             judgment in MF (Nigeria) had been  issued  but  it  was  still
             correct that the Tribunal were wrong to  consider  that  there
             should be a two-step approach.   Having  identified  that  the
             appellant could not succeed  under  the  Rules,  the  Tribunal
             should  have  looked  at  what  the  Rules  stated   regarding
             exceptionality rather than merely going on to the Razgar test.
              He  argued that there was a failure to give adequate reasons.
              The Tribunal had ignored the way  in  which  the  appellant's
             wife had been granted indefinite leave to remain and that  she
             had ties to Colombia to which she had travelled as recently as
             2011.  They had not taken into account the age  of  the  child
             and had not stated why it would  be  detrimental  for  him  to
             return to Colombia.  They had not been able  to  identify  why
             there was a claim to be  a  low  risk  of  re-offending.   The
             Tribunal had ignored the importance of what had been  said  by
             Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria).  In paragraph  46  of  that  judgment
             Laws LJ had stated that the more pressing public  interest  in
             removal or deportation the stronger must be  the  claim  under
             Article 8 if it is to prevail".  At paragraph 48 Laws  LJ  had
             stated:-


             "48. Where such potential deportees have raised  claims  under
                  Article 8, seeking to resist deportation by relying on the
                  interests  of  a  child   or   children   having   British
                  citizenship,  I  think  with  respect  that   insufficient
                  attention has been paid to the weight to be  attached,  in
                  virtue of its origin in primary legislation, to the policy
                  of deporting foreign criminals. In Sanade the UT  observed
                  'the more serious the offending, the stronger is the  case
                  for deportation' (paragraph 48). With respect that  is  no
                  doubt right; but it applies as readily to a case where the
                  offender is not subject  to  automatic  deportation  under
                  s.32 of the 2007 Act and his removal is at  the  Secretary
                  of  State's  discretion.   In   Strasbourg,   within   the
                  �ner/Maslov criteria we find  a  comparable  reference  to
                  'the nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed  by
                  the applicant'.
             49.  These references say nothing about the policy's origin in
                  primary legislation. The policy's source, however,  is  as
                  we have seen one of the drivers  of  the  breadth  of  the
                  decision-maker's   margin   of   discretion    when    the
                  proportionality of its application in the particular  case
                  is being considered. In relation to foreign criminals  the
                  point was almost alive in AP (Trinidad  &  Tobago)  [2011]
                  EWCA Civ 551, referred to in Sanade at  paragraph  41,  in
                  which Carnwath LJ, as he then was, observed  at  paragraph
                  44:
                  'As I have said, Parliamentary endorsement is  arguably  a
                  matter which  should  be  taken  into  account  in  giving
                  greater weight to such factors when drawing the balance of
                  proportionality under article  8.  ...it  seems  a  little
                  surprising... that this apparently definitive statement by
                  Parliament has made no difference in  practice,  at  least
                  where any form of private or family life is involved.'...
             54.  I  would  draw  particular  attention  to  the  provision
                  contained in s.33(7): 'section 32(4) applies  despite  the
                  application of Exception 1...', that is to say, a  foreign
                  criminal's deportation remains  conducive  to  the  public
                  good notwithstanding his successful reliance on Article 8.
                   I  said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the  authorities
                  demonstrate that there is no rule  of  exceptionality  for
                  Article 8, they also clearly show that the  more  pressing
                  the  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation,   the
                  stronger must be the claim under Article 8  if  it  is  to
                  prevail. The pressing nature of the public  interest  here
                  is vividly informed  by  the  fact  that  by  Parliament's
                  express declaration the public interest is injured if  the
                  criminal's deportation is  not  effected.  Such  a  result
                  could in my judgment only be justified by  a  very  strong
                  claim indeed."
         32.  Mr Bramble then  asked  me  to  find  that  the  Tribunal  had
             identified no such compelling factors and  therefore  to  find
             that they had made a material error of law.


         33.  In reply Ms Ukachi-Lois stated that the Tribunal had,  in  any
             event, applied  the  two  stage  approach  in  that  they  had
             considered  both  the  Rules  and  the  appellant  under   the
             Convention which indeed  was  the  approach  asserted  in  the
             Tribunal determination in MF (Nigeria) in the Upper Tribunal -
             the relevant authority  at  the  time  the  determination  was
             promulgated.


         34.  The tribunal were entitled to rely on the lack of risk of  re-
             offending given the  pre-sentence  report  which  was  in  the
             bundle and at paragraph 63 they had set out  the  evidence  on
             which they relied regarding the  appellant  kicking  his  drug
             habit.  He had undertaken various  relevant  courses  and  the
             evidence of London Probation Trust was that he was  no  longer
             an  addict.   Similarly  the  evidence  from  the  prison  was
             positive.


         35.  It  was  not  the  case  that  the  Tribunal  had  incorrectly
             interpreted the concept of exceptionality.   The  reality  was
             that removal of the appellant  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences  for  the  appellant's  child.    It   would   be
             disproportionate and the Tribunal were  correct  to  so  find.
             They had taken into account the fact that  the  appellant  was
             fully involved with the relationship of the child  and  had  a
             relevant parenting role. They pointed out that  the  Secretary
             of  State  had  in  any  event  accepted  that  it  would   be
             unreasonable to expect J to leave Britain.


         36.  She asked me to find that  the  Tribunal  had  looked  at  the
             totality of the evidence and find that they had properly taken
             into  account  all  relevant  factors  before  reaching  their
             decision which was fully open to them on the evidence.


         Discussion


         37.   I  find  that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
             determination of the Tribunal.   The  reality  is  that  Judge
             Mayall appeared, having found that  the  appellant  could  not
             qualify under paragraphs 398 and 399  of  the  Rules  to  have
             discounted the fact that that was  the  case  and  immediately
             gone on to the issue of proportionality under the  five  stage
             Razgar process.  That was clearly wrong.   He  had  not  taken
             into account what was laid down in legislation and indeed  had
             not followed the clear guidance in the judgment  in  SS  which
             stated that the more serious the offence the  stronger  needed
             to be the basis of the Article 8 claim.


         38.  The only fact which Judge Mayall identified  was  that  J  was
             British.  He did not  appear  to  take  into  account  in  the
             proportionality exercise that both J's parents were Colombian,
             that it appeared that either the appellant had not been living
             with his wife at the time of her appeal or that she had misled
             the First-tier Judge who heard her appeal against the  refusal
             of the claim that she was a family member of an  EEA  national
             and had further ignored the fact that the appellant's wife had
             travelled back to Colombia as recently as 2011.   The  reality
             is that there appears no  reason  why,  if  the  appellant  is
             deported and the appellant  and  his  wife  decide  that  they
             should remain together as a family unit with their child  that
             the appellant's  wife  and  J  should  not  accompany  him  to
             Colombia.  While, of course, the Secretary  of  State  accepts
             that it is not  reasonable  to  claim  that  J  should  go  to
             Colombia that is rather different from a conclusion  that  his
             parents could not make a decision  that  it  is  in  his  best
             interests that he remains part  of  a  family  unit  with  two
             parents returning to the country of nationality  of  both  his
             parents.  Judge Mayall did not consider the evidence  relating
             to circumstances in Colombia and  in  particular  the  section
             relating to education in Colombia which  is  set  out  in  the
             reasons letter.


         39.  The Tribunal did not appear to place weight on the decision to
             deport based on the provisions set out in Section  32  of  the
             2007 Act.


         40.  I therefore consider that there were material errors of law in
             the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for  that
             reason I set aside the decision.  It is appropriate that  this
             appeal proceeds to a hearing afresh on all issues.




         Directions


         1.   The appeal is to proceed to a hearing afresh  on  all  issues.
             It remains in the Upper Tribunal.


         2.   Fourteen days before the hearing a skeleton argument is to  be
             submitted together with a bundle of all documents on which the
             appellant wishes to rely."

Hearing on 24 February 2014
3.   At the hearing I heard evidence form the appellant  and  his  wife.  At
    the beginning of the hearing it was confirmed that  the  appellant  had
    arrived in Britain in 1999 and had applied for asylum in December 2000.
     He had not left Britain after entering in 1999.

4.    The  appellant  gave  evidence  relying  on  two  statements  dated  2
    September 2013 and 26 March 2013 as well as a further  statement  dated
    12 February 2014.  He was asked about the health of his son  J  who  he
    said suffered from regular nasal haemorrhages - a problem which he  had
    had since birth.  He stated that his child is one of the best  students
    at school.  He also said that his son was receiving speech and language
    therapy as he had been slow to start speaking.   The  teachers  at  his
    nursery school have  been  concerned  about  this.   His  position  had
    worsened when the appellant had  been  arrested  and  he  had  required
    emotional support.   It was clear  that  J  had  missed  him.   He  had
    improved dramatically since the appellant had been released.

5.   He was asked about J's education if he  returned  to  Colombia  and  he
    said that in Colombia education would be difficult  and  he  could  not
    afford to pay for private education. He would  also  have  to  pay  for
    medical treatment which was expensive.  He said that his wife would not
    want to return.

6.   He stated that he had met  his  wife  in  Britain  in  2004  but  their
    relationship had developed in July 2010 although they had  dated  since
    they had met and their son had been born in  2008.   They  had  started
    living together in 2010.  He said that if he  returned  to  Colombia  J
    would not go with him.  His wife worked full-time in  Britain  and  was
    also studying here.   He had no work to go to in Colombia.

7.   He was then asked about the application for asylum and he said that  he
    had never made any application for asylum and that the only information
    he had had was the name of a solicitor's office.  He emphasised that he
    had come to study English and had had a six months' visa.  He had  then
    wanted to study international business again he asserted  that  he  had
    not claimed asylum.  He also said that he had  never  worked  here  but
    would merely help friends who give him a place to stay and  food.   His
    wife had kept him after he had met her.  She had been  a  dependant  on
    her brother.  His wife had worked when she could and he had to stay and
    look after their child as he had no work permit.

8.   In cross-examination he stated that when he had arrived in  Britain  he
    had known a cousin here with whom he had lived for  one  or  two  years
    before that cousin returned to Colombia.  His visa to enter Britain had
    been obtained to Bucharest where his uncle  was  living.   He  had  met
    other friends here in school before meeting his wife  in  2004.   Asked
    what he had done for money he said that he had helped out  his  friends
    but he never received any money.  His friends worked in washing windows
    in sky scrapers.  He could not work as he had not had  a  work  permit.
    His friends were Colombians, English and Spanish.  He said that he  had
    never known any of his wife's relatives before he met her.   He  stated
    they had not lived together when they had first met  or  when  she  was
    pregnant.

9.   He was then asked if he had worked as a cleaner and  he  said  that  he
    had worked for Ocean Contract Cleaning.

10.  His wife had come to Britain in 2001 when she was 15 because she had  a
    brother here.  Her father had been kidnapped when she had been present.
     She had come as a dependant of her brother.

11.  He went on to say that he got on well with his wife's  family  although
    her brother was now divorced and his wife lived in Spain.

12.  Asked why he had not lived with his wife  in  2008  he  said  that  his
    wife's brother had been sponsoring her and he had not wanted  to  be  a
    burden.

13.  He then gave his  brother-in-law's  name  as  Jiminie  Roland  Delgardo
    Villota and he was asked if his brother-in-law had gone to prison.   He
    said that his brother-in-law had  been  imprisoned  in  2009  for  drug
    offences.  At that stage his wife had been living with her  brother  in
    his flat.  His brother-in-law had spent fifteen to eighteen  months  in
    prison.

14.  Asked when he had started living together with his wife  he  said  that
    around July 2010 they had rented a flat together.  His wife would  work
    and he would look after the child.  He confirmed that that was when  he
    was arrested.

15.  Asked when he had become addicted  to  drugs  he  said  that  that  had
    happened in 2010.  He had met someone who had introduced him  to  drugs
    and when he had tried to stop he had been threatened and told that  his
    family would be in danger if he did not do what he was  told.   He  had
    therefore kept drugs for the man.  The police had gone to his flat  and
    having heard that they had gone to his flat he himself had gone to  the
    police to explain that he was not a criminal and he had been threatened
    and he had been told that he must cooperate and  give  details  of  the
    person who was threatening  him.   He  said  that  he  had  given  that
    information to the judge and on the day of the sentencing this had been
    verified and that is why he had received a reduced sentence.

16.  He said that he realised he had made a mistake and had been stupid  and
    had put his family in jeopardy and that was why he  had  given  himself
    up.

17.  Asked if the person who had sold him drugs knew his wife's  brother  he
    said that he did not.

18.  He had lived with his wife and child between July  2010  and  23  March
    2011.  His wife had started living in the rented flat at Birch House in
    May 2009 with her brother after his wife had left him.

19.  Asked who had looked after his son when his wife  was  on  her  own  he
    said that he had always looked after his son when she was working  even
    though they were not living together.  They could not live together  in
    2009 because she was still waiting for her appeal  to  be  heard.   His
    wife had been extremely stressed by what had happened.   He  emphasised
    that he had not worked.

20.  The appellant's wife Jimena Delgardo Villota then gave  evidence.   She
    stated that she was now a  British  citizen  having  become  a  British
    citizen in February 2014.  She relied on her  statement  in  which  she
    stated that she and her son would be affected  if  the  appellant  were
    deported to Colombia and referred to her son's medical condition.   She
    said that she worked as a cleaner in  a  bank  and  was  also  studying
    English - she intended to study to become a  midwife.   She  emphasised
    that she would be unable to  continue  studying  if  her  husband  were
    removed and referred to the care which the appellant gave to  her  son.
    The appellant helped her because he spoke betere English.

21.  She gave details of  her  son's  illnesses  and  stated  that  she  was
    adamant that she would not return to Colombia with her husband.

22.  She went on to say that she spoke English to her son.

23.  She confirmed that she had not had a visa when she had entered  Britain
    in 2001.

24.  In cross-examination she said that she had not  attended  school  here.
    She had met the appellant through her brother's friends.  She  did  not
    know what work he was doing nor  did  she  know  his  friends  and  she
    confirmed that the appellant had known her brother before meeting  her.



25.  She said that her brother was also a cleaner in  offices  and  had  had
    his own business.  He was a self-employed carpet cleaner.

26.  She said that the appellant had been helped by  friends  when  she  had
    first met him and confirmed that the appellant had not been living with
    her when her child was born.  Her son had been aged 2 when he was born.

27.  They had lived together for twelve  months  before  the  appellant  had
    been arrested.  Her own brother had gone to  prison  in  January  2009.
    Although she knew that her brother  had been convicted of drug offences
    she did not know that the appellant had been involved  in  drugs.   Her
    husband had not been in when the police had come to the flat.  She  had
    been taken to the police station and a friend had had to look after her
    child.  She could not remember how long she  had  been  at  the  police
    station but said that she  had  been  surprised  that  drugs  and  drug
    paraphernalia had been found in the flat where she  and  her  son  were
    living.

28.  She confirmed that she had returned to Colombia in 2011 when the  proxy
    marriage had taken place.  She had stayed with her mother and father  -
    her father who had been kidnapped in 2001 had been released  six  years
    later.  Having got married the application form for residence  for  her
    husband had been submitted.

29.  She confirmed that her brother had been back to Colombia and  that  she
    had been back on other occasions but she could not  recall  when.   She
    accepted she had been back before her son had  been  born.   She  would
    return every two or three years to stay with her family.  She had  only
    however returned to Colombia once with her child.

30.  In re-examination she said that she  had  not  been  back  to  Colombia
    since 2011 because it was so expensive.  It had been difficult to  take
    J with her because he could not understand much.   She  did  not  think
    that she would return to Colombia as  she  would  have  to  start  from
    nothing there.

31.  In his submissions Mr  Walker  argued  that  it  was  proportionate  to
    deport the appellant given the circumstances of conviction.   The  only
    countervailing argument was the fact that the appellant had  a  British
    wife and child and that his wife said she was not  willing  to  return.
    However the appellant who had been here since 1999  without  leave  for
    twelve years until his marriage in 2011 had never claimed that  he  had
    worked here.  He had been sentenced for possession of class A drugs  to
    two years and  that  his  offence  had  been  committed  while  he  was
    supposedly living with his partner and child and they claimed that they
    were unaware of what  was  happening.   They  had  only  however  lived
    together for twelve months before the sentence.   He  referred  to  the
    importance of deterrence and emphasised  that  the  appellant's  family
    life had been built up while he had not had leave to remain.   He  also
    pointed out that the appellant's wife and child had visited Colombia.

32.  In response Miss Ukachi-Lois relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  which
    emphasised the length of time which the appellant had  lived  with  his
    wife - the relationship had been consolidated  since  the  marriage  in
    2011.  She referred to the criteria set out in Uner  referring  to  the
    judge's sentencing remarks and emphasising that the appellant had  only
    committed one offence.  The judge indeed had referred to his offence as
    a "one off."  She stated the appellant's situation was  different  from
    that of the appellant in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  who  had
    received a three year sentence and had had three convictions.

33.  She argued that the appellant was  at  low  risk  of  re-offending  and
    referred to the probation reports in the file.

34.  Moreover the appellant had lived in Britain since  1999.   His  conduct
    since the offence had been  exemplary  and  he  had  completed  various
    courses in prison.  In particular he had taken various courses relating
    to drug awareness.

35.  She referred to the fact that the appellant's wife was naturalised  and
    the child was British and said that they had a strong family life.  She
    referred to the problems which J  would  face  if  the  appellant  left
    Britain and stated that it was not in the best interests of J  for  him
    to have to go to Colombia -  he  did  not  speak  Spanish  and  he  was
    receiving therapy here as well as being investigated at  the  Ear  Nose
    and Throat Department in hospital.  There were clearly medical concerns
    relating to his health.  Moreover she referred to  J's  schooling  here
    and other family connections here as well as connections to  the  local
    church and school.

Discussion

36.  It is relevant to consider the chronology in this case  which  is  that
    the appellant came to Britain in 1999 and claimed asylum the  following
    year.  He states, but I do not accept, that he did  not  claim  asylum.
    In any event the asylum claim was not pursued.   The  appellant's  wife
    came to Britain in 2001 as a visitor.   She  was  then  aged  15.   She
    remained, it appears, with her brother before  making  the  application
    for leave to remain as the dependant of an EEA national - her sister-in-
    law.   That  application  was  refused  but  allowed  on  appeal  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8 June 2010.   The  determination  in  her
    appeal stated that she claimed asylum in 2001 with  the  assistance  of
    her elder brother and it  was  argued  that  she  had  been  granted  a
    residence card in 2003.  It is of note that in  his  determination  the
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge White,  stated that  J  enjoyed
    family life with his  mother  and  "through  their  contact,  with  his
    father."

37.  It is evident that the appellant and his wife started  living  together
    in July 2010.  The appellant was convicted in 2011  the  offence  start
    date being 14 June that year (203 days on remand had  been  taken  into
    account when he was sentenced in February 2012).  He was released on 15
    February 2013 having spent some time  in  immigration  detention.   The
    appellant and his wife have lived together since February 2013.

38.  The relevant structured approach in this appeal is that set out in  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192.
    That judgment refers to the provisions of paragraphs 398 and 399 of the
    new Rules relating to deportation and Article 8.  This is a case  where
    paragraph 398(b) is relevant in that the appellant was sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at  least  twelve
    months.  Paragraph 399 must therefore be considered.  It  is  the  case
    that the appellant has a genuine subsisting parental relationship  with
    a child under the age of 18 and it will be considered that it  was  not
    reasonable to expect that child to leave Britain.  However there  is  a
    family member who is able to care  for  the  child  in  Britain  -  the
    appellant's wife has clearly shown that she is able to  do  so  in  the
    past and, as set out above the reality is that the appellant only lived
    with his wife and child for less than a year before he was arrested and
    has only lived with them since 2013.

39.  I have also considered the  provisions  of  Rule  399(b)  in  that  the
    appellant has a genuine subsisting relationship with a partner  who  is
    in Britain and is a British citizen but of course the appellant has not
    lived in Britain for at least fifteen years with valid leave.

40.  However,  paragraph 398(c) states that in assessing the claim that  the
    rights of  an appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR would be  infringed
    by deportation in a situation where the provisions of  paragraphs   399
    and 399 A do not apply   "it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by  other
    factors."

41.  As I stated in my decision finding a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal I must consider the  issue  of
    exceptionality within the context of the Rules.  The  relevant  factors
    are, I  accept,   similar  to  those  which  would,  under  the  Razgar
    principles make a decision disproportionate but there is  the  emphasis
    on the relevant factors which make deportation the appropriate decision
    when a crime has been committed.

42.  The reality is that the test of "exceptionality"  in  paragraph  398(c)
    of the Rules follows on from the clear guidance given in  the  judgment
    in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550. Moreover any  decision  should  be
    viewed within the guidance given in DS (India) [2009] EWCA Civ  544  in
    which Lord Justice Rix stated:-

         "The public interest in deportation of  those  who  commit  serious
         crimes goes well beyond depriving the offender in question  from  a
         chance to re-offend in this country: it extends  to  deterring  and
         preventing serious crime generally and upholding public  abhorrence
         in such offending."

43.  The appellant committed  a very serious crime.  I note the comments  of
    the sentencing judge, Miss Recorder Booth that  she  had  come  to  the
    conclusion that she took the appellant at the "high end of  the  lesser
    role, category three" and that her starting point should be around  the
    "three year point."  Her conclusion was that the  appellant  should  be
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment for 2 rather than 3 years, on the
    basis that the appellant  had  given  himself  up  to  the  police  and
    cooperated with them and indeed that he had pled guilty.

44.  I also take into the account the pre-sentence report which referred  to
    the appellant's own drug taking and his indebtedness  to  the  man  who
    threatened him.  The probation officer considered  that  the  appellant
    had demonstrated a clear understanding of the impact such  offences  as
    his could have on individuals and society. The  probation  officer  did
    refer to the appellant as having worked as a  window  cleaner  on  high
    rise buildings and he took into account that the  appellant  was  still
    waiting for his "spouse  visa"  to  be  considered.   He  assessed  the
    appellant as at a low "30%" risk of re-offending within two years.  .

45.  I note that there was no OASys Report.

46.  It must however be taken into account the fact that the  appellant  had
    come to Britain in 1999, made an asylum application - I do not find his
    assertion that he did not do  so  to  be  credible,   and  was  content
    thereafter to overstay.  The reality is that since the  expiry  of  his
    leave to remain as a visitor he has not had leave to  remain.   He  did
    not have leave to remain as  a  spouse  -  that  application  is  still
    pending.  He does not claim to have built up any pattern of  work  here
    and nor is there any element of private life apart from the  fact  that
    he is exercising private and family life with his wife and  child  here
    at the present time.

47.  I would add that given that he was a friend of his  brother-in-law  and
    that his brother-in-law has also been found guilty  of  drugs  offences
    there must be a reasonable likelihood that the appellant has mixed with
    such people during his stay here when he claims he  was  not  receiving
    any income.

48.  Central to the assessment of the appellant's  rights  under  Article  8
    are, of course, his relationship with his wife and child.  While  there
    is clearly some doubt over  the  way  in  which  the  appellant's  wife
    obtained indefinite leave to remain she entered Britain at a young  age
    and was certainly claiming to be a dependant of her sister-in-law at  a
    time when she also claimed to be in a relationship with  the  appellant
    who was, by that stage, the father of her child.  However, the  reality
    is that the appellant does not claim to have  supported  his  wife  and
    child here other than providing childcare.  He did not  live  with  his
    wife and J until J was aged 3 and then, when imprisoned did  not  again
    live with his wife and J until J was nearly 5.  He has therefore  lived
    with J for only approximately half of  his  life.   He,  moreover,  was
    prepared to have drugs apparatus and drugs in the flat, which indicated
    to Miss Recorder Booth that there was "a business of selling drugs"  at
    the felt where he was living with his child.

49.  While I accept that he may undertake some childcare he is certainly  by
    no means J's principal carer.

50.  I turn now to the position of the appellant's wife.  She  asserts  that
    she would not go to live in Colombia but the reality is  that  she  has
    parents and other family members there, has visited Colombia every  two
    or three years in the past and was last in Colombia when  she  arranged
    the proxy marriage with the appellant.  She is certainly by no means  a
    woman who has lost ties with that country.  I consider that there is no
    reason why she would not be able to return  there  with  the  appellant
    although I accept that she does not want to do so and there might  well
    be economic implications.

51.  I now consider the position of J.  He  appears  to  have  had  problems
    with nose bleeds and also with his speech but he is doing  much  better
    at school now.  I consider that he could without difficulty  live  with
    both his parents in Colombia.  Although  weight was placed on the claim
    that he would not be able to access education  there   because  of  the
    cost I note that the COIS report , quoted in the reasons letter, states
    that education is free  and  compulsory  for  5  years  and  the  State
    guarantees freedom of teaching at primary and secondary level.

52.    There are very significant cultural and family ties with Colombia.

53.   I consider that it is in J's  best  interests  to  be  with  both  his
    parents.  Having said that, however, the reality is that it is accepted
    by the respondent that he and his mother could not be expected to go to
    Colombia.  That, however, is different from stating that the  appellant
    and his wife would not be able to assess  the  best  interests  of  the
    child and decide that the family should return to Colombia together.

54.  Taking into account all these factors but placing weight  on  the  need
    to remove those who commit serious crimes such as that of the appellant
    involving as it did class A drugs, I consider that the decision of  the
    Secretary of State to deport this appellant  was  correct.   I  do  not
    consider that there is anything exceptional in this  case  which  would
    make it disproportionate to deport  this  appellant  and  I  therefore,
    having set aside the decision of the First-tier tribunal, I dismiss the
    appellant's appeal  on  both  immigration  and  human  rights  grounds.



Decision
This appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.
This appeal is also dismissed on human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


