
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On: 4 September 2013                         Decision Promulgated:
                                             On: 10 September 2013

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Souhil Laib
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Not present


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Appeal

For the purposes of this appeal I refer to Mr Laib as the appellant and  the
Secretary of State as the respondent, reflecting their positions before  the
First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Algeria and was born on 24 July 1983.

The respondent appeals the decision promulgated on 3  July  2103  of  First-
tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miles  and  Dr  J  O  de  Barros  which  allowed  the
appellant's appeal against deportation.

Background

The appellant has an appalling immigration history. He came to the UK  as  a
visitor  in  August  2002  but  overstayed.  He  was  arrested  in  2003  in
connection with terrorism offences. He gave a false name when  arrested.  In
the event, he was only charged with four counts of fraud  and  in  2004  was
convicted and received a sentence of 12 months.  The  respondent  wished  to
deport him but in 2008 the appellant won his appeal  on  protection  grounds
as his (false) name  had  been  linked  to  terrorism.  The  appellant  then
informed the respondent of his relationship with  a  British  national  with
whom he claimed to be living after having undergone an Islamic  ceremony  in
2003. In 2011 he admitted his real name. He then informed the respondent  of
his relationship with a French national, an Islamic  marriage  having  taken
place on 26 February 2011 and a son being born on 25 August 2012.

Having learned of the appellant's  true  identity,  deportation  action  was
recommenced. The appellant accepted that he could not rely  on  the  outcome
of the previous deportation litigation as  it  was  founded  on  his  having
given  a  false  name  and  his  real  identity  not  being  connected  with
terrorism. On 5 February 2013 the respondent notified the appellant  of  her
decision to make a deportation order against  him  under  s.3(5)(a)  of  the
Immigration Act 1971.

Error of Law

I was satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
appellant's appeal against deportation, disclosed material errors on  points
of law.

Firstly,  the  respondent's  refusal  letter  at  [9]  indicated  that   the
appellant had breached his licence in 2006. This was relevant  to  his  risk
of re-offending but  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  reference  to  it,
stating at [7] only  that  the  appellant  had  not  re-offended  since  the
conviction in 2004.

Secondly, the refusal letter stated at [44(c)] that the French  partner  was
"exercising treaty rights" but by the time of the appeal before  the  First-
tier Tribunal, as set out  in  a  refusal  letter  dated  1  May  2013,  the
respondent had decided against issuing a residence  card  on  the  basis  of
false evidence having been provided regarding the partner's employment.  The
First-tier Tribunal note at  [16]  the  different  positions  taken  by  the
respondent but do no more than that. They do not find  one  way  or  another
whether  the  couple  had  relied  on  false  employment  documents  in  the
residence  card  application,  a  material  matter  in  the  proportionality
assessment. This was so even when the statement in the refusal  letter  that
the partner was exercising Treaty  rights  was  unevidenced  and  the  later
decision that she was not evidenced in some detail.

Thirdly, the Tribunal at no  point  consider  the  material  factor  of  the
knowledge of the appellant and his partner at  the  time  that  they  formed
their relationship that his immigration status was precarious.

Fourthly, in their proportionality assessment, the  First-tier  Tribunal  do
not at any point weigh the fact of the appellant's having  been  in  the  UK
illegally since 2003.

Fifthly, and finally, the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the  significant
matter of his deception of  the  immigration  and  criminal  authorities  is
perverse. The panel merely states at [9] that the  deception  "does  him  no
credit" and then goes on to  place  more  weight  on  the  appellant  having
decided to reveal the truth 7 years later. They  take  no  account  of  that
deception being the only reason he has been able to build up the family  and
private life on which he now relies.

I  was  satisfied  that  these  errors  were  such  that   the   Article   8
proportionality assessment was unsound and had to be set aside and  re-made.


Re-making of the Appeal

I proceeded to remake the appeal. I heard submissions  from  Mr  Tufan,  the
appellant had chosen not to attend and  having  given  an  indication  in  a
letter dated 8 August 2013 from  his  representatives  that  he  wished  the
matter to proceed on the basis of written submissions only.

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules failed has not been cross-appealed and stands.

I accept that as regards the second stage Article 8 assessment, the  answers
to the first four Razgar questions  must  be  answered  in  the  appellant's
favour and so only proportionality falls for me to  assess  as  regards  the
appellant's family and private life and that of his wife and child.

I commenced by considering the best interests of the appellant's son.  Those
best interests son are undoubtedly that the  appellant  remain  living  with
his son and his  mother.  The  deportation  of  the  appellant  to  Algeria,
leaving the partner as a single parent and the child to grow up without  his
father, is a  significant  matter,  one  that  can  only  have  a  seriously
detrimental effect on the future life of any child. The  best  interests  of
the child must be weighed as a primary consideration and I so weigh them.

 Also weighing in the appellant's favour is the fact of his having lived  in
the UK for 12 years and the private life  built  up  during  that  time.  In
addition to his family life with his son, he formed a relationship with  his
current partner, a French national, in 2011 and the relationship  continues.
The appellant has not been convicted of any further  crimes  since  2004,  a
significant period of time, but that cannot  be  taken  as  a  factor  going
entirely in his favour as he was recalled on licence in 2006. I accept  that
the risk of reoffending  is  very  low  given  that  there  are  no  further
substantive offences since 2004.

I could not identify any other factor going in the  appellant's  favour.  He
has committed criminal offences which attracted a sentence  of  imprisonment
of  12  months  and  that  must  be  weighed  against  him.  As  above,  his
immigration history is appalling and can  only  but  weigh  heavily  against
him. He has remained in the UK from 2003 onwards unlawfully. He lied to  the
authorities, both criminal and immigration, about his  identity.  He  relied
on that lie to fight deportation, telling the truth  only  years  later.  He
has been able to remain in the UK as long as he has  only  because  he  told
that lie. He has family members in Algeria to whom  he  can  look  for  some
support on his return.

Further, the appellant was  only  able  to  form  his  current  relationship
because he had told that lie and thus avoided deportation or removal  at  an
earlier time. He formed his current  relationship  when  he  knew  that  his
immigration status was precarious. I had recent evidence in the form of  the
refusal letter  dated  1  May  2013  before  me  which  indicated  that  the
appellant and his wife have relied on false documents to try  to  show  that
the wife is exercising Treaty rights. I had nothing to show that  they  have
appealed that decision. The matters set out in  the  letter  are  cogent.  A
telephone call to the purported  employer  established  that  the  telephone
number provided was unobtainable. The website for the company  was  said  to
be under construction.  It  stated  that  the  company  sells  footwear  and
clothing and  is  a  clearance  stock  buyer.  The  contract  of  employment
provided, however, suggested that the company  was  involved  in  investment
and was not signed by the appellant's partner.  I  was  satisfied  that  the
appellant and his wife had provided false documents in order to try to  show
that  the  partner  was  exercising  Treaty  rights.  That  further  attempt
deception must weigh against them in the proportionality assessment.

Put simply, there is too much weighing against this appellant for  even  the
best  interests  of  the  child  and  the  appellant's  long  residence  and
relationship  with   his   current   partner   to   make   his   deportation
disproportionate. His history  is  such  that  this  is  a  case  where  the
disruption of the family, even though this inevitably means a mother  having
to bring up a child alone  and  a  child  growing  up  without  his  father,
remains proportionate.

The appellant's wife is in the UK and can care for his  son.  She  can  also
continue to do so in France as she and the child are  French  nationals.  No
issue arises under Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano. That  case  establishes  only
that where a child is a British citizen  and  therefore  a  citizen  of  the
European Union, as a matter of EU law it is  not  possible  to  require  the
family as a unit to relocate outside  of  the  European  Union  or  for  the
Secretary of State to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do  so.
 Where, however, one parent remains  because  he  or  she  is  also  an  EEA
national, the removal of the other parent does not mean that the child  will
be required to leave, thereby infringing  the  Zambrano  principle;  see  C-
256/11 Murat Dereci.

The letter from the appellant's representatives suggests that an  assessment
under the EEA Regulations 2006 should take place. I do not agree. As  above,
the evidence before me is that the appellant and his partner have  submitted
false evidence in order to show that the wife is exercising  Treaty  rights.
There is no reliable evidence to show that she has ever done so. Where  that
is so, the appellant is not entitled to have his case considered  under  the
EEA Regulations.

For all of these reasons,  I  found  that  the  appellant's  appeal  against
deportation brought under Article 8 of the ECHR must fail.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is re-made as refused.


Signed:                                 Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

