
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision Promulgated         |
|on 20 May 2016                                |on 31 August 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            MOHAMMAD JADER KARIM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Schwenk instructed by Fadigia & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. Following a hearing at Manchester on the 5 February 2016 it was found
       a First-tier judge had made an error of law material to the  decision
       to allow the appeal and that determination was set aside.  A copy  of
       the reasons for this finding is annexed to this decision at  Annex  A
       below.
    2. The immigration decision under challenge is a decision dated 1  April
       2014, made pursuant to section 32(5) UK Borders Act  2007  to  deport
       the appellant.


Background


    3. The appellant is a national of Iraq born on the 13 January  1990  who
       arrived in the United Kingdom  in  October  2002  together  with  his
       father, brother, step mother and  step  sister.  His  father  claimed
       asylum naming the appellant as his dependant. The  applications  were
       refused on 10 December 2002  and  an  appeal  against  that  decision
       failed.  The appellant's father became appeal rights exhausted on the
       13 November 2003.
    4. On 27 February 2008  at  Leicester  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
       convicted of possessing a Class A  controlled  drug  with  intent  to
       supply, heroin and crack cocaine. Between 5 and  11  August  2008  at
       Leicester Crown Court the appellant was  convicted  of  possessing  a
       firearm without a certificate and on 18 September 2008 sentenced to 6
       years detention in a young offender's institution.
    5. The appellant's father, step-mother and step  siblings  were  granted
       ILR on 10 June 2009 although the appellant was not granted such leave
       in line due to his conviction.
    6. On 12 October 2009 a signed deportation order  was  made  and  served
       providing the appellant with an out of country right of  appeal.  The
       decision was withdrawn on the 9 May 2011 after the respondent  agreed
       to reconsider the decision.
    7. On 16 June 2011 a fresh human rights claim was made and  refused  and
       on 26 September 2011  the  signed  deportation  order  was  sent  for
       service. The appellant lodged an appeal against the deportation order
       on the 10 October 2011 which was allowed to the extent  the  decision
       was remitted for the Home Office to consider paragraph  395C  of  the
       Immigration Rules. A further liability  for  deportation  notice  was
       sent for service on the 18 May  2012.  The  appellant  completed  the
       document indicating he relied upon asylum and human rights grounds as
       a result of which he was interviewed on the 30 January 2014.
    8. On 1 May 2014 the respondent issued a  comprehensive  refusal  letter
       which served as the decision to deport pursuant to section  32(5)  UK
       Borders Act 2007. It is against  this  decision  that  the  appellant
       appealed.

The law

    9. Mr Schwenk submits that the applicable rules are those  in  force  at
       the date of decision. Reliance is placed upon  paragraph  39  of  the
       Judgement of YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 where is was found:

           39.    So far as the 2014 Rules are concerned, it is clear  from
                the provisions of Rule A362 itself, as well as the statement
                under "implementation"  in  the  Statement  of  Changes  and
                paragraphs 3.4 and 4.7 of the Explanatory  Memorandum,  that
                the 2014 Rules are to be applied to all decisions concerning
                Article 8 claims that are made after 28 July 2014.  As  Lord
                Hoffmann said in the Odelola case at  [7],  the  Immigration
                Rules are a statement by the SSHD of how she  will  exercise
                powers of control over immigration. Thus, in the absence  of
                any statement to the contrary, the most natural  reading  of
                the Rules is that they apply to decisions taken by the  SSHD
                until such time as she promulgates new  rules,  after  which
                she will decide according to the new rules. The same applies
                to decisions by tribunals and the courts: that is why in  MF
                (Nigeria) v SSHD[15] (hereafter "MF(Nigeria)"), the Court of
                Appeal held that both the UT and it were  obliged  to  apply
                the 2012 Rules to MF, despite the fact  that  the  SSHD  had
                taken her original decision in 2010 under  the  pre-existing
                rules.

   10. The wording of A362 is as follows:

           A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
           under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim  under  Article  8  will
           only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July
           2014 are met, regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to
           deport or the deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

   11. The Statement of Changes HC 532 confirms that the changes set out  in
       paragraphs 14 to 30 of that statement take effect on 28 July 2014 and
       apply to all ECHR Article 8 claims from foreign criminals  which  are
       decided on or after that date.
   12. In YM (Uganda) it was held that the  relevant  time  for  determining
       whether the claimant could meet the test in paragraph  339(b)  of  at
       least 15 years continuous residence, minus periods  of  imprisonment,
       was prior to the respondent's decision to deport the claimant and not
       at the date of the hearing. The  question  of  whether  the  Claimant
       satisfied the requirements in paragraph 399A(b) of  the  2012  rules,
       depended on at what date he was required to be under 25. A  fair  and
       practical construction was that the person had to be 25 at  the  time
       of the Secretary of State's original decision. That would fit in with
       the other provisions in  paragraphs  399  and  399A,  which  required
       periods of residence in the UK  of  15  or  20  years  prior  to  the
       relevant 'immigration decision'.  (Note:  the  provisions  have  been
       deleted by  the  28  July  2014  changes  to  the  Immigration  Rules
       (paras.43, 45 and 49)).
   13. The Immigration Rules are a complete code for deportation  decisions.
       The Rules have been amended over time and now reflect  the  statutory
       provisions contained in section 117 of the 2002 Act which have to  be
       considered in any case in which Article 8 is  raised  in  opposing  a
       deportation decision.
   14.  The  appellant  was  sentenced  to  two  three  years   periods   of
       imprisonment for the two offences. In YM (Uganda) it  was  held  that
       paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules does not require or  authorise
       the aggregation of prison terms to  meet  the  12  month  or  4  year
       thresholds (para.44), and so the relevant period for considering  the
       applicable rules is that of three years.  Hence paragraph  398(b)  is
       applicable. The calculation of the applicable sentence on this  basis
       is also in accordance with section 117D(4)(b) of the 2002 Act.
   15. Paragraphs 399 and 399A also need to be considered which provide:

           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -


           (a)     the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and


                (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or


                (ii)   the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                least the 7 years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
                immigration decision; and in either case


                    (a)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                    the country to which the person is to be deported; and


                    (b)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                    in the UK without the person who is to be deported; or


           (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
           in the UK, and


                (i)    the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                (deportee) was in the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
                status was not precarious; and


                (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                the country to which the person is to be  deported,  because
                of compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
                in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain  in
                the UK without the person who is to be deported.


           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -


           (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
           of his life; and


           (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


           (c)     there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
           integration into the country to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
           deported.



Discussion


   16. In relation to the order of events I shall  consider  the  protection
       element of the claim first  followed  by  the  human  rights  element
       (family and private life) thereafter.
   17. The  appellant  relied  upon  a  claim  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
       protection.  It  has  not  been  established  that  if  returned  the
       appellant faces a credible real risk of persecution for a  Convention
       reason and so the asylum claim is not made out and is dismissed.   It
       is asserted that the appellant is entitled to a grant of humanitarian
       protection. It is not disputed that  the  appellant  originates  from
       Kirkuk. It is not disputed that the current country guidance case  is
       AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).
   18. In relation to the appellants home area it was found in AA that:

           (i) There is at present a state of internal  armed  conflict  in
           certain parts of Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
           militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL.
           The intensity of this armed conflict in the so-called "contested
           areas", comprising the governorates of  Anbar,  Diyala,  Kirkuk,
           (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah  Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a
           general matter, there are substantial grounds for believing that
           any civilian returned there, solely on account  of  his  or  her
           presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to
           indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within  the
           scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive; (ii)  The
           degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the "Baghdad Belts"
           (the  urban  environs  around  Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
           intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to
           a generalised Article 15(c) risk. The parts of the Baghdad Belts
           concerned are those  forming  the  border  between  the  Baghdad
           Governorate and the contested areas described  in  paragraph  1;
           (iii) The degree of armed conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
           (including Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to
           indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such  serious  harm  to
           civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics,  so
           as  to  engage  Article  15(c);  (iv)  In  accordance  with  the
           principles set out  in  Elgafaji  (C-465/07)  and  QD  (Iraq)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  620,
           decision-makers in Iraqi  cases  should  assess  the  individual
           characteristics of the person claiming humanitarian  protection,
           in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are such  as
           to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

   19. It has not been establish that the appellant is able to return to  or
       live in his home area,  or  even  safely  travel  to  the  same.  The
       assertion in the refusal letter [105] that the appellant could travel
       from Baghdad to any area of Iraq should he so wish is not made out by
       the country material.  The respondents own Operational Guidance notes
       for Iraq note that In the Country Guidance (CG) case of  AA  (Article
       15(c)) (Rev 1) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) (30 September 2015), the
       Upper Tribunal (UT) found, based on evidence up to April  2015,  that
       the degree of armed conflict in the  'contested'  areas  does  engage
       Article 15(c) of the QD (paragraph 204, A1) [2.3.5].
   20. This reflects the  finding  in  AA  that  that,  in  the  'contested'
       governorates, indiscriminate  violence  was  at  such  a  level  that
       substantial grounds existed for believing that a  person,  solely  by
       being present there for any length of time, faced a real risk of harm
       which threatened their life or person (thereby engaging Article 15(c)
       of the Qualification Directive and entitling a person to a  grant  of
       Humanitarian Protection).
   21. In the respondents more recent operational guidance, August 2016,  it
       is asserted that following the recent military actions of  the  Iraqi
       government some of the area identified as being 'contested ' areas in
       Iraq no longer are and that a person  in  such  areas  is  no  longer
       entitled to a grant of  humanitarian  protection.  This  is  not  the
       position that existed at the date of the hearing and it has not  been
       considered appropriate to invite further submissions on  this  point.
       The situation in Iraq is fluid and the content of the  document  does
       not warrant this tribunal departing from the country  guidance  case.
       If a further country guidance case changes the finding in relation to
       Kirkuk or other contested areas the situation can be re-appraised  at
       that time.
   22. I find it has not been made out that the appellant can safely  return
       to live in Kirkuk at the date of the hearing or  successfully  travel
       to reach this are through the disputed territories.
   23. The respondent raised the issue of internal relocation in the refusal
       letter. This can only be by return to the Kurdish  regions  (IKR)  in
       the north of the country or to Baghdad.
   24. In relation to the IKR, it was held in AA that  (i)   the  Respondent
       will only return an Iraqi national (P) to the  IKR  if  P  originates
       from the IKR and P's identity has been  "pre-cleared"  with  the  IKR
       authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to  have  an
       expired or current passport, or  laissez  passer;  (ii)  the  IKR  is
       virtually violence free.  There  is  no  Article  15(c)  risk  to  an
       ordinary civilian in the IKR; (iii) A Kurd (K) who does not originate
       from the IKR can obtain entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew
       this entry permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K
       can remain for longer, although K will  need  to  register  with  the
       authorities and provide details of the employer. There is no evidence
       that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the IKR whose
       permits have come to an end; (iv) whether K, if returned to  Baghdad,
       can reasonably be expected to avoid any potential undue harshness  in
       that city by travelling to the IKR, will be fact  sensitive;  and  is
       likely to involve an assessment of (a)the practicality of travel from
       Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air - there  is  not  a  real
       risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from Baghdad airport  to  the
       southern  governorates,  suffering  serious  harm  en-route  to  such
       governorates so as engage Article 15(c).); (b)the likelihood  of  K's
       securing  employment  in  the  IKR;  and  (c)  the  availability   of
       assistance from family and friends in  the  IKR;  (v)  As  a  general
       matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home  area  in  Iraq  is
       unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.
   25. The appellant is from Kirkuk which is not within the boundary of  the
       autonomous zone  recognised  by  Iraq  in  2005.   The  appellant  is
       therefore not a person originating from the IKR. The  respondent  has
       not shown that the appellant will be accepted for entry  to  the  IKR
       through the pre-clearance policy referred to in AA.  It  is  accepted
       the appellant is a Kurd and that a greater part of the north of  Iraq
       is now under the control of the Kurdish  forces  but  this  does  not
       warrant a departure from the country guidance case law at this stage.


   26. If the appellant is unable to relocate to the north return to Baghdad
       will have to be considered. In relation to this element the  Tribunal
       in AA found (i)  As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable  or
       unduly harsh for a person  from  a  contested  area  to  relocate  to
       Baghdad City or (subject to comments in  this  case  on  humanitarian
       protection and areas of the country where there is an internal  armed
       conflict) the Baghdad Belts; (ii) In assessing whether  it  would  be
       unreasonable/unduly harsh for and Iraqi national  (P)to  relocate  to
       Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,   however,   likely   to   be
       relevant:(a) whether P has a CSID or  will  be  able  to  obtain  one
       (comments in this Chapter, this section, section  on  Iraq  generally
       and returns); (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are
       less likely to find employment); (c) whether P has family members  or
       friends in Baghdad able to accommodate him; (d) whether P is  a  lone
       female  (women  face  greater  difficulties  than  men   in   finding
       employment); (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel  room
       or rent accommodation; (f) whether P is from  a  minority  community;
       (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there is
       some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are  provided  with
       the support generally given to IDPs. (iii) there is not a  real  risk
       of an ordinary  civilian  travelling  from  Baghdad  airport  to  the
       southern  governorates,  suffering  serious  harm  en-route  to  such
       governorates so as engage Article 15(c).
   27. It is not disputed that this is a decision that will spit this family
       with the appellant's wife and children remaining in the  UK  and  the
       appellant returning alone.
   28. It is accepted by the respondent  in  paragraph  25  of  the  refusal
       letter that the appellant does not possess a  CSID.  It  is  accepted
       there is no evidence that appellant will  be  unable  to  obtain  the
       required identity document to enable his return  to  Iraq,  an  issue
       commented upon further below.
   29. The appellant is a Sorani speaker whose command and use of Arabic  is
       poor. This will have a direct  impact  upon  his  ability  to  secure
       employment in Baghdad.
   30. The appellant does not have access to accommodation in Baghdad. There
       is no evidence of a sponsor as the appellant  has  no  connection  to
       Baghdad.
   31. Mr Schwenk challenges the  respondent's  assertion  that  support  is
       available to the appellant on return on the basis no evidence of  any
       such support has been provided and that submissions claiming  support
       is available are not evidence. This  is  factually  correct  on  both
       points.
   32. The appellants country expert reports [report of Professor Joffe - 20
       July 2014] when considering the implications  for  the  appellant  on
       return:

           '84.   In general, Mr Karim, if he is actually returned to Iraq,
                will arrive there at what is probably the most dangerous and
                uncertain period since both  the  American-led  invasion  in
                2003 and the outbreak of intense sectarian violence in 2006.
                 Security provision in Northern Iraq, outside  Baghdad,  has
                broken down completely; the Kurdish region is  now  isolated
                from the rest of the country except for Christians and Sunni
                Muslim  families  -  and  then  only  under  very  stringent
                conditions; and the south of the  country  is  an  extremely
                hostile environment for anyone who is not  a  Shi'a  Muslim.
                The difficulties that would be faced by  an  individual  who
                does not speak good Arabic and  has  few  marketable  skills
                would be vast.


           85.    Quite apart from this consideration, it has  to  be  said
                that Mr Karim would face extremely difficult  conditions  in
                general, were he to be returned to Iraq.  Firstly, it  would
                be extremely difficult for him to  relocate  elsewhere  than
                Baghdad,   unless   he   can   acquire    the    appropriate
                documentation, even though his birthplace has been  said  to
                be in Kirkuk.  It also seems unlikely  that  he  can  obtain
                such documentation since he possesses no means of  identity.
                There is also the question of his personal security  in  the
                light of the current wave of violence  which  is  likely  to
                spread  into  the  Baghdad  area  from  Anbar  and   Nineveh
                Provinces.  Iraq today is still extremely dangerous  society
                and violence is on the rise again.  Death rates amongst  the
                civilian population are still extremely high and now seem to
                have reached a level in excess of 800  per  month  or  about
                9,000 a year.  There is every  possibility  that  they  will
                increase during 2014  as  the  sectarian  struggle  in  Iraq
                intensifies.  There is  still  very  high  unemployment  and
                public service provision is  deplorable.   It  is  extremely
                difficult  to  see  how  Mr  Karim  could  survive  in  such
                conditions, as he will find working there with  very  little
                knowledge  of  Arabic  or  the  dominant  Kurdish  languages
                virtually impossible.


           86.    I now turn to address  certain  specific  questions  that
                arise, some of which resume matters already discussed above:


                 i. I do not consider that the former  political  activities
                    of Mr Karim's father represent any threat to  Mr  Karim,
                    were he to be returned to Iraq.  Not only has the Saddam
                    Hussain regime  disappeared  but  irredentist  Ba'athist
                    supporters are now engaged in struggling against the al-
                    Malili government or have been eliminated over the  past
                    decade.  They would  have  no  time  or  inclination  to
                    settle old scores which are  now  of  purely  historical
                    interest.


                ii. Nor  do  I  consider  that  Mr  Karim's  comportment  or
                    appearance would necessarily put him at risk.   However,
                    his inability to speak Arabic may well do so because  he
                    will be assumed to be from Europe or the  United  States
                    and therefore potentially wealthy.  As  such,  he  could
                    easily become the target of criminal  gangs  engaged  in
                    kidnappings.   The  fact  his  religious  observance  is
                    deficient and that he has used  drugs  will  only  be  a
                    threat to his personal security if he were to go out  of
                    his way to draw attention to himself in these respects -
                    by eating or using drugs in public during daytime  hours
                    in Ramadan, for example.


               iii. Nor do I consider the fact that his  family  have  lived
                    abroad and in Europe to be in and of itself a  potential
                    threat to his personal safety.  Many Iraqis  today  have
                    close relatives living abroad in precisely this way.


                iv. Mr Karim would be able to visit Iraqi  Kurdistan  simply
                    by registering with the Kurdish security authorities  at
                    the border check point,  provided  he  had  the  correct
                    identity documentation. However,  to  stay  there  would
                    need the documents listed above in paragraphs  (29)  and
                    (30), as well as a Kurdish sponsor  and  may  well  meet
                    obstructions to such plans from the Kurdish authorities,
                    particularly in the current political climate.


                 v. I have to say that I cannot imagine how Mr  Karim  could
                    survive in Iraq without family support, not least  given
                    the fact he is wholly unqualified  to  work  there.   He
                    does not speak the language; I am not aware that he  has
                    any special skills; he lacks family contacts that  could
                    facilitate access to employment; in short, be is  bereft
                    of virtually every quality necessary for survival in  an
                    extremely dangerous and fraught environment.  Family  is
                    an essential guarantor of survival  in  a  country  like
                    Iraq and the risk  of  destitution  facing  him  without
                    familial support is very high indeed.


                vi. Although Mr Karim could easily stay in  touch  with  his
                    family in Britain through mobile or fixed line telephony
                    as well as the internet, provided he  could  afford  the
                    equipment and services that this would require, it would
                    be  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible  for  his
                    current partner and her  child  to  join  him  in  Iraq.
                    Firstly, she will only be able to join  him  as  a  non-
                    Iraqi spouse, a status that she will have to demonstrate
                    to the Iraqi foreign ministry.  She would also  have  to
                    provide HIV free certificates for herself and her  child
                    together  with  two  passport   photographs   for   each
                    individual. Then, within ten days of arrival,  she  must
                    present a request for a residence  permit  and  pay  the
                    requisite fee.  Thereafter, she will  only  be  able  to
                    leave Iraq after payment  of  a  $20  fee  for  an  exit
                    permit.   Quite  apart  from  this,  she  will  find  it
                    extremely difficult  to  find  work  and,  not  speaking
                    Arabic, will be totally isolated inside  Iraqi  society.
                    Also, the fact that she would be a  non-Arabic  speaking
                    Muslim would further  isolate  her  and  might  lead  to
                    explicit  persecution,  given  the   ongoing   sectarian
                    attacks on Muslim women in  Iraq  in  the  wake  of  the
                    violence there in the past ten years.


               vii. There is  no  doubt  that  the  security  situation  has
                    significantly deteriorated,  as  demonstrated  above  in
                    paragraph 76-to-83.  It is certainly far worse  than  is
                    described in the UK Border Agency's latest report on the
                    security situation inside the country or as is described
                    in the most recent Country Guidance case.  Nor  is  this
                    situation likely to improve in the near-term or  medium-
                    term future.


              viii. In short, Mr Karim is quite correct when he asserts that
                    safe relocation inside Iraq is not possible and that the
                    Kurdish  region  is  as  inaccessible  and  insecure  as
                    elsewhere  in  the  country  as  far  as  he  would   be
                    concerned.'

   33. It is accepted this report was written before the decision in AA  was
       promulgated but many of the  views  and  opinions  stated  have  been
       confirmed in AA.
   34. The respondent raised the issue of travel by air from Baghdad to  the
       IKR but it has not been shown the appellant will  have  the  required
       documents to be permitted to travel by air and the required funds. It
       has not been show the fact he may be able to fly will result  in  the
       appellant being permitted to remain in the IKR.  The  appellant  will
       also have to be able to remain in Baghdad until able to leave.
   35. Having considered  the  country  guidance  case  and  the  appellants
       personal circumstances I find it has been made out that at this point
       in time, and in relation to a person  with  the  appellants  profile,
       return to Kirkuk will result in a breach of the appellants Article  3
       rights or entitle him to a grant of humanitarian protection  pursuant
       to Article 15(c).  In relation to Baghdad, that it will be unsafe  or
       unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to  live  there  making  internal
       relocation unavailable at the date of this hearing. No  other  viable
       option has been established on the facts.
   36. The appellant relies upon Exception 1, section 33(2) UK  Borders  act
       2007.  This  arise  where  deportation  would  breach   the   Refugee
       Convention or the  ECHR.  Although  Humanitarian  Protection  is  not
       mentioned this is probably caught by Article 3 ECHR in practice and I
       find the exception made out on this basis.
   37. Paragraph 399 and 399A are only applicable to a  claim  in  which  an
       appellant is resisting deportation  on  the  basis  of  a  claim  his
       deportation would be contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
       under Article 8 ECHR.  This was an  issue  raised  by  the  appellant
       although may now be academic. For the sake  of  completeness  I  have
       considered the claim on its merits as this was an area  in  which  it
       was found legal error had be made.
   38. The issue in relation to both the appellant,  his  partner,  and  her
       child, is whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in  the
       UK without the appellant.
   39. The Court of Appeal has provided clarification of the correct way  in
       which this element should be assessed in  the  case  of  MM  (Uganda)
       [2016] EWCA Civ 450 which upheld the decision of KMO that a  holistic
       approach is required.
   40. It is submitted that the appellant has not reoffended for almost five
       years and has been rehabilitated. The pre-sentence  report  dated  27
       August  2008  was  commissioned  in  relation  to  the  firearms  and
       possession of Class A drugs with intent to supply offences. Paragraph
       4 of the report dealing with the assessment  of  'Risk  of  Harm  and
       Likelihood of Reoffending' is in the following terms:

           '4.1 The risk of further offending is assessed as medium for the
           following reasons.  Mr Karim takes little responsibility for his
           offending, attributing much of his behaviour to  associates  and
           co-defendants.  This risk could be reduced if Mr  Karim  took  a
           greater level of responsibility for his offending behaviour  and
           then  completed  work  addressing  his  pro-criminal  attitudes,
           problem solving and consequential thinking skills.


           4.2 In the commission of the current offences, it is clear  that
           Mr Karim  has  been  heavily  involved  in  offending  with  his
           associates and whilst he may have not  taken  direct  action  to
           harm others he is heavily  implicated  in  this  behaviour.   As
           such, I feel he has displayed concerning behaviour and  presents
           a medium risk of harm to the general public  and  associates  he
           feels aggrieved by.


           4.3 There is an apparent or identified risk of self-harm.'

   41. Whilst Mr Karim has not offended, especially during the  time  he  is
       aware of the respondents desire to deport him, there is  insufficient
       evidence to show  he  has  acted  in  the  manner  suggested  by  the
       probation officer who wrote the report and dealt with  his  offending
       and reason for the same. Passage  of  time  in  not  reoffending  may
       therefore not be sufficient in isolation.
   42. The error of law finding identified a failing in the original  appeal
       by the appellant in not providing medical  evidence  to  support  the
       claim of depression or evidence to adequately detail  the  impact  on
       the family of his removal. Further evidence has now been obtained  in
       the form of a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr  Pablo  Vandenabeele  in
       relation to the appellant's wife, Mrs Sophie Ahmed.
   43. Dr Vandenabeele was asked the address the following issues:

             i. The mental  health  of  the  children's  mother  (needs  and
                diagnosis)


            ii. The ability  of  the  children's  mother  to  care  for  the
                children in the event the appellant  is  deported  from  the
                United kingdom with particular emphasis on:


                 a) The impact upon the  children's  mother's  psychological
                    and/or psychiatric presentation


                 b) The standard of care she will be  capable  of  providing
                    for the children


                 c) The availability of  care  from  family  and  others  to
                    assist in the event that she is not able to care alone


                 d) The impact of the appellant's removal on the children in
                    relation to their physical and emotional  well-being  in
                    light of a-c above.

   44. Dr Vandenabeele set out his opinion in section 14 of  the  report  in
       the following terms:

         '14.1    Unfortunately, to date I have not had sight of her medical
             notes.  I therefore reserve the right to alter my opinion,  in
             light  of  information  that  may  be  contained  within  such
             documents, should these be made available to me.


         14.2 It seems that Mrs Ahmed has been suffering from mental  health
             difficulties for a considerable period of time.  As far  as  I
             was able to ascertain it  appears  that  she  first  developed
             difficulties in terms of her mental health  when  she  was  21
             years of age and studying at the University of  Salford.   She
             explained  to  me  that  her  current   difficulties   emerged
             following the birth of her son three years ago.


         14.3 Based upon the information provided to me by Mrs Ahmed and the
             findings obtained during my assessment it is my view that  she
             is currently suffering from a depressive disorder which is  of
             moderate severity.  She  described  a  history  of  low  mood,
             tearfulness, anhedonia, low  self-esteem  and  some  ideas  of
             hopelessness  towards  the  future.   She  also  reported  the
             presence of biological symptoms that  can  often  be  seen  in
             those suffering from a depressive illness.


         14.4 It is also my view that Mrs Ahmed is suffering from a comorbid
             anxiety  disorder  and  that  such  an  anxiety  disorder   is
             characterised by her suffering from  generalised  anxiety  and
             panic attacks.


         14.5 As far as I was able to establish it seems that  to  date  Mrs
             Ahmed  has  not  had  any  treatment  for  her  mental  health
             difficulties.  She told me that she had not consulted  her  GP
             for her mental health problems as she felt "stupid".


         14.6 The  information  provided  to  me  by  Mrs  Ahmed  is  highly
             indicative of the fact that  her  mental  health  difficulties
             have had a significant impact upon her day-to-day functioning.
              She appears to be highly reliant upon her husband in order to
             assist with childcare and as far as I was  able  to  establish
             she felt no longer confident to travel places or go out on her
             own.   I  also  understand  that  there  has  been   different
             occasions whereby she had to call her husband when he  is  out
             due to her suffering from what appears to  be  panic  attacks.
             Further, it is also the case that Mrs Ahmed  explained  to  me
             that as a  result  of  her  mental  health  problems  she  has
             increasingly isolated herself during recent years; this is not
             uncommon for people suffering from the type of difficulties as
             those experienced by Mrs Ahmed.


         14.7 It is also my view that the deportation of  her  husband  will
             also be a very stressful life event for Mrs Ahmed in  its  own
             right and that such stressors are likely to have a detrimental
             impact  upon  her  mental  state  and  thereby  cause   likely
             worsening of her physical condition.


         14.8  The  deportation  of  her  husband  would  therefore  have  a
             detrimental effect upon Mrs Ahmed via two separate  processes.
             First, it would remove an important source of support for her.
              Second, it would introduce a further stressor that  may  lead
             to a deterioration in her mental state.


         14.9 Whilst to date I have not seen any evidence that the needs  of
             the children are not being met as  a  result  of  Mrs  Ahmed's
             mental health difficulties, it  appears  that  some  of  those
             needs are currently directly and indirectly fulfilled  by  her
             husband.  I consider it  likely  that  in  the  event  of  her
             husband being deported that due to the processes identified in
             paragraph 14.8 Mrs Ahmed's mental health may  deteriorate  and
             that therefore this  may  have  a  negative  effect  upon  the
             children and possibly upon their physical needs.   The  extent
             of this impact at this stage is difficult to foresee. However,
             in view that she currently finds it already difficult to leave
             the house unaccompanied it can be envisioned that aspects such
             as obtaining shopping, taking the children for  social  visits
             or taking the children for activities outside the home will be
             complicated.  It is also the case that the biological symptoms
             of her condition (such as her poor sleep) may result in  there
             being a negative impact upon the children.


         14.10    I am aware that Mrs Ahmed does have  a  good  relationship
             with her parents and that they live nearby.  Therefore,  there
             may be a possibility of them to assist Mrs Ahmed in the  event
             her husband being removed from this country.   Further,  I  am
             also aware that she is close to her younger sisters.  However,
             I am not clear to what  extent  Mrs  Ahmed's  parents  or  her
             sister would be able to support her and the children.   It  is
             also the case that  such  support  would  not  counteract  the
             detrimental effect that would  likely  occur  in  Mrs  Ahmed's
             mental state as a result of the stress caused by her husband's
             removal.  Therefore  the  negative  emotional  impact  of  Mrs
             Ahmed's disordered mental state upon  her  children  can  less
             readily be replaced by the support offered by others.


         14.11    In the event of the  appellant's  removal  I  consider  it
             likely that a further  deterioration  in  Mrs  Ahmed's  mental
             state will occur and that she will also be losing an important
             source of support.  Whilst there is  a  possibility  that,  in
             such an event, the physical wellbeing of the children  can  be
             maintained by support offered by others it is  the  case  that
             the emotional impact of Mrs Ahmed's  disordered  mental  state
             upon the children  would  be  more  difficult  to  counteract.
             Having carefully considered all the issues it is my view  that
             the removal of Mrs Ahmed's husband is most likely to result in
             there being a negative impact upon  the  children's  emotional
             well-being.

   45. It is still the case that Mrs Ahmed's medical  notes  have  not  been
       made available to Dr Vandenabeele. It has been stated that Mrs  Ahmed
       has not sought the assistance of her GP in relation to her depression
       and so there is no evidence of the  effectiveness  of  medication  or
       other forms of intervention such as cognitive therapies upon  her  in
       relation to her mental health issues.
   46. Oral evidence was received from Mr Karim, his  wife  Mrs  Ahmed,  and
       Joanne Mason (Mrs Ahmed's mother).  All gave evidence  in  chief  and
       were cross-examined without incident.
   47. Mr Karim stated he had contacted the Iraqi  Consulate  in  Manchester
       and asked how he could obtain an Iraqi passport or  ID  document.  He
       visited the following day and was told he was required to  provide  a
       birth certificate or to answer specific questions  but  that  for  an
       interview to proceed he would have to produce a letter from a  person
       in authority such as the Police or Home Office. I find at this  stage
       that it has not been established that the appellant will be unable to
       secure the documentation required to enable him to  return  to  Iraq.
       If the situation in that country improves the respondent can organise
       the interview with the Iraqi authorities in the UK.
   48. There has been delay in this matter between conviction, now six years
       ago, and the date of this hearing but it has not been made  out  that
       responsibility for the same can be laid at the respondent's  door  of
       that of the Presenting Officers Unit.
   49. The offences Mr Karim committed, involving  a  firearm  and  Class  A
       drugs, are serious.  As recognised in section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act
       the more serious the offence committed  by  a  foreign  criminal  the
       greater the public interest in his or her  deportation.  It  has  not
       been made out that the public interest in Mr Karim's deportation  has
       lessened during the intervening period.
   50. It is accepted that deportation will split this family and result  in
       loss of the current family dynamics and relationships  and  resultant
       emotional trauma, especially for Mrs Ahmed.  This is what deportation
       does.
   51. It is accepted that the children will go from a two parent family  to
       a one parent family and that  the  best  interests  of  children  are
       ordinarily to be brought up by both their parents  in  a  loving  and
       caring environment.
   52. There  is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  physical  and
       emotional needs of the children are currently not  being  met  or  to
       show that the effect of deportation is such that the  impact  of  the
       appellants removal will have  such  a  detrimental  impact  upon  the
       family that there is no option other than to enable him to remain  to
       prevent irreparable or serious harm to the children
   53. It is accepted that Mrs Ahmed will need  a  lot  of  support  if  her
       husband is removed but it has not been shown that sufficient adequate
       support in not available within the family or with the assistance  of
       the health and social support networks in the local area.  Mrs  Ahmed
       only lives a relatively short distance from  her  parents  and  other
       family and although it is accepted her mother has issues of her  own,
       it has not been shown that in this close family  Mrs  Ahmed  and  the
       children  will  be  effectively  abandoned  and  left  to  fend   for
       themselves.
   54. Whilst it is accepted  that  Mrs  Ahmed  and  the  family  will  face
       hardship in readjusting to the  consequences  of  removal,  and  that
       initially these may be harsh in light of the medical evidence,  I  do
       not find it has been shown they are unduly harsh when  all  competing
       facts are considered in the round. The submission  focused  upon  the
       best care available for the children but this is not a  prerequisite.
       It has not been shown that even if the care available falls below the
       standard of 'best possible  care  available'  that  it  will  not  be
       adequate in terms of meeting the essential needs of the children.  It
       is not as if the children are being placed in  foster  care  or  with
       strangers as they will continue to be cared for in  their  family  by
       their mother, with assistance if required. Readjusting  to  the  post
       deportation lifestyle may take time but it has not been made out that
       this tips the balance in the appellants favour.
   55. I find there are other family members such as Mrs Ahmed's two sisters
       who it has not been shown will be  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide
       assistance if required.
   56. Mr McVeety referred to both the lack of Mrs Ahmed's  medical  history
       being provided to the psychiatrist and  the  lack  of  evidence  from
       other family members who are not referred too at paragraph 1.3 of the
       report.
   57. In conclusion I  find  the  appellant  has  failed  to  establish  an
       entitlement to rely upon the exception set out in section  117(5)  of
       the 2002 Act as he has not established  that  there  will  be  unduly
       harsh consequences, but as I have found the exception  in  117C(4)(c)
       has been made out this appeal must be allowed.
   58. If Mr Karim was not from Iraq the respondent may have succeed but  he
       is and for this reason, at this time, it is Mr Karim who does.

Decision

   59. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in  law.  I  have  set
       aside the decision of the original Judge. I remake  the  decision  as
       follows. This appeal is allowed.


  Anonymity.


   60. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. No application for anonymity before  the
       Upper Tribunal having been made.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30 August 2016


                                   Annex A

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision Promulgated         |
|on 5 February 2016                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMMAD KADER KARIM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Schwenk instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors.


                            ERROR OF LAW FINDING


    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a  decision  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge G Bruce promulgated on the 22 January  2015
       following a hearing at Manchester on 8 January 2015.
    2. Mr Karim is a national of Iraq born on the 13 January 1990 who is the
       subject of an order for  his  deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom
       pursuant to section 32(5) Borders Act 2007. An agreed  chronology  is
       set out at paragraphs 2-10 of the determination.
    3. The index offending is set out at paragraph 4 of the  decision  under
       challenge in the following terms:

           4. On the 27  February  2008  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of
           possessing Class  A  controlled  substances  (heroin  and  crack
           cocaine) with intent to supply. On the 11th August 2008  he  was
           convicted of possession of a firearm without a licence (a  sawn-
           off shotgun).  The circumstances relating to  that  offence  was
           that the Appellant's co-defendants had conspired to use that gun
           to threaten some people that they had an altercation  with,  and
           had fired it at a car in a busy street.  The gun had  thereafter
           been stored at the Appellant's premises with his knowledge.   In
           respect of the drugs the trial Judge found him to be "an  active
           drug  dealer",  albeit  a  "comparative  foot  soldier"  in  the
           operation.  The Appellant was  aged  17  at  the  date  of  both
           offences and  on  the  18th  September  2009  received  3  years
           imprisonment for the drugs offence and a further 3 years for the
           possession of firearm.  These were to be  served  consecutively.
           The Judge declined to make a recommendation that  the  Appellant
           be deported.

    4. The scope of the appeal was limited to the  assertion  the  appellant
       fell within an exception contained in the UK Borders Act on the basis
       his   deportation   from   the   United   Kingdom   will    interfere
       disproportionately  with  his  human  rights.  It  was  accepted  the
       appellant was unable to pursue a Refugee Convention ground as  he  is
       excluded from  international  protection  by  virtue  of  section  72
       Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 although  it  was  argued
       before Judge Bruce that the  proposal  to  return  the  appellant  to
       Baghdad, from where he can make his own way overland to his home area
       of Kirkuk, was too dangerous to undertake as a result of the presence
       of 'Islamic State'.
    5. Judge Bruce found on the facts that Mr Karim  fell  within  paragraph
       398(b) of the Immigration Rules which meant that if he  was  able  to
       show he satisfied one of the  exceptions  set  out  in  399  he  must
       succeed in his appeal. The appellant relied upon  section  399(a)  in
       respect of the relationship he has with his son Noah and his daughter
       Aria.
    6. The appellant and his witnesses were found to be credible.
    7. It is noted in the determination that the family members  claim  that
       the  effect  upon  the  children  of  Mr  Karim's  removal  would  be
       'devastating' [24]. It was found that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to
       expect the British children to go and  live  in  Baghdad  with  their
       father [27].
    8. The refusal letter referred to the point  of  return  being  Baghdad.
       Judge Bruce refers to the evidence relating to the 'contested'  areas
       north of Baghdad and finds there would be a real risk of serious harm
       to Mr Karim and his family should they try and travel through Iraq in
       the manner suggested by the Secretary of  State,  such  that  it  was
       found Mr Karim had discharged the burden of proof upon  him  pursuant
       to section 399(a)(i)(a) [29].
    9. Judge Bruce properly directed  herself  to  the  fact  this  was  not
       sufficient as Mr Karim also had to show it would  be  'unduly  harsh'
       for the children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  him.  In
       relation to this aspect it was found [30]:

           "... In this  case  however,  I  find  there  to  be  particular
           circumstances that would  render  this  decision  to  be  unduly
           harsh. The first, and perhaps most important factor, that I have
           taken into account is that the Appellant has - perhaps unusually
           - a very close relationship with  his  young  children.   I  say
           unusually because it is very often the case that in  infancy  at
           least, it is the mother who is the main carer for the child.  In
           this family the parenting is shared equally between  the  mother
           and father.  I accept the  evidence  of  the  witness  that  the
           impact on the children, but in particular Noah,  of  losing  his
           father would be "devastating".  Secondly I am not satisfied,  as
           suggested by Mr Dillon, that the grandparents would be  able  to
           "fill the void" left by the children's  father.   Mrs  Mason  is
           clearly a woman under a lot of stress. As she put  it  "everyone
           brings their troubles" to her. She helps her daughter where  she
           can but having health concerns herself this is not easy and  she
           does not have the capacity ot make up for  the  absence  of  the
           Appellant. Thirdly, it was apparent that Mr Ahmed is  very  much
           dependent upon her husband. She has had  two  children  in  very
           close together in age and like any mother of young  children  is
           physically and mentally exhausted.  She is able to cope with the
           support of the Appellant, but  I  share  her  concern  that  her
           anxiety may overwhelm her should he leave. This is  particularly
           so because of the stress and worry that she will inevitably feel
           if he is returned to Iraq, a destination  she  not  unreasonably
           describes as a "war zone". Her distress will inevitably be  felt
           by the children.  The final factor I have taken into account  is
           that there has been  a  substantial  delay  in  this  case.  The
           Appellant committed the offences aged 17 and went to prison.  He
           has been out of prison for well over three years and during that
           time has, I  accept,  turned  into  a  "mature  and  responsible
           adult".  I find the risk of reoffending to be very low.  I  have
           given great weight to the fact that the Appellant has  committed
           serious crimes and that his removal is in the public interest. I
           cannot however accept that the very harsh, "devastating"  impact
           on  the  children  would,   in   all   the   circumstances,   be
           proportionate.   I  therefore  find  that  the   appellant   has
           discharged the burden of proof in respect  of  399(a)(i)(b)  and
           allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules."

   10. In paragraph 31 the Judge returns to the issue of protection  finding
       that the situation north  of  Baghdad  is  extremely  precarious  and
       expressing concerns in relation to Mr Karim's safety in  those  areas
       controlled by the Iraqi government on the basis  he  may  face  "some
       suspicion" if travelling through a government controlled area on  the
       basis  the  fact  IS  attracts  jihadists  from  the  West  is   well
       documented. The Judge concluded on this issue "...The  Appellant  has
       no family, nor tribal affiliations that he can call  upon,  to  offer
       him assistance or protection. In those circumstances I find him to be
       at risk over and above that faced by other Iraqi civilians".




Grounds and submissions


   11. The Secretary of State seeks  to  challenge  the  decision  on  three
       grounds.
   12. Ground 1 asserts Judge Bruce, in concluding  Article  3  is  engaged,
       failed to undertake a holistic assessment  of  the  evidence.  It  is
       submitted the Judge, whilst finding a risk in relation to  travel  by
       land, failed to consider the option of travel by air using a domestic
       flight to Kurdistan which are said to occur regularly. There is  also
       a challenge to  what  is  described  as  the  Judge's  uncorroborated
       opinion in relation to the situation north of Baghdad and  a  failure
       to properly consider the relocation option. This is of  relevance  as
       it is said Mr Karim spent a large proportion of his  formative  years
       in in Iraq and has experience and an understanding of life there.
   13. The grant of permission to appeal makes specific  reference  to  this
       issue where it is stated at paragraph 4 :

           "It is clear from the  determination  that  the  Judge  did  not
           consider the issue of  internal  flight  or  indeed  as  to  the
           availability of air travel internally  in  Iraq.  The  issue  of
           internal flight was considered by the respondent at [82] to [89]
           of the refusal letter dated 1 May 2014 but the Judge's  findings
           on  these  issues  at  [31]  of  the   determination   was   not
           sufficiently reasoned.

   14. Ground 2 asserts the Judge erred in assessing whether the  effect  of
       the decision would be 'unduly harsh' for a number of detailed reasons
       set out at Ground 2 (ii) to (xiii) which do not need to  be  repeated
       here.
   15. Ground 3 asserts inadequate reasoning for the conclusion the decision
       is unduly harsh or why Mr Karim is not able to relocate within  Iraq.


   16. Permission has been granted on all grounds.


Discussion


   17. In relation to Ground 1 I  find  arguable  legal  error  proved.  The
       refusal letter clearly raised the issue of internal relocation within
       Iraq at [82] as an alternative to Mr Karim being able  to  return  to
       his tribal areas. This element has not been considered by Judge Bruce
       who focuses upon the  prospect  of  return  via  the  overland  route
       between the point of return to Baghdad and Kirkuk.
   18. In AMM and others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
       Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that  Article
       8(1) of the Qualification Directive provides that Member  States  may
       determine that a person is not in need  of  international  protection
       "if in a part of the country of origin there is no well-founded  fear
       of being persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm and the
       applicant can reasonably be expected to stay  in  that  part  of  the
       country.   Article   8(3)   states   that   Article   8(1)    applies
       "notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to  the  country  of
       origin"
   19. The two limbs of the exercise, to decide whether Mr  Karim  would  be
       safe in another part of Iraq and  secondly  whether  Mr  Karim  could
       reasonably be expected to live there, still await determination.
   20. It is accepted by Mr McVeety that the Secretary of State only  raised
       the overland route in the refusal letter and at the  hearing  and  so
       the failure of the Judge to consider air travel as an  option  within
       Iraq cannot be criticized.
   21. The findings in relation  to  Article  3  ECHR  or  Article  15C  are
       therefore infected by material legal error and are set aside.
   22. In reaction to the assessment of the impact upon the  family  in  the
       United Kingdom it is not adequate explained why  the  fact  Mr  Karim
       plays an active role in the life of his family is  such  a  surprise.
       Shared parental care arrangements are not unusual and it has not been
       explained  why  this  constitutes  'exceptional  circumstances'.  The
       nature of the relationship with the children is not in issue but  the
       focus needs to be upon the effect of the decision upon the  children.
       In similar terms the phrase used by the Judge that "like  any  mother
       of  young  children  is  physically  and  mentally  exhausted"   when
       referring to Mr Karim's wife  may  be  too  wide  and  generalised  a
       finding as there is no evidence all mothers of young children are  so
       affected, although it is accepted some are and Mr Karim's wife may be
       one of those.
   23. In this regard the test is not that of the 'best available' in  terms
       of the care provided but whether it is adequate to meet the needs  of
       the family. The evidence in relation to the family  is  limited.  The
       finding the impact will be 'devastating' is not adequately  reasoned.
       Such a term indicates a highly destructive or  damaging  consequences
       but no clear findings are made in relation to the  same  or  how  the
       availability of family and professional careers  can  ameliorate  the
       impact and whether the result is sufficient to satisfy  the  required
       test. A bare acceptance of the claim by the family this  will  be  so
       arguably requires more in a case in which all members wish to prevent
       Mr Karim's deportation.
   24. The nature of the evidence available to support the contention as  to
       the impact of the deportation is also limited. The appellant has  the
       benefit  of  public  funding  and  commissioned  a  country   report,
       Probation report, and DNA tests in reaction to issues raised  in  the
       refusal letter, yet failed to obtain any medical evidence to  support
       the claim of depression or evidence to adequately detail  the  impact
       on the family of Mr Karim's removal.
   25. Whilst it is for a judge to decide on the weight to be given  to  the
       evidence they receive, the evidence  must  provide  support  for  the
       findings made. In this case  the  evidence  is  lacking,  making  the
       findings arguably unsafe.
   26.  The  issue  of  delay  is  noted  by  the  Judge  but  this  is  not
       determinative. Mr Karim is subject to an automatic deportation  order
       in relation to which Parliament has considered and set out the public
       interest. The impact of the delay  is  relevant  to  the  nature  and
       quality of the human rights being relied upon and the  weight  to  be
       given to the same in assessing the required tests.  Delay  in  itself
       does not provide an exception to deportation set out  in  UK  Borders
       Act 2007.
   27. The determination is set aside to be re-made in accordance  with  the
       directions issued to the parties dated 5 February 2016.

Decision

   28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. List for  a  substantive  hearing
       before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson sitting at Manchester on Friday 20
       May 2016 at 10.00am. Time estimate 3 hours.








  Anonymity.


   29. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 April 2016
