
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: DA/00065/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


On: 28th September 2016
    Decision Promulgated
|Heard at: Manchester                          |On: 3rd October 2016         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MDP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnrose, Counsel instructed by Ellen Court
Partnership
                       Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Italy born in 1968.

    Anonymity Order

 2. The Appellant is subject to a deportation order and as such  would  not
    ordinarily merit protection of his identity.  This  case  does  however
    turn in large measure on the involvement of his minor children who  are
    resident in the United Kingdom. Having had regard to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    The Appeal

 3. On the  19th  November  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department took a decision to deport MDP under the terms of Regulations
    19 and 21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (the Regulations).

 4. That decision was appealed and  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge R Lloyd), which in a decision dated 21st June 2016  allowed  the
    appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which was granted on the 4th July 2016 by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly.

 6. The Secretary of State's case before me is, in brief summary  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to both  the  applicable  law
    and the facts. The Secretary of State asks that  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  that  the  decision  in  the
    appeal is remade dismissing it on all grounds.

    The Legal Framework

 7. There is no dispute that MDP is a national of Italy, having  been  born
    to  parents  of  Italian  nationality,  albeit  in  Switzerland.    The
    applicable framework is therefore the Regulations.

 8. The Secretary of State is entitled to remove nationals  of  EEA  member
    states from the United Kingdom pursuant to  Regulation  19(3)(b)  where
    she has decided that removal is justified  on  the  grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health in accordance with  Regulation
    21. The material part of Regulation 21 reads:

         Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
         grounds

           21.-(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is
         necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the Convention
         on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly of the
         United Nations on 20th November 1989(1).

           (5) Where a relevant decision is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
         the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
         justify the decision.

           (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.

 9. As can be  seen,  Regulation  21  creates  a  three-tier  hierarchy  of
    protection for EEA nationals facing removal. At the highest end of  the
    scale are persons  who  have  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of ten years. It has been  held  that  this  ten-year
    period must be calculated by counting backwards from the  date  of  the
    decision to deport: SSHD v MG C-400/12 CJEU (16.01.14).  In those cases
    the Secretary of State  must  demonstrate  that  there  are  imperative
    grounds to remove the person concerned.  Then there are person who have
    acquired a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 by accruing
    a five year period of  continuous  residence  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations. In those cases the Secretary of State must establish  that
    deportation is necessary on  "serious  grounds"  of  public  policy  or
    security.  Finally, in respect of all other persons  the  Secretary  of
    State only has  to  show  that  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned "represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society".   The
    principles of proportionality and engagement apply to all three  tiers.
    Thus in any case involving removal of  an  EEA  national  the  decision
    maker must first assess which tier of protection the  individual  falls
    into. So categorised, the facts can be assessed  against  the  relevant
    legal test.



      The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The determination begins by setting out some of the relevant facts:

         . MDP was born in Switzerland in 1968

         . He moved to the United Kingdom  in 1974 when he  was  six  years
           old

         . His father was working and in 1978 the family were  all  granted
           'indefinite leave to remain'

         .  In  1980  MDG  was  placed  into  care  in  Warrington  due  to
           "behavioural problems". He was then aged 12

         . He received his first criminal conviction in 1981

         . He has been convicted on 33 occasions for a total of 59 criminal
           offences

         . He has had custodial sentences imposed on 8 occasions

         . MDG has five children in the United  Kingdom  for  whom  he  has
           cared (when not in prison). The children have  no  contact  with
           their mother who abandoned them a number of years ago due to her
           own struggles with alcoholism

         . MDG's two eldest children were adults at the date of the appeal;
           the three minors had been taken into care; one of those children
           had given birth to a child herself who was also living  in  care
           with her

11. In respect of the index office which led to the present proceedings the
    determination refers to the remarks made by the  sentencing  judge.  It
    would appear that MDP  suspected  a  neighbour  of  having  stolen  his
    children's Christmas presents and as a result subjected him to a brutal
    and prolonged assault which included a period of false imprisonment  at
    knifepoint.  As a result of this incident MDP was sentenced on the 15th
    May 2014 to a period  of  21  months  in  prison  for  the  offence  of
    'wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm'.   MDP  was  deported
    to Italy on the 5th May  2015.  He  apparently  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom  not long afterwards, because he was found to be at  home  when
    Lancashire Constabulary called round in October. He  was  arrested  and
    deported for a second time.

12. The First-tier Tribunal makes the following findings of fact in respect
    of the family which are unchallenged by the Secretary of State in  this
    appeal. It finds as fact that he has lived here since he  was  a  young
    child It is accepted that MDP's children are all British  and  resident
    in this country. The three youngest are in care and that none  of  them
    have any contact with their mother.  MDP had  supervised  contact  with
    his children when he was in prison. All the children have  expressed  a
    wish to continue seeing their  father;  the  eldest  children  attended
    court and gave evidence to that effect.   The children's social worker,
    a Mr Howarth, informed the Tribunal that there were no  plans  for  the
    children to be returned to live with their father, but social  services
    had no objection to unsupervised contact  with  him.   There  were  "no
    safeguarding concerns" and the local authority  would  facilitate  that
    contact. The children all have  regular  contact  with  their  paternal
    grandparents, with the exception of S  who  is  in  a  secure  unit  in
    Glasgow.

13. The determination then deals with the OASys assessment completed on the
    12th May 2015, a week after MDP had been deported for the  first  time.
    At paragraph 24 the determination  records  the  following  "points  to
    note" from the OASys report:

         . There has been a significant  period  of  time  since  the  last
           conviction for violence

         . The risk of serious harm posed by [MDP] is not imminent in light
           of this

         . The children are not permitted to have any  contact  with  their
           father until they are 18 years unless this is supervised

         . [MDP] is unwilling to change and is not motivated to address his
           offending

         . He demonstrated  no  insight  into  the  unacceptable  level  of
           violence he inflicted on his last victim

         . Social services have been  involved  with  the  children  for  a
           number of years

         . This is [MDP]s seventh conviction for violence

         . He poses a raised risk of serious harm in the community

         . The risk to the public is classified as medium

    (I take the first of these points as a reference to the period  between
    the index offence and the last previous conviction, which was in 2003).

14. Against this factual background the First-tier Tribunal turns to assess
    the matter in light of the Regulations.   It  is  found  that  MDP  had
    accrued ten years continuous residence prior to his first  offence  [at
    27], and another  'crime  free'  period  of  ten  years  prior  to  the
    expulsion  decision  [26],  concluding   "I  find  therefore  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK for ten years  preceding  the  deportation
    decision". It would appear that it  is  this  finding  that  leads  the
    Tribunal to make, at paragraphs 29, 36 38, findings that the  Secretary
    of State has not shown  there  to  be  'imperative  grounds'  for  MDPs
    removal.  At paragraph 36 the Tribunal specifically finds that MDP  has
    over forty years of integration in the UK.

15. The determination also addresses the wider,  less  stringent  tests  in
    Regulation 21.  At paragraphs 29, 30, 33, 38 the Tribunal finds that it
    has not been shown that MDP's conduct represents a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. In making that finding the Tribunal looks at the context of
    the index offence, and whilst endorsing the Secretary of  State's  view
    that this was a vicious  assault,  notes  that  it  arose  in  specific
    circumstances which would not tend to indicate a threat to  the  public
    at large.   Considering the propensity of MDP to reoffend the  Tribunal
    noted that he had completed an anger management course, there had  been
    a long period of non-offending before the index offence was  committed,
    MDP had expressed remorse and the Tribunal accepted that he had "learnt
    his lesson". As for the finding in the OASys report that MDP would be a
    risk to his own children, the Tribunal did not find this to square with
    the evidence presented by social services.   The  local  authority  was
    happy for there to be  unsupervised  contact  with  him.   As  for  the
    question of rehabilitation, his prospects were far greater in  the  UK.
    The appeal was therefore allowed.

    The Secretary of State's Appeal

16. The grounds of appeal are lengthy and somewhat repetitive but before me
    Mr Harrison helpfully distilled them into the following points.  It  is
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in:

              i) Applying the 'imperative' grounds test when it was apparent
                 from the chronology that MDP  could  not  show  ten  years'
                 continuous residence prior to the decision to deport him;

             ii) Failing to take into account MDP's recidivist behaviour and
                 repeated offending when finding him to be 'integrated';

            iii) Failing to engage with the findings of the OASys report (ie
                 failing to take material evidence into account/ failing  to
                 give reasons);

             iv) Misdirecting itself as to the  question  of  rehabilitation
                 failure to follow  the  guidance  in  MC  (Essa  principles
                 recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC).

17. Ms Johnrose conceded that if MG is  correct,  she  cannot  successfully
    defend the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions on  the  question  of  ten
    years' residence  and  imperative  grounds.  Nor  did  she  attempt  to
    persuade me that the Tribunal had been entitled to  find,  without  any
    real analysis of the MDP's convictions and  periods  of  incarceration,
    that he was integrated into UK society. She  submitted  that  any  such
    error was immaterial however,  since  the  determination  makes  clear,
    sustainable findings on the correct test under  the  Regulations.   The
    Tribunal was in law entitled to make the findings that it did.

    My Findings

18. It is conceded on behalf of MDP  that  (if  MG  is  correctly  decided)
    grounds (i) and (ii) above are made out. The  Secretary  of  State  was
    under no obligation to show that there were imperative grounds and  any
    reference to this test in the  determination is an error of law.

19. The focus of the submissions before me was whether this error could  be
    shown to be material. The Secretary of State's principle  argument  was
    that the determination did not adequately engage with the OASys report,
    and in particular the conclusions therein that MDP posed a medium  risk
    of harm to the public, and a high risk to his own children.

20. I deal first with the matter of the children. It is quite apparent from
    the determination that the concerns expressed  by  the  author  of  the
    OASys report were largely historical.   As  the  sad  history  of  this
    family demonstrates these were children who had  been  through  a  lot,
    with an alcoholic mother and a father who,  in  the  younger  years  at
    least, had been in and out of trouble with the police.  The  author  of
    the report had good  reason  to  express  concern  about  that  chaotic
    upbringing, and the neglect that no doubt ensued. However, by the  date
    of the appeal before the Tribunal there were  two  significant  factors
    which displaced that concern. First of  all,  the  children  (at  least
    those who were still minors) were in care, and there were no  plans  to
    return them to live with their father. Secondly, the specialised agency
    charged with their care,  Children's Services,   had  "no  safeguarding
    concerns" about the children's relationship with their father, and  was
    prepared to facilitate contact. In its assessment of the possible  risk
    of harm to the children the Tribunal was entitled to place  significant
    weight on that evidence. It is self evident that the children were  not
    considered to be at risk of harm in those contact visits.

21. In respect of the risk posed to others, I cannot accept  the  Secretary
    of State's contention  that  the  Tribunal  ignored  or  minimised  the
    findings in the OASys report. The determination makes express reference
    to them at paragraphs 9, 24 (see above) and 25. The  question  then  is
    whether the Tribunal was entitled to take a different view.  The  OASys
    report was written in May 2015.  Central to the  findings  therein  was
    the fact that MDP had at that time expressed  no  remorse  and  had  no
    insight into his offending behaviour.  The appeal was heard over a year
    later. At that time the Tribunal noted that MDP had completed an  anger
    management course, and had come to reflect on the  offence,  expressing
    regret for what  had  happened.  The  Tribunal  considered  that  these
    factors, taken with the fact that there had  been  a  ten  year  period
    between 2003 and 2013 when MDP had no problems with the police,  to  be
    an indication that there was not a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    I have given careful consideration to the submission that the  Tribunal
    failed  to  take  material  evidence  into  account.  Looking  at   the
    determination as a whole I am not satisfied that it can  be  made  out.
    The determination squarely engages  with  the  findings  in  the  OASys
    report. The Tribunal plainly had in mind the fact that MDP had numerous
    convictions: see paragraphs 6. Nor can it be said that the Tribunal did
    not have regard to the nature of  the  index  offence;  the  attack  is
    described at paragraph 7 and 32 and is described  by  the  Judge  as  a
    "vicious assault".   The  Tribunal  took  all  of  these  matters  into
    account. I am not satisfied that it ignored  the  evidence,  failed  to
    give reasons or that the decision  was  not  one  open  to  it  on  the
    totality of the evidence.

22. The global submission made by Mr Harrison was in essence a  rationality
    challenge. Even if it could be shown that the Tribunal  had  looked  at
    all of the evidence, the Secretary of State  submitted  that  it  could
    not, properly directed, find the threshold in  Regulation  21  was  not
    met. I am not satisfied that this is so. The Secretary of  State  must,
    inter alia, show there  to  be  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat by virtue of MDP's continuous  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. To establish that threat the Secretary of State had pointed to
    the violent nature of the index  offence,  the  fact  that  there  were
    numerous earlier convictions for drugs and violence, and MDP's  refusal
    to accept responsibility for his actions at the  date  that  the  OASys
    report was compiled. The Tribunal gave  due  weight  to  all  of  those
    factors. It was however entitled to place greater weight  on  the  fact
    that MDP now expressed contrition, had taken steps  to  deal  with  his
    temper, and importantly the fact that apart  from  the  convictions  in
    2013, all of his offending had been committed over  a  decade  earlier.
    The Tribunal was further entitled to place  weight  on  the  very  long
    residence of MDP in the UK, and the fact that his elderly  parents  and
    children all lived here. In contrast he  had  no  such  connections  to
    Italy and in fact only spoke basic Italian.

23. The final point raised in the grounds, in  respect  of  rehabilitation,
    was expressly refused permission by Judge Kelly. I need not  deal  with
    it at all, save to say that I entirely agree with his  assessment  that
    this was simply a quarrel with the Tribunal's conclusions.

    Decision

24. The grounds  are  not  made  out  and  the  appeal  is  dismissed.  The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

25. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         29th September 2016


