
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00529 2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2018                           |On 05 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               Andrzej Chorazy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, hereinafter the Claimant, did  not  attend  before  me.
    This is the second occasion  he  has  not  attended  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Notice of hearing was sent to  his  last  known  address  in
    Dudley in the West Midlands on 13 November  1998.  The  notice  clearly
    referred to the hearing today required him to attend for a  10  o'clock
    start.  I am satisfied that he has been given proper service under  the
    Rules although whether he knows about it must be a matter of some doubt
    because this is a man who, as he is perfectly  entitled  to  do.  moves
    around apparently pursuing work.

 2. The appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  Claimant's   appeal   against
    deportation.  The Claimant is a citizen of Poland who has a substantial
    criminal record dating back many years.  The most recent offences which
    I consider to be relevant for reasons that will be explained below, led
    to his being disqualified from driving and made  the  subject  of  some
    kind of community order at the Black Country Magistrates' Courts  on  9
    March 2017. He had pleaded guilty to the offence  of  driving  a  motor
    vehicle whilst uninsured, without the necessary test certificate,  and,
    much more importantly, with excess alcohol in his blood.  His  previous
    last known criminal offence was in Germany when  he  was  fined  on  29
    January 2016 for an offence of  theft.  Apparently  he  stole  alcohol.
    Before that at a district court in Poland he was made the subject of  a
    community order, later leading to a prison sentence, for driving whilst
    unfit through drink or drugs. He committed  that  offence  in  February
    2015.

 3. There are other offences and they are more serious.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal was very aware of its obligations  and  matters
    to consider  in  the  case  of  an  EEA  deport  and  reminded  itself,
    correctly, that deportation is not permissible under  Regulation  27(5)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 unless:

         "The personal conduct of the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests  of  society  taking  into  account  past
         conduct of the person and the threat does not need to be imminent."

 5. The recent offences of the Claimant are not of the  most  serious  kind
    but I do not for a moment underestimate the importance to  be  attached
    to driving a motor vehicle whilst  intoxicated.   That  is  an  offence
    which can often lead to much more serious offences because  people  can
    be killed.  It is wrong because it shows an irresponsible  attitude  or
    an inability to control the consumption of alcohol and  it  is  conduct
    that very often leads to extreme danger to members of the community.  I
    am satisfied that it is a serious offence and I am satisfied  that  any
    tendency to repeat that  kind  of  behaviour  would  be  sufficient  to
    warrant a finding that the conduct represents  a  genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious a threat affecting one the  fundamental  interests
    of society.  I make the point that offences of this kind, although  not
    as serious as some, can  have  very  wide  ranging  and  indiscriminate
    effect on other people.  In some ways they are more serious than a one-
    off offence committed against an enemy because they show  conduct  that
    creates problems for people completely unconnected with  the  appellant
    and there might be literally thousands of people who could come  across
    his behaviour.

 6. The judge had the advantage, unlike me, of hearing  from  the  Claimant
    and the judge concluded that "the  respondent  has  not  shown  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the appellant is likely  to  continue  to
    reoffend."

 7. The judge noted that the claimant had been a "fairly  regular  offender
    in the past" and then referred to his being convicted in February 2015,
    January 2016 and March 2017.  The judge was clearly  impressed  by  the
    Claimants evidence that he wanted to stay in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that he was "getting older" and wanted to put this  sort  of  behaviour
    behind him.

 8. I have no hesitation in saying that I do not think for a moment that is
    the decision I would have reached on  this  evidence.   The  Claimant's
    past behaviour indicates a person who  gets  into  trouble  because  he
    cannot leave alone alcohol and an assurance  even  if  given  with  the
    utmost sincerity in the witness box is not something to which very much
    weight would ordinarily be attached given this man's history.   It  was
    not, for example, supplemented with evidence  that  he  had  joined  an
    alcoholic support group or had some other reason to show an ability  to
    keep away from alcohol.  I am not saying this man is an alcoholic there
    is no evidence for that I am simply saying this is  not  a  case  where
    there is evidence of the kind I have indicated that would  give  reason
    to reinforce a declaration that he did not wish to reoffend.

 9. The grounds are lengthy and Mr Mills appropriately has pruned them  and
    essentially maintains, as has to  be  his  case,  that  the  judge  was
    perverse in not following  the  correct  self-direction  about  further
    offending.  I have reflected very hard on  this  and  I  have  reminded
    myself that I did not have the advantage of hearing the appellant  give
    evidence.  For all that I cannot see how that judge's conclusion can be
    justified.  There was only a short period when  the  Claimant  was  not
    getting into trouble.  He was in detention for much of it and knew that
    this whole matter was hanging over him for the rest of it.  That  is  a
    matter which concentrates the mind, or  can  be  expected  to,  and  is
    really a very skimpy indicator indeed of future conduct.

10. Given that this man seems in the recent  past  to  have  almost  annual
    appearances for alcohol related offences I am satisfied that the  judge
    was just not entitled to reach that conclusion  and  I  find  that  the
    judge erred in law by making a  decision  that  was  not  open  on  the
    evidence.  I therefore set aside the decision.

11. I find that the evidence points only to the conclusion  that  there  is
    every likelihood of further reoffending.  The longer  the  Claimant  is
    able to keep himself out of trouble the weaker  that  position  becomes
    but presently I do not accept that it can be said with  any  confidence
    that there will not be further offending. Rather I  find  the  evidence
    points to  the  fact  that  there  will  be  further  offending  and  I
    substitute a decision dismissing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision the Secretary of State.

    Notice of Decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision  and  I
    substitute a decision dismissing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 January 2019                |

