
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00925/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 February 2014                             |On 10 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        ahmed mohamed jaylani mahamud
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs V James, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ahmed Mohamed Jaylani Mahamud, born on 1 January 1995 is
    a citizen  of  Somalia.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 24 April 2013  to
    deport him under Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971.   On  8
    April 2010, the appellant had been convicted of  wounding  with  intent
    and sentenced at Nottingham Crown Court to detention for  a  period  of
    three  years.   The  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds but  allowed  it  "on  immigration  and
    human rights grounds".  The Tribunal also upheld the certificate  under
    Section 72(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    finding that the appellant had been convicted of a particularly serious
    crime and consequently a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.
     The appeal was allowed on the basis that the appellant  would  face  a
    real risk of Article 3 ECHR harm if he were returned  to  Somalia.   As
    regards Article 8 ECHR, the appeal was allowed on that ground also, the
    Tribunal giving its reasons at [54-57].

 2. There are cross appeals in this matter.  The appellant appeals  on  the
    basis that the Section 72 Certificate should not have  been  upheld  by
    the Tribunal.  The respondent asserts that the  panel  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal  on  Article  3  and  8  ECHR
    grounds.

 3. Having heard the  oral  submissions  of  the  representatives  of  both
    parties, I directed that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 12 September 2013 be set  aside  and  the  matter  heard
    again by the First-tier Tribunal which shall remake the  decision.   My
    reasons for reaching that finding are as follows.

 4. Allowing the appeal under Article 3 ECHR, the Tribunal wrote this:

         45.  We find a number of factors which put this appellant at  risk.
             He would be returned to Mogadishu  where  he  has  no  family,
             indeed there was no evidence he has any family in Somalia now.
              He is from Lower Shabelle, not Mogadishu  itself  and  travel
             out of Mogadishu is dangerous especially if through  insurgent
             held territory -  Al  Shabab  operates  on  the  outskirts  of
             Mogadishu.  In any event the appellant would have no where  to
             go in his home area - no home, family or support.

         46.  He is from a  minority  clan,  the  Benadiri,  acknowledges  a
             vulnerable group in the background evidence and less under the
             protection of more  powerful  actors  -  the  appellant  would
             return having no-one to protect himself.  He is young and  fit
             but without support, contacts or protection.  It is  difficult
             to see how he could avoid ending up in  a  refugee  camp.   He
             left the country as a young child well before the rise  of  Al
             Shabab and would be perceived and identifiable as  a  returnee
             from the west.  We find that the security situation  is  still
             volatile given insurgent attacks in the Mogadishu  area.   IDP
             camps  in  Mogadishu  continue  to   grow   and   humanitarian
             operations are hampered by insecurity, fighting and restricted
             access.

 5. One difficulty with the Tribunal's determination is that  many  of  the
    circumstances of the appellant which the Tribunal accepted as facts had
    been disputed by the respondent in her refusal letter.  In that letter,
    which is dated 24 April  2013,  the  respondent  took  issue  with  the
    appellant's claim that he would  be  without  support  and  effectively
    destitute upon return to Somalia (see refusal letter, page 18  of  32).
    It is clear from the passage of the determination which I  have  quoted
    from above that the Tribunal  accepted  that  the  appellant  would  be
    without support.  However, it is  also  clear  from  the  determination
    that, although there was written evidence relating to  the  appellant's
    asylum/Article 3 ECHR claim, most of  the  oral  evidence  concentrated
    upon the appellant's Article  8  ECHR  appeal.   I  consider  that  the
    Tribunal has not adequately explained why it accepted  those  parts  of
    the appellant's evidence which were in dispute.  Its  determination  of
    the appellant's credibility is short to say the least  and  appears  at
    [20]:

         We found no material inconsistencies in the evidence and found  the
         witnesses  and   the   evidence   credible   subject   to   certain
         qualifications indicated below.  However, we interpreted aspects of
         the evidence differently from both sides as indicated below.

    Neither Ms James nor Mr Smart were able to explain  to  me  what  those
    "certain qualifications", might be or how the Tribunal had  interpreted
    aspects of the evidence  "differently  from  both  sides  as  indicated
    below".  Paragraph [20] is wholly inadequate  as  an  analysis  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence; indeed, most of the  paragraph
    refers  to  qualifications  to  its  acceptance  of   the   appellant's
    credibility which the Tribunal has completely failed to  explain  later
    in  the  determination.   Proper  findings  of   fact   regarding   the
    circumstances which the appellant will encounter upon return to Somalia
    are necessary because those circumstances will determine whether or not
    he is entitled to Article 3 ECHR protection.  In the  country  guidance
    decision of AMM & Others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;
    FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal observed that:

         The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not, however, pose a real risk
         of Article 3 harm in respect of any person in that city  regardless
         of circumstances.  Humanitarian  crisis  in  southern  and  central
         Somalia has led  to  a  declaration  of  famine  in  IDP  camps  in
         Mogadishu; a returnee from the United Kingdom who is fit  for  work
         or has family connections may be able to avoid him to live in  such
         a camp.  A returnee may nevertheless face a real risk of Article  3
         harm by reason of his or her vulnerability.

    I do not say that the  Tribunal  could  not  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk  of  Article  3  harm  upon  return  to
    Somalia but I do find that the Tribunal has failed to  deal  adequately
    with the matter of the credibility of the appellant's account.

 6. I find that the determination should be  set  aside  in  its  entirety.
    However, I would also make the following observations.  As regards  the
    Section 72 Certificate, the Tribunal  noted  [41]  that  the  appellant
    asserted that he was "now leading a hardworking positive  life  whereby
    he presented no danger to the community".  The Tribunal, however,  also
    found that his offence of wounding was "very serious" and further  that
    the appellant had had "disciplinary issues in prison in  particular  he
    was  involved  in  several  fights  in  different  institutions".   The
    Tribunal noted that the appellant presented a low risk  of  reoffending
    "but this does not mean no risk and if he reoffends, there is a  medium
    risk of harm to the community.  We  therefore  uphold  the  Section  72
    Certificate".  Later in the determination [55] when  dealing  with  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds, the Tribunal observed that

         The appellant engaged well on licence and  has  good  relationships
         with his family, his girlfriend and  his  colleagues  we  find  him
         reliable and helpful.  He is at low risk of reoffending we find  he
         has done well  in  re-establishing  himself  after  coming  out  of
         custody.

    Those were all factors which the Tribunal  considered  weighed  in  the
    appellant's favour in the Article 8  assessment.   Ms  James,  for  the
    appellant, submitted that the Article 8 findings and  those  concerning
    the Section 72 certificate were contradictory.  I agree.  The  Tribunal
    needed to  consider  all  the  evidence  and  then  make  comprehensive
    findings of fact so as  to  establish  a  complete  assessment  of  the
    appellant and his current and past circumstances.  It should then  have
    applied the same factual  matrix  to  the  matter  of  the  Section  72
    Certificate and all the grounds of  the  appeal,  including  Article  8
    ECHR.  The determination gives the impression  that  the  Tribunal  has
    adopted one view of the appellant's behaviour  and  circumstances  when
    dealing with the Section 72 Certificate and another in determining  the
    Article 8 appeal. It  is  an  approach  that  obscures  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning and renders the determination unsatisfactory.

 7. I observe also that, whilst the Tribunal refers  to  the  authority  at
    [53], there was no attempt in the determination to apply the principles
    of Maslov [2008] ECHR 546 to  the  particular  facts  of  this  appeal.
    Those principles are clearly relevant in a case where the appellant has
    been living in the United Kingdom for a number of years and  the  index
    offence was committed whilst he was a minor; the  respondent's  refusal
    letter discusses Maslov at length.    I  find  that  the  Tribunal  has
    failed properly to apply the principles of the relevant jurisprudence.

 8. In the light of the fact that the appellant and  other  witnesses  many
    need to give oral evidence, I consider it appropriate  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to remake the decision.

DECISION

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    12 September 2013 is set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall
    stand.  I direct that the appeal shall be heard again in the First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Lloyd/Mr G F Sandall) and the  decision  remade  in
    that Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 5 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

