
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00550/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 September 2016                 |on 20 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KLAUS TESCH
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Handley, allowing an appeal against deportation under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) regulations 2006, on the following grounds:

         ...

         (b)      ... the judge failed to answer the direct  question  asked
         by regulation 21 (5) (c); namely, does the  appellant  represent  a
         genuine, pleasant and sufficiently serious threat.

         (c)      The judge finds that the appellant has not offended in the
         UK, other than the one instance  where  he  did  offend.  The  SSHD
         submits that the appellant's conduct is not indicative  of  someone
         who has broken the cycle of  criminality  as  opined:  it  was  the
         SSHD's position ... that there were gaps  between  the  appellant's
         offending behaviour and, therefore, it could not be  said  that  he
         was fully rehabilitated nor that recidivism was anything other than
         an extant possibility.

         (d)      The judge fails to engage with the  evidence  that  weighs
         against the appellant such as his continued use of alcohol and  his
         failure  to  address  his  offending  triggers.  While  it  is  the
         appellant's evidence that he drinks only  occasionally,  the  judge
         fails to engage with why such evidence  should  be  accepted  given
         that the offending in this case primarily relates to dishonesty.

         (e)       Furthermore  while  the  evidence  [of  the  witness   Ms
         Kerpiene] has been given some weight  it  is  not  clear  how  much
         weight nor how reliable her evidence is: her alliances are  clearly
         to the appellant and she is not, therefore, an objective source  of
         evidence.

         (f)      It is not clear to  what  extent  Mr  Anderson  knows  the
         appellant, nor whether he was asked about, and  had  any  knowledge
         of, the appellant's alcoholism.   Irrespective,  the  SSHD  submits
         that the evidence does not directly address whether  there  remains
         an extant risk of reoffending

         (g)       The  SSHD  accordingly  asserts  that   the   judge   has
         sidestepped the direct question asked by  regulation  21(5)(c)  and
         has  failed  to  provide  adequate  and  intelligible  reasons  for
         concluding that the risk posed by the  appellant  is  anything  but
         present, genuine and sufficiently serious.

 2. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge had "name  checked"  the  question
    posed by regulation 21(5)(c), but in substance had failed to answer it.
     She said that in essence the challenge was to lack of reasoning.

 3. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal to the UT would not succeed.

 4. The appellant offended in Germany in 1987 to 2000, and  in  the  UK  in
    2011.  The FtT drew from the facts before it that he had "been able  to
    break the cycle of re-offending" (paragraph 26) and  that  he  did  not
    represent "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    public of the UK" (paragraph 27).  Despite  the  best  efforts  of  the
    presenting officer to make something of the unpromising grounds,  I  am
    unable to find that they yield any cogent proposition of  legal  error.
    Rather, they are reassertion and disagreement wrapped up in some  high-
    flying verbiage.

 5. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

 6. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appeal
    brought by Mr Tesch, shall stand.


            [pic]


            19 September 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
