
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00391/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ANDRE ALROY REID
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Haywood, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor
         promulgated on 23 September  2015  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
         Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
         26 February 2014 that section 32 UK Borders Act  2007  applies  and
         making a deportation order against him dated 20 February 2014.

      2.  The  background  immigration  and  offending  history  is  largely
         irrelevant to the  error  of  law  which  the  Respondent  asserts.
         However, since if I find an error of law, it  is  agreed  that  the
         appeal  must  be  remitted   to   the   First-Tier   Tribunal   for
         determination, it may assist if I record the  salient  facts.   The
         Appellant is from Jamaica.  He entered the  UK  in  1995  aged  six
         years.  He remained lawfully and was granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain in 1998.  He was  convicted  in  2013  for  possession  with
         intent to supply Class A drugs and sentenced to two years and  nine
         months imprisonment.

      3. The primary factual focus for the issue before me  relates  to  the
         Appellant's mental health.  As recorded at [5] of the Decision, the
         appeal against the Respondent's decision  was  listed  for  a  case
         management  hearing  on  3  April  2014.   It  was  listed  for   a
         substantive hearing on 15 September 2014.  It was adjourned due  to
         deterioration in the Appellant's mental health.  At  the  adjourned
         hearing on 10 November 2014, the Respondent acknowledged  that  the
         Secretary of State had approved a transfer direction under  section
         47 Mental Health Act 1983 on 13 October 2014.  Mr Haywood  told  me
         that it was submitted at that hearing that  the  appeal  should  be
         allowed on the basis of that  transfer  order  but  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal Judge declined to do so.  Instead, the Judge adjourned the
         hearing again to a further case management hearing  on  9  December
         2014 to enable  the  Respondent  to  consider  the  effect  of  the
         transfer direction.  Mr  Kandola  informed  me  that  according  to
         minutes on the Home Office file the case was sent to  the  Criminal
         Casework team for review on 3 November 2014 on  the  basis  of  the
         transfer order being in place.  The file indicated  that  the  case
         was looked at on 6, 13 and  19  November  2014  and  was  noted  as
         waiting for a decision but he fairly accepted that nothing  further
         was done and  no  further  decision  was  ever  made.   Mr  Haywood
         described that conduct as "unconscionable".  There were  subsequent
         case management hearings on 9 December 2014, 15 January, 2 February
         and 7 April 2015 before the appeal  was  eventually  listed  for  a
         substantive hearing on 10 September 2015.  Meanwhile,  the  section
         47 transfer order had been discharged, I  am  told  on  19  January
         2015.

      4. At the hearing on 10 September 2015, the Judge was invited to  deal
         as a preliminary issue with whether the appeal should be allowed on
         the basis that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with
         the law.  The Judge did so and concluded at [23]  of  the  Decision
         with the following:-
             "I find that the Respondent's failure to consider whether  one
             of the Exceptions in Section 33 applies,  and  thereafter  the
             failure to consider the revocation of  the  Deportation  Order
             under the provisions of Section 32(6) and to assess if  it  is
             conducive to the public good of the  United  Kingdom  for  the
             Appellant to be deported  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of
             Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971,  that  this  does
             render the decision as one which is not in accordance with the
             law"

      5. It is common ground that there was no section 47 transfer order  in
         place either at the date of the Respondent's  decision  or  at  the
         date of the final hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  on
         10 September 2015.  It is also common ground that if there had been
         a  section  47  transfer  order  in  place  at  the  date  of   the
         Respondent's decision, exception 5  in  section  33(6)  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007  would  operate  to  prevent  the  application  of
         section 32(4) and section 32 (5) of that Act.  It  is  also  common
         ground  that  the  effect  of  this  is  that  the  presumption  of
         deportation does not apply.  It is common ground that the impact of
         section 33(7) is that  the  invocation  of  exception  5  does  not
         prevent the making of a deportation but results  in  it  not  being
         assumed either way that deportation is or is not conducive  to  the
         public good. The Respondent could still make a deportation order.

      6. The issue is therefore a narrow one in  relation  to  timing.   The
         Respondent submits that the material error was in the Judge finding
         that the deportation order was not in accordance with the law  when
         the transfer order was not in force at the date of the Respondent's
         decision and it was accepted that  the  section  47  order  was  no
         longer in force by  the  date  of  the  substantive  hearing.   The
         Respondent also submitted that section 33(7) did  not  prevent  the
         making of a deportation order in any event.  Permission  to  appeal
         was granted on all grounds by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin  on  16
         October 2015.

    The Law

    UK Borders Act 2007
         "32      Automatic deportation
             ...
               4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act
                  1971 (c. 77) the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is
                  conducive to the public good.
               5) The Secretary of State must make a  deportation  order  in
                  respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)
             (6) The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation  order
                  made in accordance with subsection (5) unless -
                  (a)  he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,
                  (b)  the application for  revocation  is  made  while  the
                      foreign criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or
                  (c)  section 34(4) applies
             ...
         33 Exceptions
             (1) Section 32(4) and (5) -
                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                      applies (subject to subsection (7) below) ...
             ...
               6) Exception 5 is where any of the following  has  effect  in
                  respect of the foreign criminal-
             ...
                  (c)  a transfer direction under section 47 of that Act
             ...
               7) The application of an exception -
                   a) does not prevent the making of a deportation order;
                   b) results in it being assumed neither that  deportation
                      of the person concerned is conducive  to  the  public
                      good nor that it is not conducive to the public good;
                  but section  32(4)  applies  despite  the  application  of
                  Exception 1 or 4.
         34 Timing
             (1) Section 32(5) requires a deportation order to be made at a
                  time chosen by the Secretary of State
             ...
             (4) The Secretary  of  State  may  withdraw  a  decision  that
                  section 32(5) applies, or revoke a deportation order  made
                  in accordance with section 32(5) for the purpose of -
                  (a)  taking action under the  Immigration  Acts  or  rules
                      made under section 3  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
                      (c77)(immigration rules) and
                  (b)  subsequently taking a new decision that section 32(5)
                      applies and making a deportation order in  accordance
                      with section 32(5)
         ..."

    "Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         84. Grounds of appeal
               1) An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                  decision must be brought on one or more of  the  following
                  grounds -
             ...
                   e) that the decision is not otherwise in accordance with
                      the law
         ..."







    Submissions

      7. Mr Kandola submitted on the facts of this case, it was not open  to
         the Judge to allow the appeal on the basis that the decision is not
         in accordance with the law.  The section 47 transfer order was  not
         in place at either the date of the  Respondent's  decision  or  the
         date of the final appeal hearing.  Sections 32 and 33  are  phrased
         in the present  tense  namely  whether  an  exception  applies  and
         whether the transfer order is in place not whether it has been.  Mr
         Kandola also pointed out that the effect of the  Decision  and  the
         fact that the exception no longer applied meant that the Respondent
         could simply make a further deportation order on precisely the same
         basis.

      8. Mr Haywood submitted that the Respondent should not be permitted to
         avoid the effect of the statute by sitting on her  hands.   If  she
         had reviewed the case when directed to do so,  the  transfer  order
         would have been in place  and  the  exception  would  have  applied
         without any doubt.  He submitted that the word "applies" in section
         33(1) is open-ended.  The exception did apply by the  time  of  the
         first hearing because at that time the section  47  transfer  order
         was in place.  The automatic presumption in favour  of  deportation
         as contained  in  section  32  then  ceased  to  have  effect.   He
         submitted also that once the threshold was triggered there  was  no
         discretion for the Respondent to do other than revoke  or  withdraw
         the deportation order on the basis that the exception applied.   He
         did not accept that revocation  required  any  application  by  the
         Appellant; the Respondent could  revoke  or  withdraw  of  her  own
         motion.  He submitted that the exceptions are drafted  flexibly  so
         as to accommodate maters that may have existed at the date  of  the
         original deportation decision (e.g. the criminal's age at  date  of
         the conviction) or apply prospectively (e.g. whether removal  would
         breach the ECHR) or matters which later obtain (e.g. that a  person
         becomes liable for extradition).  He submitted that the wording  is
         not  tied  to  the  date  when  the  deportation  order   is   made
         deliberately to permit revocation or withdrawal of the  deportation
         order precisely because, he submits, otherwise once a person  falls
         within the definition of foreign criminal, the Secretary  of  State
         is mandated to deport.  He submits that if an exception  thereafter
         arises, the Secretary of State is not so mandated  and  should  not
         deport (or at least not under the automatic deportation regime).

    Error of Law Decision and reasons

      9. As noted above, the issue is one of timing.   On  the  Respondent's
         case, it is only if the  exception  applies  at  the  date  of  the
         original decision to deport that she is precluded from reliance  on
         section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Mr Kandola was not inclined
         to accept that if the Appellant had been subject to  a  section  47
         transfer order at the date of hearing the  Judge  would  have  been
         entitled to do as he did.  That is not however  something  which  I
         need to decide if I accept the proposition that the  relevant  date
         is the date of the Respondent's decision.

     10. Consideration of this issue requires  attention  not  only  to  the
         provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 but also to the provisions of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the Tribunal's
         jurisdiction to allow an appeal on the basis that the decision  "is
         not otherwise in accordance with the law".  Both  parties  accepted
         that "the law" in this context encompasses the relevant  provisions
         of the 2007 Act.  The  issue  is  again  one  of  timing.   Is  the
         Tribunal considering the lawfulness of the decision as at the  date
         it was made or as at the date of the hearing?  Of course, in  other
         contexts such as appeals on human rights grounds, the  Tribunal  is
         considering the issue at the  date  of  the  hearing  but  that  is
         because it is for the Tribunal  to  decide  the  issue  of  whether
         removal would breach a person's human rights at that point in time.
          The position is not necessarily the  same  when  the  Tribunal  is
         assessing the lawfulness of the decision which is under appeal.

     11. The jurisdiction to allow an appeal on the basis that the  decision
         is not in accordance with the law was considered by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in the case of Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
         D S Abdi [1995] EWCA  Civ  27,  a  decision  to  which  Mr  Kandola
         referred.  In that case, the Court  compared  the  jurisdiction  to
         that of judicial review.  For that reason,  the  Court  rejected  a
         submission that the Secretary of State's decision could be held  to
         be not in accordance with the law based on  a  policy  which  post-
         dated the decision in question.   True  it  is  that  the  relevant
         statutory provision at that time was couched in the past  tense  in
         terms of whether the decision under appeal was  not  in  accordance
         with the law.  However, section 84 makes clear that what  is  under
         consideration is the immigration decision made by the Secretary  of
         State and the fact that the grounds are now couched in the  present
         tense does not seem to me to affect the position  as  to  the  date
         when the legality of the decision falls  to  be  assessed  on  this
         ground.  Looking at the issue through the prism of judicial  review
         leads to the inescapable conclusion that the relevant point in time
         is the date of the decision under appeal.  Even if I  am  wrong  in
         that, however, and the relevant point in time is the  date  of  the
         hearing, that cannot assist the Appellant  on  the  facts  of  this
         case.  He did not fall within one of the exceptions at that time.

     12. The position is not altered by  the  provisions  of  the  2007  Act
         itself.  The 2007 Act is also couched in the present tense.  As  is
         clear from the wording of the statute, sections 32(4) and 32(5)  do
         not apply if an exception "applies".  Exception 5 applies when  the
         transfer order "has effect".  The  issue  is  whether  there  is  a
         transfer order in force currently not whether there has been one in
         the past. If Mr Haywood were right,  then  at  any  point  when  an
         exception came  into  play,  the  deportation  order  would  become
         unlawful whether or not the Secretary of State  was  aware  of  the
         existence of the exception and would remain unlawful thereafter for
         an undefined period thereby preventing the Secretary of State  from
         relying on the presumptions in section 32.  If that  had  been  the
         intention of the statute, it would have  been  an  easy  matter  to
         provide for the exception to apply if at any time there had been  a
         transfer order in place.

     13. That is though not the end of the matter.  Mr Haywood submits that,
         once the exception applied, it was incumbent on the  Respondent  to
         consider the revocation or withdrawal  of  the  deportation  order.
         That was all the more so here because of her agreement to  do  that
         following the November 2014 case management  hearing.   She  should
         not be entitled to benefit from her failure.   I  accept  that  the
         Respondent's conduct in this case and her  failure  to  review  the
         case at the relevant time is worthy of criticism but that does  not
         mean that the statutory scheme should be  rewritten  to  mark  that
         disapproval.  True it is that, having been aware  of  the  transfer
         order and having been directed to review the case, if she had  done
         so and the transfer order had been in place at  the  relevant  time
         she would not have been able to rely on the presumptions in section
         32.  However, as Mr Kandola rightly pointed  out,  that  would  not
         have prevented the re-making of the deportation order. The position
         now is even more stark because, as Mr Kandola points  out,  if  the
         Decision  stands,  it  will  be  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         reconsider the Appellant's case which will still  fall  within  the
         provisions of the 2007 Act because the transfer order is no  longer
         in place.  The presumptions in section 32 will continue  to  apply.
         In that regard, the Judge has also erred in [24]  of  the  Decision
         where he finds that, following the Decision, the Secretary of State
         is required to consider the case again under  the  Immigration  Act
         1971.  The Judge appears to be under the misapprehension that if an
         exception has applied in the past, the Secretary of State can at no
         time in the future make a deportation order under the 2007 Act.  On
         a plain reading of the statute and as noted  at  [12]  above,  that
         cannot be the position.

     14. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does
         involve the making of a material error of law.  Accordingly, I  set
         aside the Decision. Both parties agreed that since the Decision was
         confined to a determination of the preliminary issue  and  had  not
         considered the substantive merits of the appeal, the appeal  should
         be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal if I were to find  an  error
         of law as I have done.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing. No findings are preserved.

Signed      [pic]      Date 15 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
