

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00660/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|14 November 2013                              |25 November 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                                Lord Matthews
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

                                   Between

                            GOITOM KIFLE MEHAIRE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Kam Mak, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born in Ethiopia and came to the  United  Kingdom  in
    1991.  He is of Eritrean ethnicity but has never been to that  country.
    At the time he came to the United Kingdom Eritrea was part of  Ethiopia
    and did not exist as a separate country.  He came to the United Kingdom
    in  1991  and  unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum.   Because  he  was   an
    unaccompanied minor he was granted successive  periods  of  exceptional
    leave to remain and in 2000 was granted indefinite leave to remain.

2.   He is married to Ms Juliana Lewis who has two children from a  previous
    relationship.  They are grown up and live separate lives from  her  and
    the appellant.  He and Mrs Lewis however have  four  children  who  all
    live with them.  As at 29 August 2013 they were aged 15,  3,  2  and  8
    months.

3.   On 15 October 2012 at  Thames  Magistrates'  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of five counts of theft and one for being  in  possession  of
    Class A drugs.  He was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment.  On  30
    October 2010 at Stratford Magistrates' Court he was convicted of  theft
    and sentenced  to  two  months'  imprisonment.   On  8  April  2010  at
    Horseferry Magistrates' Court he was convicted of four counts of  theft
    and was sentenced to one month and two weeks' imprisonment.  In view of
    these convictions the respondent deemed  it  to  be  conducive  to  the
    public good to make a deportation order against him and  made  such  an
    order by virtue of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

4.   The Immigration Rules (paragraphs 396 to 400)  applied.   The  relevant
    parts of those, for present purposes, are as follows:

        "396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
             be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
             public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must
             make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the
             UK Borders Act 2007.


        397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
             pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
             under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.
             Where deportation would not be contrary to these obligations,
             it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
             interest in deportation is outweighed.


        398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
             Convention, and ...


             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State,
             their offending has caused serious harm or they are a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
             law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the
             public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other
             factors.


        399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
             if -


             (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
               relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
               in the UK, and
               (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or
               (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                    least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                    immigration decision; and in either case
                 a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                    the UK; and
                 b) there is no other family member who is able to care for
                    the child in the UK; or


             (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
               a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled
               in the UK, or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
               protection, and
               (i)    the person has lived in the UK with valid leave
                    continuously for at least the 15 years immediately
                    preceding the date of the immigration decision
                    (discounting any period of imprisonment); and
               (ii)   there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
                    with that partner continuing outside the UK.


        399A This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
             if -
             (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least
               20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
               decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has
               no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the
               country to which he would have to go if required to leave
               the UK ...;


        399B Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be
             granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall
             be given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State
             deems appropriate.
        399C Where limited leave has been granted under paragraph 399B, the
             person may qualify for further limited leave, subject to such
             conditions as the Secretary of State deems appropriate.  The
             requirements for further leave are that the applicant continues
             to meet the criteria set out in paragraph 399 or 399A".

5.   The appellant appealed against the making of the deportation order  and
    relied on Article 8 and the Immigration Rules.  The appeal was heard on
    20 August 2013  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  refused  in  a
    determination promulgated on 29 August 2013.

6.   It is not necessary to go into great detail about the findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Suffice it to  say  at  this  juncture  that  the
    Secretary of State accepted that the appellant had a British  wife  and
    children and that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    with them being continued abroad.  It was not accepted that he had been
    living in the UK with valid leave continuously  for  at  least  the  15
    years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration  decision
    (discounting any periods of imprisonment) on  the  basis  that  he  was
    granted ILR in February 2000 but  prior  to  that  had  no  leave  from
    November 1996 to February 2000.

7.   Inter alia the First-tier Tribunal agreed with that  position,  as  set
    out at paragraph 25  of  their  determination.   They  found  that  the
    appellant did not fulfil the requirements of paragraph  399(b)  because
    he could not show valid leave continuously for a period  of  15  years,
    having had no leave from November 1996 to  February  2000.   They  also
    found that after taking into account the time the appellant  had  spent
    in custody he had not lived here continuously for a period of 20  years
    immediately prior to the decision to deport him.

8.   At the outset of  the  appeal  before  us  Mr  Tufan  the  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  very  fairly   indicated   that   he   had   found
    documentation which showed that in fact the  appellant  had  had  valid
    leave continuously for at least the 15 years immediately preceding  the
    date of the immigration decision.  As it was conceded that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  his  partner  continuing
    outside the  UK  the  appellant  fulfilled  the  criteria  set  out  in
    paragraph 399(b).

9.   In the circumstances without further ado we allowed the appeal  and  it
    is not necessary for us to look at the matter in any more detail.

10.  We observed however that the First-tier Tribunal had proceeded  upon  a
    misconception.   In  finding  that  the   appellant   had   not   lived
    continuously in the UK for at least 20 years immediately preceding  the
    date  of  the  immigration  decision  (discounting   any   periods   of
    imprisonment) it appeared to us that there had been  a  miscalculation.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 January 1991  and  the
    date of the deportation order was 3 January 2013.  By that time he  had
    been in the United Kingdom for just short of 22 years and he  had  only
    been imprisoned for a total of 11  months  and  2  weeks.   The  issue,
    accordingly, would have been whether he had ties with Eritrea, to which
    he would have to go if required to leave the UK.  He had indicated that
    he was an ethnic Eritrean but  he  had  never  been  to  that  country.
    Having regard to the case of Ogundimu it appeared  to  us,  and  we  so
    indicated, that we would require a great deal  of  persuasion  that  it
    could properly be said that he had any ties to Eritrea.  However  since
    we did not hear any argument on the matter and since it is  unnecessary
    in any event we make no decision on the point.

Decision

11.  For the reasons  set  out  in  relation  to  paragraph  399(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules the appeal is allowed.








                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                      Date: 20 November 2013
