


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00471/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 2 January 2014                           |On : 14 January 2014         |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                riadh mabrouk
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Mabrouk's  appeal
against a decision to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  order  made  against
him. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
State as the respondent and Mr Mabrouk as the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born on 8 February  1977.  He  claims
to have left Algeria in August 2003 and travelled to the United Kingdom  via
Italy, France and Switzerland where he made an  unsuccessful  asylum  claim.
He was arrested upon entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  7  June  2006  for
entering with a false French passport and applied for  asylum.  He  withdrew
his asylum claim on 9 June 2006. Attempts to return him to Switzerland  were
unsuccessful. On 23 June 2006 he was convicted  of  possession  of  a  false
identity  document  with  intent  and  was   sentenced   to   eight   months
imprisonment.

On 30 August 2006 the appellant was served with  a  notice  of  decision  to
deport. He lodged an appeal against that decision but subsequently  withdrew
the appeal and stated  that  he  wished  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  A
deportation order was signed against him on 13 April 2007. In  the  meantime
an Emergency Travel Document (ETD) application was forwarded to the  Returns
Group Document Unit (RGDU). On 30 July 2007 RGDU received a letter from  the
Algerian Embassy advising that the ETD application was rejected for lack  of
sufficient information. The appellant then undertook an interview  with  the
Algerian Embassy on 25 September  2007  and  the  following  day  RGDU  were
informed that the Embassy  was  happy  with  the  details  provided.  On  25
February 2008 the appellant applied to return to Algeria  voluntarily  under
the enhanced Facilitated Return  Scheme  (FRS)  and  he  was  released  from
detention on 28 February  2008  on  reporting  restrictions.  He  failed  to
report after 27 March 2008 and was subsequently listed as an  absconder  and
withdrawn from the FRS.

 The appellant next came to the attention of the UKBA when he  was  arrested
on 25 July 2010 for immigration matters. He was detained and  on  25  August
2010 he re-applied for an assisted return under the FRS, stating again  that
he wished to return to Algeria. On 20 September 2010 an ETD application  was
re-completed. On 31 March 2011 the appellant  was  interviewed  by  Algerian
officials but he was unable to provide any  new  information.  On  14  April
2011 he had a telephone interview with the British Embassy in Algiers. On  1
June 2011 he was re-interviewed  by  an  immigration  officer  in  order  to
provide further evidence for his bio-data. That information was compared  to
the old bio-data and  was  found  to  be  conflicting  and  inaccurate  with
respect to his place of birth. As a result the appellant was withdrawn  from
the FRS.

Following  several  unsuccessful  bail  applications   the   appellant   was
eventually released on bail on 19 September 2011.  However  -  and  what  is
particularly pertinent to this appeal - no progress has since been  made  by
the UKBA in obtaining an ETD from the Algerian Embassy.

On 30 July 2012 an application was  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  to
revoke the deportation order and to grant him a period of  leave  to  remain
in the United Kingdom on the grounds that it was unlikely that he  would  be
issued with an ETD by the Algerian  Embassy  and  removed  from  the  United
Kingdom and that he had established a private  life  here.  The  appellant's
representatives  submitted  two  psychiatric  reports  in  support  of   the
application to revoke the deportation order.

The UKBA then re-submitted the appellant's ETD application to  the  Algerian
High Commission on 14 January 2013. On 18 February 2013 a decision was  made
to refuse to revoke the deportation order.

The respondent, in making that decision,  concluded  that  any  interference
with the appellant's private life as a result of his deportation  would  not
be disproportionate or in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.  With  regard  to
the lack of progress with his  ETD  application  the  respondent  considered
that the appellant had contributed to the delay as a  result  of  absconding
for over two years. His case was not considered to fall within the  "legacy"
scheme. The respondent considered that  paragraph  398  of  the  immigration
rules did not apply to the appellant and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
circumstances outweighing the public interest in his deportation.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 10  October  2013,  before  a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Elliman and Mrs A Cross De Chavannes. The appellant  did  not
give oral evidence as he had been deemed unfit to do so by Professor  Katona
who had prepared two psychiatric reports for him. The panel  concluded  that
the situation of "limbo" in which the appellant found himself  as  a  result
of the respondent's inability to obtain an ETD  from  the  Algerian  Embassy
and to remove him to Algeria undermined his  physical  and  moral  integrity
and resulted in a breach of his right to a private life under Article  8  of
the ECHR. They accordingly allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,
considering that it was open to the respondent to  grant  him  a  period  of
discretionary  leave  and  accordingly   "mitigate   the   extent   of   the
interference with the appellant's private  life  whilst  at  the  same  time
maintaining control over his immigration status".

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the panel had failed  to  have  regard  to  the
immigration rules in making its Article  8  assessment  and  had  failed  to
provide adequate reasons why it was proportionate to revoke the  deportation
order when the appellant's circumstances were of his own making.

Permission to appeal was granted on 6 November 2013,  with  respect  to  the
second ground.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before me on 2 January 2014. The appellant was not  present
at the hearing. I heard submissions on the error of law.

Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  panel  had  made  no  findings  as  to  the
appellant's exercise of deception  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
actions in absconding from the authorities and thus failing to make  himself
available for removal to Algeria. Although stating a  desire  to  return  to
Algeria he had not assisted in his removal since he had  failed  to  provide
sufficient information about his family and  origins.  With  regard  to  the
first ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the  immigration  rules,  Mr  Melvin
acknowledged that the reasoning at paragraph 97 of the refusal decision  was
unclear and appeared to accept that paragraph  398  of  the  rules  did  not
apply in the circumstances. However he maintained that  the  panel  was  not
entitled to  conclude  that  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  by  the
appellant's circumstances, given that he had been provided  with  a  certain
level of support.  The  appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  exceptional
circumstances justifying the grant of discretionary leave.

Ms Short relied on the  Rule  24  response  prepared  by  Mr  Blum  who  had
represented the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  She  submitted
that it was open to the panel to find that  the  delay  in  progress  for  a
mentally ill person was in breach of Article 8. The appellant did  not  pose
a risk  to  the  public.  The  matter  of  him  having  provided  vague  and
inconsistent information was irrelevant, given the  respondent's  concession
before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  his  nationality  and  identity  was
accepted. The fact that he had absconded made no material difference to  the
progress of the ETD as the application had been outstanding since  2007  and
throughout the period during which  he  had  absconded  the  respondent  was
still awaiting a response from the Algerian  Embassy.  With  regard  to  the
first ground, it was accepted that the immigration rules could  not  be  met
and in any event they had no application to the appellant's case  given  the
basis upon which it had been presented.

Error of Law

I do not consider there to be merit in the first  ground  of  appeal,  given
the particular  and  somewhat  unusual  basis  upon  which  the  appellant's
application was pursued. It was not the case that the appellant  was  simply
challenging his deportation on the basis of an established private  life  in
the United Kingdom, but on the basis that the situation of  limbo  in  which
he found himself as a result of the respondent's  inability  to  remove  him
was an affront to his physical and moral integrity. That was plainly  not  a
situation envisaged by the rules and  indeed  that  was  recognised  by  the
Tribunal at paragraph 18. Furthermore, as Mr  Melvin  himself  acknowledged,
the reasons for refusal  letter  of  18  February  2013,  at  paragraph  97,
appeared to accept that paragraph 398 did not apply  in  the  circumstances,
although the reasoning was not entirely clear.

However, I consider that the second ground of appeal  does  have  merit  and
discloses errors of law in the Tribunal's determination such that  it  must,
in my view, be set aside. At paragraphs 2 and 3  of  its  determination  the
Tribunal, in recounting the history of the attempts made by  the  respondent
to obtain an ETD, refers to the appellant's unlawful  entry  to  the  United
Kingdom, his failure to report and identification as an  absconder  and  the
conflicting information he was considered to have given as to  his  personal
details and history. However at no point in its findings  did  the  Tribunal
appear to give any consideration to the  weight  to  be  attached  to  these
plainly material matters and indeed appeared to ignore  them  completely.  I
refer in particular to the comments made by the Tribunal at paragraph 17:

    "...this is a situation that he has not contrived  himself  as  he  has
    been trying since 2007 to co-operate with the returns procedure and  so
    to effect his return to Algeria. For six years the appellant  has  been
    living in circumstances that are not of his own choosing...."

That conclusion appears to have been reached by the Tribunal  in  isolation,
without any assessment of the facts, the evidence and the  allegations  made
by the respondent in the refusal letter. It is submitted on  behalf  of  the
appellant  that  such  matters  were  immaterial,  given  the   respondent's
acceptance of his identity and nationality and given that efforts  continued
to be made, throughout the period during which he had absconded,  to  obtain
the ETD from the Algerian Embassy. However, I consider this to be  an  over-
simplistic view which fails to take full account of the evidence.

Whilst it may have been the  case,  as  recorded  at  paragraph  13  of  the
determination, that the presenting officer confirmed  at  the  hearing  that
the appellant's identity and nationality was accepted, that does not  in  my
view  amount  to  anything  more  than  an  acceptance  that  his  name  and
nationality were  as  claimed.  I  cannot  agree  with  the  suggestion,  at
paragraph 6 of the rule 24 response, that that amounts to  a  concession  by
the respondent that he had given an accurate  and  genuine  account  of  his
family history and background for the purposes of the ETD application.  That
is particularly so given that the presenting officer,  in  her  submissions,
continued to rely on the reasons for refusal  which  plainly  disputed  that
that was the case. Furthermore, whilst it is the case,  as  paragraph  9  of
the rule 24 response states, that the respondent did  not  particularise  in
the reasons for refusal letter the vague and  conflicting  evidence  of  the
appellant's place of birth, the appellant's own evidence, in  his  statement
of  22  July  2011,  referred  to  various  inconsistencies  that  had  been
identified and which he proceeded to address. At paragraph 6  he  sought  to
explain differences in the recording of his place of birth; at  paragraph  7
he sought to explain why he had failed to mention the name  of  his  primary
school; at paragraphs 14 to 16 he addressed inconsistencies in his  evidence
about his passport, visa and identity card; and at paragraph 17 he  referred
to false details given in his screening interview of 8  November  2006.  The
Tribunal did not go on to make any findings in that regard.

There were, furthermore,  various  other  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
provided by the  appellant  himself  with  respect  to  the  information  he
provided about his background and origins  which,  whilst  not  specifically
drawn to the  attention  of  the  Tribunal,  nevertheless  arose  from  that
evidence. Indeed the UKBA case notes recorded, at  page  85  of  the  second
appeal bundle, that the information recorded in his screening interview  was
different  to  that  provided  to  complete  his  travel  document  and  the
appellant was warned that incorrect  information  would  result  in  a  huge
delay to his removal to Algeria. Further, it is relevant  to  note  that  at
page 91 of the  bundle  the  appellant  informed  the  immigration  official
interviewing him for the purposes of completing a new bio-data form that  he
had been at an orphanage in "Galmo" until the age of  three  years  when  he
was adopted. That plainly contradicted  the  information  previously  given,
and indeed that given to his solicitors and included in their letter to  the
Algerian Embassy at page 64 of the appeal bundle, that he had  resided  from
birth with his natural parents in their family home in Jijel. It also  clear
impacted on  the  enquiries  made  through  "One  World  Research",  whereby
efforts were made to  locate  his  birth  certificate  in  the  municipality
assembly offices in the vicinity of his family home.

In addition, the case notes at page 87 record  the  appellant's  explanation
for a lack of documentation being that his parents  had  died  when  he  was
young  following  which  he  was  looked  after  by   family.   Again   that
contradicted his evidence in his statement that he had lived  at  home  with
his parents until leaving for Algiers when he reached the age  for  military
service (paragraph 8 of his first statement), that after 2009 he  had  asked
someone to  search  for  his  parents  in  Algeria  (paragraph  21  of  that
statement) and in Wilson Solicitor's letter of 9  September  2011  that  his
parents' whereabouts were unknown (pages 63 and 64). A  further  explanation
offered by the appellant for his lack of documentation, as recorded  in  the
UKBA case notes at page 93, was that he had been away from Algeria for  over
15 years, yet in his screening interview he claimed to have left Algeria  in
2003. In addition, the enquiries made by Wilson Solicitors to  the  Algerian
Embassy also included details of his primary school,  as  mentioned  in  his
statement of 22 July 2011, yet  the  appellant  told  Professor  Katona,  as
recorded at paragraph 2.3 of his report of 23 January 2013, that he did  not
attend school. Furthermore,  Wilson  Solicitors'  enquiry  to  the  Algerian
Embassy confirmed that the appellant held no  documentary  evidence  of  his
identity, yet it appears from the UKBA case notes that he  had  admitted  in
March 2007 to having held an Algerian DVLC (which I assume to be  a  driving
licence). There is no record of him having produced  that  document  despite
being asked to do so. Clearly such matters  compromise  the  enquiries  made
and undermine the weight to be attached to the outcome, or lack thereof,  of
those enquiries.

As  I  have  said,  these  were  not  matters  which  appear  to  have  been
specifically  referred  to  by   the   respondent   before   the   Tribunal.
Nevertheless they arose from the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
himself and the Tribunal had been put on  notice  that  the  respondent  was
relying upon inconsistencies in the information  he  had  provided.  In  any
event it was, at the very least, incumbent  upon  the  Tribunal  to  enquire
further about those inconsistencies referred  to  at  paragraph  50  of  the
refusal letter and to  make  findings  on  the  explanations  given  by  the
appellant  for  the  inconsistencies  he  had  himself  identified  in   his
statement. This it failed to do and in so doing it plainly erred  by  making
the bare assertion that it did at paragraph 17  of  its  determination  that
the appellant had been trying  to  co-operate  with  the  returns  procedure
since 2007.

With regard to the period  during  which  the  appellant  absconded,  it  is
submitted in the rule 24 response that that was irrelevant to  the  lack  of
progress made in regard to the ETD since the UKBA continued to  contact  the
Algerian  Embassy  throughout  that  period.  However  the  fact  that   the
appellant failed to report to the United Kingdom authorities  for  over  two
years  is  plainly  relevant  to  the  appellant's  intentions  as   regards
assisting the removals process and  demonstrates  a  failure  to  co-operate
with the authorities in that regard, whether or not enquiries  continued  to
be made in his absence. In any event the case notes at pages  96  to  98  of
the appeal bundle indicate that  contact  by  the  UKBA  with  the  Algerian
Embassy ceased once the appellant was listed as an absconder  and  that  the
ETD application had to be re-submitted in 2010 once the  appellant  was  re-
detained. The rule 24 response, at paragraph 10, relies upon  references  in
those case notes to contact with the Embassy on 13 March 2008  and  2  April
2008, but that clearly pre-dated absconder action being taken.  Accordingly,
the appellant's absence cannot be said to have been irrelevant  to  the  ETD
application process, particularly in light of the progress that appeared  to
have been made prior to him absconding. Of particular note is the fact  that
the appellant made no attempt, in either of his statements, to  explain  his
behaviour  or  to  provide  reasons  for  failing  to  co-operate  with  the
authorities.  Neither  was  that  matter  addressed  in  Professor  Katona's
reports. The finding of the Tribunal, that he had been trying since 2007  to
co-operate  with  the  returns  procedure  cannot,  in  the  light  of  such
behaviour, be considered to be a sustainable one.

In all of these circumstances I consider that the Tribunal materially  erred
in law by failing, in concluding that the appellant's status of   being  "in
limbo", and the resulting hardships emanating from that, were in  breach  of
his human rights, to take account of material matters  which,  at  the  very
least, indicated that he had contributed to that status. There  was  nothing
in Professor Katona's reports that entitled the Tribunal  to  reach  such  a
conclusion and certainly that was not the basis  upon  which  it  approached
his reports. In such circumstances the Tribunal's decision cannot stand  and
has to be set aside and re-made.

Re-making the Decision

Mr Melvin submitted that,  in  the  event  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision was set aside for error of law, it would  be  helpful  for  further
submissions to be made on the application of the new  rules,  but  otherwise
the decision could be re-made on the evidence available. Ms Short,  however,
was content for the decision to be re-made  on  the  information  available.
She confirmed that there was no new evidence  requiring  a  further  hearing
and nothing further to submit. Accordingly, and given that the error of  law
arises out of the second ground of appeal, I have proceeded to  re-make  the
decision on the evidence already available.

For the reasons I have already given I do not accept  that  the  appellant's
situation has been outside his control but consider  that  he  significantly
contributed to it by providing inconsistent information  about  his  origins
and family and by failing to co-operate with the authorities.  Whilst  there
is evidence, as referred to  in  the  written  representations  from  Wilson
Solicitors LLP dated 30 July 2012, at section M of the  respondent's  appeal
bundle, of problems in obtaining ETDs  from  the  Algerian  authorities,  it
cannot be said that it is their actions alone that have contributed  to  the
appellant's current situation. Neither can it be said that  there  has  been
several years of lack of progress, since 2007, given that efforts to  pursue
the ETD appeared to have  lapsed  when  the  appellant  absconded  and  were
pursued again after 2010. Clearly, as the UKBA  case-notes  show,  the  UKBA
have where possible made continuous and regular efforts to obtain an ETD  in
order to remove  him,  including  arranging  interviews  with  the  Algerian
Consulate  and  ongoing  requests  to  the  appellant  himself  for  further
information which he claimed to be unable to give.

Whilst it is indeed the case that, other than the  period  during  which  he
absconded, the appellant appears on the face of it to  have  been  compliant
in the documentation process by taking  part  in  interviews,  the  evidence
before me strongly suggests that the information he was offering was  either
incorrect or deliberately inadequate. Likewise, whilst there is evidence  of
commendable efforts being made by his  solicitors  to  assist  the  removals
process, either directly with the Algerian Embassy (pages 61 to  64  of  the
second appeal bundle), or through other agencies such as One World  Research
(pages 51 to 56) and the British Red Cross (pages 65 and 66), it seems  that
those  efforts  were  based  on  inaccurate  information  provided  by   the
appellant and were accordingly not surprisingly unsuccessful.

I have given careful consideration to the medical  evidence,  including  the
two psychiatric reports from Professor Katona. I note from  the  letters  at
pages 38 to 46 of the second appeal bundle  that  the  appellant  failed  to
attend appointments with the NHS mental health services  between  July  2012
and April 2013, although  the  documentary  evidence  in  the  first  appeal
bundle refers to appointments previously attended whilst  he  was  detained.
With regard to the reports from Professor Katona,  it  appears  from  Wilson
Solicitors' letter of 21 November  2012  at  page  S1  of  the  respondent's
appeal bundle that the purpose  of  the  reports  (or  at  least  the  first
report)  was  to  raise  compassionate  circumstances  in  relation  to  the
deportation proceedings. It is not claimed that his mental health  would  be
grounds for permitting him to remain in the United Kingdom, but the  reports
are relied upon to support his case as to  the  circumstances  in  which  he
finds himself in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  the  respondent's
inability to remove him. However I consider  there  to  be  nothing  in  the
reports to detract from  the  findings  I  have  made  above.  Although  the
reports refer to depression, cognitive impairment and PTSD,  such  diagnoses
do not provide an adequate explanation  for  the  appellant's  behaviour  in
undermining the removals process. In any  event,  given  Professor  Katona's
express statement at paragraph 1.3 of both  reports,  that  the  information
was  based  partly  upon  the  history  provided  by  the   appellant,   the
observations I have made about  the  appellant's  behaviour  and  intentions
clearly undermine the weight to  be  attached  to  the  conclusions  in  the
reports.

In the circumstances, whilst the appellant may have  established  some  sort
of private life in the United Kingdom given the number  of  years  spent  in
this country, any interference with that private life,  when  considered  in
the light of my findings above and given the  appellant's  stated  (although
perhaps not so genuine) desire to be removed to Algeria, cannot be  said  to
be disproportionate to the public interest in his  deportation.  Whilst,  as
already  stated,  his  circumstances  do  not  give  rise   to   the   usual
considerations under the immigration rules, there is in  any  event  nothing
exceptional, in terms of the rules in those circumstances. The  respondent's
decision was, in my view, in accordance with the terms of paragraph  390  of
the rules. The appellant came to the United Kingdom illegally, he sought  to
enter  using  deception,  he  continued  to  provide  the   United   Kingdom
authorities with inconsistent information  and  he  has  failed  to  provide
genuine assistance to the removals process. His claim to have  no  remaining
ties  to  Algeria  is  not  a  believable  one,  given   the   contradictory
information he has provided about his family and origins. He  has  expressly
stated that he does not fear return to Algeria,  but  on  the  contrary  has
repeatedly expressed a desire to return  there.  There  is  no  evidence  to
suggest that he would be unable to receive  treatment  in  Algeria  for  any
psychiatric problems that he has. His situation is largely one  of  his  own
making and I do  not  accept  that  his  physical  and  moral  integrity  is
undermined by his current circumstances to the extent that the  decision  to
maintain the deportation order and  to  continue  to  seek  his  deportation
could be considered as being disproportionate and in breach of  his  Article
8 human rights.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Mabrouk's appeal on all grounds.











                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
