
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00211/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2015                  |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     JF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 26 July 1976.   He  first
    entered the UK on 1 October 2001 and applied for asylum the  next  day.
    His application was refused on 8  November  2001.   He  appealed.   His
    appeal was dismissed but he was granted  exceptional  leave  to  remain
    until 17 July 2003.  On application he was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain on 20 January 2004.

2.   He reapplied for asylum on 7 June 2006.  The  application  was  refused
    and his appeal subsequently dismissed on 7 October 2008.  Meanwhile, on
    7 August 2007 he was convicted of robbery and being knowingly  involved
    in the supply/production of drugs.  He  was  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment for the former offence and one month to  run  concurrently
    for the latter.  His sentence for robbery  was  reduced  on  appeal  to
    eighteen months on 21 December 2007.

3.   On 14 February 2008 the respondent  decided  to  deport  him  from  the
    United Kingdom.  He appealed on 22 February 2008  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 7 October 2008.  He was served with a  signed  deportation
    order on 6 February 2009.  A number of representations were made on his
    behalf.  The respondent treated these as an application to  revoke  his
    deportation order.  She refused the application  on  27  January  2014.
    The applicant gave notice of appeal.  His appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Keane.  The judge said that it  was  common  ground
    between the parties that paragraph 398(b) applied  to  the  appeal  and
    that paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply.  Accordingly, the paramount
    issue raised by the appeal concerned the application of paragraph 390A.
     He was to consider whether the instant  appeal  disclosed  exceptional
    circumstances  whereby  the  public   interest   in   maintaining   the
    deportation order was outweighed by other factors.

4.   First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Keane  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted permission to appeal.  He stated
    that the appellant relied on Article 3  human  rights  grounds  in  his
    appeal but did not rely on Article 8  human  rights  grounds.   It  was
    arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane may have erred materially
    in  having  regard  to  Section  117C  of  the   amended   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in his consideration of Article  3  and
    human rights protection issues.

5.   On 8 October 2015 the appeal came before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch.
    She found that First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane had  made  a  number  of
    material errors of law for the reasons contained in her  decision,  and
    that his decision should be set aside and remade.

6.   Mr Yeo relied on the skeleton argument  he  had  prepared  for  today's
    hearing ie 16 November 2015, the original bundle submitted  in  support
    of the hearing in 2014, the bundle prepared  for  the  Case  Management
    Review hearing, the Upper Tribunal's decision in MOJ and Others (return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT  00442  (IAC)  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Y and Z Sri Lanka [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

7.   Mr Walker relied on an  article  entitled  "Unchained  Minds:  Somali's
    Mental Health State"; and  another  document  entitled  "A  Manual  for
    Checking Mental Health Best Practices in Somalia".

8.   Mr Yeo relied on what the Upper Tribunal said at paragraph 422  of  MOJ
    and Others.

         The fact that they had rejected the view that there is a real  risk
         of persecution or serious harm or  ill-treatment  to  civilians  or
         returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that no  Somali  national  can
         succeed in refugee or humanitarian protection or Article  3  claim.
         Each case will fall to be decided on its own  facts.   As  we  have
         observed, there will need to be a careful  assessment  of  all  the
         circumstances of a particular individual.

9.   He relied on the submissions set out  in  his  skeleton  argument.   He
    submitted  that  the  appellant's  case   has   an   unusual   set   of
    circumstances. The appeal is pursued on the basis that the appellant is
    a refugee because he is unable because of his  mental  health  to  take
    basic precautions to ensure safety and is likely to expose  himself  to
    danger, the Convention reason being  attributed  political  opinion  or
    membership of a particular social group (the mentally ill);  and/or  he
    is at risk of  enchainment  which  would  amount  to  being  persecuted
    because of his  membership  of  the  particular  social  group  of  the
    mentally ill in Somalia.  Alternatively, the appellant is  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection on Article 3 ECHR protection on similar grounds
    but in the absence of a Convention reason and because  of  the  inhuman
    conditions he will be forced to subsist, for example in a IDP  camp  in
    Mogadishu.  Alternatively he is entitled to remain in the UK  receiving
    treatment on Article 3 grounds because of the risk of suicide following
    a catastrophic decline in his mental state as  in  J  and  Y.   In  the
    alternative he could also succeed  on  moral  integrity  grounds  under
    Article 8.

10.  Mr Yeo submitted that the appellant is not able  to  give  evidence  or
    give instructions to his solicitor because he lacks capacity  according
    to Professor Katona.

11.  The facts of this case are that the appellant was born on 26 July  1976
    and is now aged 39.  When he was last resident in Somalia, he had  been
    found to be resident in Mogadishu and that he  had  left  Mogadishu  in
    1992 when he was 16 years old.  He lived in  Ethiopia  for  nine  years
    with some members of his family and arrived in the UK in 2001.  He  has
    lived in the UK for the last fourteen years.   His  parents  remain  in
    Ethiopia and his siblings are thought to be deceased.

12.  It is not disputed that the appellant has acute mental  health  issues.
    Professor Katona concludes that the  appellant  suffers  from  paranoid
    schizophrenia, is actively psychotic, suffers mild  depression,  has  a
    moderate degree of cognitive impairment  and  lacks  capacity  to  give
    instructions.  The appellant is said to  have  delusional  beliefs  and
    experience hallucinations.  In  his  report  dated  29  September  2013
    Professor Katona notes that the appellant's condition has improved  but
    goes on to state that he continues to have  florid  psychotic  symptoms
    and significant cognitive impairment.  In the report  dated  16  August
    2012 Professor Katona noted that the appellant's delusional beliefs and
    his  persistent  cognitive  impairment  would  also  render  him   very
    vulnerable to exploitation.  In the 29 September 2013 report  Professor
    Katona states that the appellant's continuing  delusional  beliefs  and
    associated  hallucinations,  together  with  his  persistent  cognitive
    impairment, would also render him very vulnerable to exploitation.

13.  Mr Yeo submitted that the medical evidence is that the appellant  would
    "act irrationally in response to hallucinatory voices  and  persecutory
    beliefs"  and  that  because  of  his  mental  health  and   particular
    vulnerability,  the  appellant  cannot  be  considered   "an   ordinary
    civilian" in the sense deployed in MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu)
    (CG) [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC).  Further, he is not able to reduce  further
    still his personal exposure to the risk of collateral damage  in  being
    caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that  was  not  targeted  at  him  by
    avoiding areas and establishments  that  are  clearly  identifiable  as
    likely Al Shabaab targets.

14.  Mogadishu is not  a  familiar  city  to  the  appellant  and  he  would
    struggle to find his way around or survive there.  He was only resident
    in Mogadishu for sixteen years, has been absent for 23 years and has no
    one to return to. He has particular  mental  health  issues  that  mean
    Mogadishu would be a very  difficult  place  to  know,  understand  and
    survive. The security situation in Mogadishu is still very poor.

15.  I find in the light of the  appellant's  particular  circumstances  and
    vulnerability, that on return to Mogadishu, the appellant is likely  to
    face the prospect of living in circumstances falling below  that  which
    is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

16.  There is also the manner  in  which  the  appellant  is  likely  to  be
    treated if returned to Somalia.  The WHO Report notes that many Somalis
    with mental illness are socially isolated when becoming  violent.   The
    pain of this isolation is felt  intensely  because  Somali  culture  is
    traditionally communal  and  family  orientated.   They  are  generally
    chained or imprisoned.  The country has only five health  centres  that
    provide essential mental health care services.

17.  The report goes on to say that people with mental health  disorders  in
    Somalia are particularly vulnerable to abuse and violation  of  rights.
    They often live  in  poor  and  humiliating  conditions  in  their  own
    communities, where they are prevented from having access to health  and
    education services, sanitation facilities and often do not have freedom
    of movement because they are chained.   Indeed  the  document  entitled
    Unchained Minds: Somali's Mental Health State submitted  by  Mr  Walker
    contained a picture of mentally ill patients chained to a rock  sitting
    within a mental health centre in Mogadishu.

18.  I find that the chaining of mentally ill patients  amounts  to  inhuman
    and degrading treatment and amounts to a  breach  of  Article  3  ECHR.
    The ill-treatment is perpetrated by the mental health centre  which  is
    run by the authorities.  The  article  said  that  "given  the  Somalia
    political and economic turmoil  suffered  during  the  civil  war,  the
    country's mental health system collapsed, and  mental  health  disorder
    became rampant across the country.  To date, the government in  Somalia
    does not have an official mental health plan of action to combat mental
    illness, rebuild facilities and grant funding  to  support  programmes.
    The apparent  lack  of  medicine,  and  adequately  trained  staff  and
    professionals has forced families, and mental health sectors  to  chain
    their patients to beds or rocks as it shows  in  the  picture,  leaving
    them with permanent trauma and physical injuries."

19.  The World Health Organisation (WHO) indicated in their recent study  of
    Somalia Mental  Health  Care  that  people  with  mental  illness  face
    degrading and dangerous cultural practices  such  as  being  restrained
    with chains, which are not  only  widespread,  but  also  socially  and
    culturally accepted.  WHO further expressed that Somalia has one of the
    world's highest rates of mental-health disorder.   Approximately,  one-
    third of its eight million Somalis are affected by some kind of  mental
    disorder, yet there are only three trained psychiatrists in the  entire
    country who specialise in mental illness.  Psychiatry as  a  profession
    is highly stigmatised in Somalia by both the  general  public  and  the
    medical  community.   Healing  for  mental  problems  is  provided   by
    religious leaders or by traditional  healers,  and  it  has  become  an
    ineffective method in the current Somalia society.

20.  On this evidence alone I find that to return the appellant  to  Somalia
    would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

21.  I allow the appellant's appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

