
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00586/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 October 2014                             |On 24 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                Mr Niazi Khan
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Physsas, Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (which panel comprising First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ford and Mrs L R Schmitt,  JP)  in  which  they  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the decision made on 10 March  2014  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    asylum and to refuse to revoke a deportation order  against  him.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1991.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in, it appears, 2010.

 2. In summary, the appellant's case is that he fears persecution on return
    to Afghanistan as he is at risk of being killed due to his  father  and
    brother having been killed by  the  Taliban  as  his  father  had  been
    involved in fighting against the Taliban  as  a  commander  within  the
    Northern Alliance.  His father and brother were killed during a  rocket
    attack on the family home.  His mother, however, was  not  killed.   He
    learned that the Taliban  were  looking  for  him  and  thus  with  the
    assistance of his uncle, he left  Afghanistan  travelling  overland  to
    France from where he attempted to enter the United Kingdom.

 3. On 26 August 2011 the appellant was convicted at Croydon Crown Court of
    one count of sexual assault on a female and one count of trespass  with
    intent to commit a relevant sexual offence.  He was sentenced  to  four
    years' imprisonment for these offences  with  an  extension  period  of
    licence for three years; he was also ordered to sign the Sex  Offenders
    Register for life.  The court also recommended his deportation.

The Respondent's Case

 4. The respondent's case is set out in detail in the refusal letter of  10
    March 2014.  The respondent considered that [27],

         "while it can be accepted that the Taliban  may  have  killed  your
         father because of his involvement as a commander with the  Northern
         Alliance you have failed to substantiate why the Taliban made it be
         known to your neighbours in your village that they were also  going
         to target and kill you also."

    The respondent considered that the Afghan Government were not unable to
    protect the appellant; that he would be able to relocate to Kabul; that
    it would be reasonable to expect him to do so; and, that there  was  no
    indication that the Taliban would know where he would be on return  and
    thus it was even less likely that the Taliban would kill him and return
    him because of his father's past activities as  a  commander  with  the
    Northern Alliance [33].  It was  also  considered  that  the  applicant
    could seek the protection of the Afghan  Police  Force  on  return  and
    there would be a sufficiency of protection for him.

 5. The respondent  considered  that  he  was  excluded  from  humanitarian
    protection due to his criminal conviction.  She considered also that he
    was a person to whom Section 72 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 applied and that given the length of his  sentence,  in
    the absence of any exceptional circumstances, there was no  reason  why
    he should not be deported.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham on
    9 June  2014.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  I  Polpitiya,
    solicitor; the respondent by Mr I Proctor, a Presenting  Officer.   The
    Tribunal first observed [18] that the refusal letter was  not  entirely
    clear, noting in particular that at [27] it  was  unclear  whether  the
    respondent was conceding that the Taliban had  killed  the  appellant's
    father because of his involvement as  a  commander  with  the  Northern
    Alliance.  The Tribunal noted that Mr Proctor conceded the letter could
    have been clearer but even if it were a concession it could not be read
    as a concession that the appellant was  at  real  risk  of  persecution
    because of any involvement his father may have had  with  the  Northern
    Alliance and because of his father being killed.

 7. The Tribunal found:-

      a) the appellant's credibility had been undermined by the use of false
         names, attempts to enter the United Kingdom illegally  and  by  not
         making an asylum claim until after he was aware of the Secretary of
         State's intention to deport him from the UK [30], [35];

      b) that the appellant's claim was undermined by inconsistencies in  it
         [36] noting that he had been inconsistent as to whether his  mother
         is alive or dead [38]; the lack of evidence regarding the  father's
         activities [39] finding that the appellant  had  been  deliberately
         vague about the father's activities; that the account of the attack
         in which his father and brother had been killed in one room of  the
         house in a rocket propelled grenade attack whilst mother was in the
         kitchen and not even injured to be highly implausible [40];

      c) that they were not satisfied that  the  appellant's  father  was  a
         Northern Alliance commander [42] that he was not under  any  threat
         from the Taliban beyond the threat that the Taliban  posed  to  the
         public in general [44]  nor  did  they  accept  that  he  would  be
         perceived as supporting government forces or the  Western  Alliance
         and that he had fabricated his asylum claim  to  avoid  deportation
         [44];

      d) that even if the appellant's father was a commander in the Northern
         Alliance they did not accept that he was killed;  even  if  he  had
         been killed it was  not  accepted  the  Taliban  have  any  ongoing
         interest in the appellant or that there was such  interest  in  the
         appellant even if he were telling the truth that they would  pursue
         him to Kabul [45]; that he would be  able  to  support  himself  on
         return to Kabul [46].

 8. The panel then went on to dismiss the appeal on all  grounds  including
    Article 8.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      a) the Tribunal had erred  in  going  behind  the  concession  by  the
         Secretary of State that the appellant's father was a  commander  in
         the Northern Alliance [4 to 5];

      b) that had the Tribunal wished  to  go  behind  those  findings  they
         should  have  given  notice  of  this,  giving  the  applicant  the
         opportunity to adduce evidence in support;

      c) that the Tribunal's approach was thus procedurally unfair  and  the
         applicant had been denied a fair hearing;

      d) that in the circumstances it was unreasonable for the  Tribunal  to
         draw inferences adverse to the appellant  for  failing  to  produce
         corroborative evidence in respect of facts which were not, prior to
         the hearing, in issue;

      e) that in purporting to consider whether the applicant  would  be  at
         risk on return in the light of his father's position and history as
         the only surviving male member of the family, the Tribunal erred in
         failing to take into account that he was the only surviving male or
         take into account the background evidence of the  attitude  of  the
         Taliban towards someone in the applicant's  father's  position  and
         the applicant's position;

      f) that in rejecting the applicant's claim to be at risk even  if  the
         appellant's  father's  history  were  accepted  the  Tribunal  gave
         inadequate reasons  for  reaching  the  conclusion  and  failed  to
         address or consider the background evidence.

10. The respondent, by way of a letter pursuant to Rule 24  dated  16  July
    2014  avers  that  there  had  been  no  concession  by  her  that  the
    appellant's father was killed as claimed; and, that in any  event,  the
    Tribunal had concluded that there was no risk of  the  appellant  being
    pursued to Kabul even taking the claim at its highest.

The Hearing

11. Ms Physsas accepted that there was no note from Mr Polpitiya as to what
    had occurred at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Physsas
    submitted that there was no suggestion  that  whether  the  appellant's
    father was a commander in the Northern Alliance or had been  killed  by
    the Taliban had been put to him in  cross-examination.   She  submitted
    that  even  had  the  issue  of  the  concession  been  alluded  to  in
    submissions, at the very least the panel should have raised  the  issue
    before drawing inferences adverse to the appellant.

12. Ms Physsas submitted also that in considering the appellant's  case  at
    its highest, the panel had failed properly to  engage  with  the  UNHCR
    guidelines which had been put before  them  or  to  the  risks  of  the
    appellant on return to Kabul.  She submitted also they  had  failed  to
    deal properly with the issue of relocation.

13. Mr Whitwell submitted that there  was  no  express  concession  in  the
    refusal letter and that in any event, had it been ambiguous, the  panel
    could still properly have reached the conclusions  they  did  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return.  He submitted  that  properly
    considered, the Tribunal  had  in  fact  engaged  with  the  background
    evidence as could be seen from the determination at [27].  He submitted
    also that the panel had been entitled to draw inferences adverse to the
    appellant for his failure to call a paternal uncle as a witness.

14.  In  reply,  Ms  Physsas  submitted  properly  considered,  there   was
    sufficient material in the UNCHR guidelines, in particular page 47,  43
    and the detailed assessment of potential risk  profiles  from  page  70
    onwards.

Discussion

15. It is established law that an appellant is entitled to a fair  hearing.
    Encompassed within that is the right to know what the case against  him
    is, including knowing what is or is  not  in  issue.  If  a  matter  is
    conceded, then it may well be unfair to proceed with a hearing if  that
    concession is withdrawn in order that the appellant is able properly to
    prepare his case, if necessary after an adjournment.

16. The Upper Tribunal has given guidance as to  how  apparent  concessions
    could be considered in Kalidas (Agreed facts -  best  practice)  [2012]
    UKUT 00327 (IAC).

         "27.  CMRs  and  agreement  of  facts  are  efficient  devices  for
             focussing the issues before the First-tier Tribunal, which can
             save much time and effort.  Based on the agreement,  any  oral
             evidence ought to have been brief and to the point.  What  the
             case principally  required  was  specification  of  background
             materials on sufficiency of  protection  and  availability  of
             internal relocation in a case of threatened  'honour  killing'
             in Tanzania.  A  witness  statement  or  a  skeleton  argument
             focussed on the correct issues would have alerted the  hearing
             judge.  As matters turned out, there was a lengthy hearing and
             a lengthy determination  resolving  in  detail  matters  which
             ought not to have been in  dispute  at  all,  while  the  real
             issues were given short  shrift.   That  was  such  an  unfair
             outcome that the determination has to be  set  aside  and  the
             decision reached again.  There has been unnecessary  procedure
             in both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

         29.  Parties should consider at as early a stage as  possible,  and
             preferably in advance  of  any  CMR,  what  agreement  can  be
             reached on the scope of the issues and what concessions can be
             made.  They should bear in mind the purposes of CMRs, set  out
             in the Senior President's Practice  Directions,  paragraph  7.
             They should assist the First-tier Tribunal to produce in terms
             of PD 7.8:

                  ... written confirmation of:-

                  (a)  any issues that have been agreed at the  CMR  hearing
                      as being relevant to the determination of the appeal;
                      and

                  (b)  any concessions made at the CMR hearing by a party.

         34.  Representatives  have  a  joint  responsibility  to  draw  the
             attention of the  judge  at  the  outset  of  the  substantive
             hearing to the extent of agreement reached, and the nature  of
             the decision still required.

         35.  Judges, unless  in  exceptional  circumstances,  do  not  look
             behind factual concessions. Such exceptional circumstances may
             arise where the concession is partial or unclear, and evidence
             develops in such a way that a judge considers that the  extent
             and correctness of the concession must be revisited.   If  so,
             she must draw that immediately to attention of representatives
             so  that  they  have  an  opportunity  to  ask  such   further
             questions, lead such further evidence and  make  such  further
             submissions  as   required.    An   adjournment   may   become
             necessary."

17. There was, however, no CMR  in  this  case  but  equally  there  is  no
    indication of any attempt  by  the  appellant  or  his  representatives
    sought to raise this issue prior to closing submissions.

18. In  considering  the  refusal  letter  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    consideration of the application set out between paragraphs  15  to  44
    proceeds from a basis which is not predicated on an assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility; that issue  is  considered  later  on  in  the
    letter.   Whilst  certain  allegations  are  dismissed,  such  as   the
    allegation that the Taliban had made it known to  his  neighbours  that
    they would target and kill him [27], this is rejected on the basis that
    it cannot be substantiated; there is no  reference  to  credibility  at
    this point.

19. Further, the respondent rejected the appellant's claim  that  he  could
    not relocate to another  area  in  Afghanistan  on  the  basis  of  the
    background evidence [32], [33]. The submission that the  Taliban  would
    kill him if they are informed that he has returned was dismissed on the
    basis of objective evidence.  Similarly it is  evident  from  paragraph
    [41] that the respondent did not accept substantial parts of the claim,
    stating:

         "Therefore, in view of the fact that you  have  failed  to  produce
         evidence in support  of  your  claim,  the  implausibility  of  the
         details you have provided of  the  alternatives  that  both  police
         protection and internal flight provide, it is not accepted that you
         have a future fear of persecution from the Taliban in Afghanistan."

    It is noted also that the appellant would not be of greater risk of ill-
    treatment than other Afghans in Afghanistan [43].

20. It is only after this passage [43] that the Secretary of  State  refers
    to inferences adverse to the appellant's credibility arising  from  his
    actions in attempting to enter the United Kingdom using different names
    [47], his failure to remain in France so that his asylum claim could be
    considered; and the delay in making an asylum claim  until  some  eight
    months after he was served with a signed deportation order [52].

21. In this context and bearing in mind the comments at paragraph 41 of the
    refusal letter, it is not arguable that what is said at paragraph 27 is
    a concession.  It  is  evident  that  what  is  intended  there  is  an
    assessment of the appellant's case taken at its  highest.    I  do  not
    consider that this could reasonably have been seen as a concession, nor
    is there, for the reasons set out below, sufficient indication that the
    appellant had  believed  a  material  concession  had  been  made;  had
    prepared accordingly;  or,  in  the  light  of  the  concession  by  Mr
    Polipitya (the appellant's representative) that any failure to  adjourn
    was a procedural error capable of giving rise to an error of law.

22. There is an absence of any sufficient  indication  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  in  the
    grounds of appeal to that Tribunal that the appellant, or his advisors,
    considered that a concession had been made.  While I accept that  there
    were in cross-examination no challenges to the  appellant's  case  that
    his father was a commander, or had been killed by the Taliban, the same
    can be said for other issues, and this is  far  from  determinative  of
    their having been a concession.

23. It appears from the Tribunal's Record of Proceedings, which I read  out
    to both  representatives,  that  Mr  Proctor  for  the  respondent  had
    accepted that what was said at paragraph 27 of the refusal  letter  was
    unclear. The record also shows that  Mr  Polpitiya  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant conceded that no evidence could be produced to show that  the
    Taliban killed the father although it was  submitted  by  Mr  Polpitiya
    that the Home Office had not contested this issue.

24. It is instructive that there was no objection from Mr Polpitiya at this
    stage in the proceedings - closing submissions  -   and  no  submission
    that the panel could not go behind what is now  said  to  have  been  a
    concession; or, that the matters could and  should  have  been  put  in
    cross-examination.  There  was  thus  no  proper  basis  on  which  the
    appellant could have concluded  that  the  Tribunal  were  bound  by  a
    concession on the facts made by the respondent.

25. Although I accept that there was no CMR, there is insufficient evidence
    of any attempt to raise the  issue  of  any  concession  prior  to  the
    hearing, contrary to the guidance given in Kalidas. It was  not  raised
    at the beginning of the hearing and the  acceptance  that  no  evidence
    could be adduced to prove the appellant's father's involvement with the
    Northern Alliance is in effect an acceptance that that  was  in  issue.
    There appears to have been no attempt on the part  of  the  appellant's
    representatives, this issue having  been  raised,  of  any  attempt  to
    reopen examination-in-chief or to  make  further  submissions.   It  is
    difficult in these circumstances to know what would have been  achieved
    by an adjournment given the concession that no further  evidence  could
    be  adduced.   Accordingly,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    procedural error on the particular facts of this  case  such  that  the
    appellant did not receive a fair hearing.

26. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Tribunal was entitled to  come  to
    the findings that the appellant's father had not  been  killed  by  the
    Taliban, had not been a commander in the Northern Alliance and that the
    Taliban had never come looking for him.  The challenge to the  findings
    of the risk of return is predicated [see paragraph 10] on the applicant
    being at risk if his account were true.  The finding that he  would  be
    at risk is not challenged on any other basis.

27. Further, and in any event, the Tribunal did consider the case taking it
    at its highest. It is evident from paragraph  27  that  the  panel  had
    considered the UNHCR report, the only substantive  background  material
    produced by the appellant, in detail.  It was  open  to  the  panel  to
    conclude [45] that there was no evidence, even taking  the  appellant's
    case at its highest, of continuing interest in him on the part  of  the
    Taliban.

28. Ms Physsas has helpfully taken me to several passages within the  UNHCR
    guidelines, but I do not consider that,  even  taking  the  appellant's
    case at its highest, that these avail him.  Whilst it is arguable  that
    as a man of fighting age and  his  father  being  associated  as  being
    supportive of the government, those individuals who  fall  within  that
    group are  said  to  require  a  particularly  careful  examination  of
    possible risks [43].  That is not an indication that they are  at  risk
    per se or that people associated with these people would  be  at  risk.
    The position on  internal  flight  at  page  47  does  not  assist  the
    appellant  as  although  UNHCR  considers  that  internal   flight   or
    relocation is reasonable  only  where  the  individual  can  expect  to
    benefit from the support of his or her own family, community or  tribe,
    the exception to this requirement of external support are single, able-
    bodied men who may in the circumstances be able to  subsist  without  a
    family community in the urban and semi-urban  areas  if  the  necessary
    infrastructure  and  livelihood  opportunities  to   meet   the   basic
    necessities of life and are under effective government  control.   That
    would appear to be the case in  Kabul  as  confirmed  by  the  relevant
    country guidance cases.

29. Ms Physsas took  me  to  the  potential  risk  profile  of  individuals
    associated with or perceived as being a supporter of the government  at
    page 70. Whilst there appears to have been kidnaps and threats  against
    government employees there is little or no evidence to show  that  this
    has occurred in  respect  of  member  or  commanders  in  the  Northern
    Alliance.  Further there is no indication that the appellant  would  be
    at risk from forced recruitment to the Taliban if he were in Kabul  nor
    does the specific risks to men and boys  of  fighting  age  within  the
    guidelines provide such evidence.

30. Whilst the panel's thus reasoning is succinct,  it  evident  that  they
    bore in mind the UNHCR guidelines, and their  reasoning  is  sufficient
    for them to reach the conclusions made in line with Country Guidance.

31. For these reasons, I find that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed:                                 Date: 23 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

