

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00414/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 4 November 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL TAYLOR
                      JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL POOLE

                                   Between

                            CARLTON CRAIG MCLEOD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bello of Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Appeal History

   1. The appellant is a male  citizen  of  Jamaica  born  on  21/5/75.   He
      entered the United Kingdom in December 1992  as  a  visitor  and  made
      subsequent applications for further leave to remain.  On 6  June  2012
      at Inner London Crown Court the appellant  was  convicted  of  affray,
      possession of an offensive weapon in a public place and  ABH  and  was
      sentenced to a total term of fifteen months imprisonment.  For two  of
      the offences he was sentenced to nine months in  prison  but  for  the
      third offence was sentenced to a period  of  six  months  imprisonment
      consecutive to the nine months sentences.  On  15  February  2012  the
      respondent made a  deportation  order.  The  appellant  appealed  that
      decision.

   2. On 15 July 2013 the appellant's appeal came before Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Brenells and Non Legal Member Mr Olszewski (the  Panel).
      Mr Bellow represented the appellant as he now represents  him  in  the
      Upper Tribunal.  In a determination  dated  24  July  2013  the  Panel
      dismissed the appellant's appeal in respect of the  Immigration  Rules
      and also with regard to the appellant's "human rights appeal".  During
      the course of the appeal  before  the  Panel  a  number  of  witnesses
      attended and gave evidence.  The Panel noted that the appellant had  a
      total of seven children by various partners.  The Panel  came  to  the
      conclusion that the appellant had minimal contact with the majority of
      his children and that as a result the respondent's  decision  was  not
      disproportionate in so far as Article 8  ECHR  was  concerned.   As  a
      result all aspects of the appeal were dismissed.

   3. The appellant then sought leave to appeal.  There are two  substantive
      grounds seeking leave,  first  that  the  Panel  had  failed  to  make
      sustainable findings in respect of the Immigration  Rules  and  second
      that the assessment of  Article  8  and  the  best  interests  of  the
      children were flawed.

   4. The application for leave to appeal was considered  by  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal AD Baker.  In a  decision  dated  13  August  2013
      leave was granted.  At paragraphs 3 and 4  of  the  decision  granting
      leave Judge Baker said as follows:

           "3.   It is arguable that the Panel may  have  made  a  material
                 error of law in  considering  the  best  interests  of  the
                 appellant's seven  children  at  paragraphs  19-31  of  the
                 determination  in  that  Section   55   of   the   Borders,
                 Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  1999  was  arguably  not
                 applied.  Paragraphs 29-31  of  the  determination  do  not
                 address the evidence which examination reveals  was  before
                 the Panel as contended but not addressed, and also referred
                 to at ground C of  the  original  grounds  of  appeal,  but
                 paragraph 31 states that  there  is  no  evidence  of  that
                 previous contact.

           4.    Whilst the Panel noted the prohibition  on  contact  since
                 the index offence with four of the children,  the  omission
                 of consideration of all other  evidence  before  it  as  to
                 previous contact with those children with whom he lived and
                 with his other  natural  children  in  the  United  Kingdom
                 arguably was material to the outcome of Article 8."

   5. Hence the matter was listed before us.



The Hearing

   6. At the commencement we indicated that no Rule  24  response  had  been
      forthcoming from the respondent.  Mr Bello said that he  had  received
      one from the Home Office and Mr Walker was able to produce a copy of a
      letter dated 30 August 2013.

   7. Mr Bello made two submissions. First he submitted that the  Panel  had
      erred in their considerations of paragraphs 398 and should have  found
      that the appellant met the requirements set out in paragraph 399.



   8. Second with respect to Article 8, there was consistent evidence before
      the  Panel.   There  were  photographs   available   and   the   birth
      certificates of all the children showing that the appellant was  named
      as the father.  The appellant wanted to participate in  the  lives  of
      the children and there was  a  lot  of  witness  evidence  as  to  his
      continued interest in the children and  their  welfare.   One  of  the
      children had written a letter on behalf of the appellant and there was
      evidence from that child's mother.  There had been a lot  of  frequent
      contact and the child had stayed with the appellant.  Even if  it  was
      one child out of seven that child's interests need to be considered.

   9. Mr Bello emphasised that the appellant had made  attempts  to  contact
      the children via his representatives as permitted by  the  restraining
      order that was in place and that it was not right to say that  he  had
      not made such attempts.  Section 55 had not  been  considered  by  the
      Panel and there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  enable  the  Panel  to
      consider the aspects of that section.

  10. Mr Walker referred to paragraph 23 of the  determination.   The  Panel
      had considered all appropriate evidence and  the  appellant's  contact
      with one of the children had only been very recent.  There had been  a
      full consideration of the best interests of the children.

  11. Mr Bello very properly drew our attention to the fact that during  the
      hearing before the Panel the respondent had  successfully  applied  to
      amend the original decision notice to refer to paragraph 398(c) of the
      Immigration Rules.  This was of course because the appellant  had  not
      been convicted of an offence and then been sentenced to  a  period  of
      less than four years but at least twelve months.  The  fifteen  months
      sentence imposed on the appellant was an aggregate of nine months  and
      six months consecutive sentences.

  12. At this stage we rose to consider  the  application  and  upon  return
      indicated  that  we  had  found  an  error  of  law  in  the   Panel's
      determination in respect of the first ground  seeking  leave  but  not
      with regard to the second ground.  Neither  representative  wanted  to
      make a further submission and we accordingly reserved our decision  on
      the remaking of the decision under appeal.



Reasons

  13. We find the Panel made no error of law in their consideration  of  the
      Article 8 aspects of the appellant's appeal.  The appellant's case  in
      respect of Article 8 as rehearsed before the Panel was  by  reason  of
      the existence of seven children that he has fathered during  his  time
      in the United Kingdom.  Four of those children are as a result of  his
      relationship with Ms T Grazette.  That lady  was  the  victim  of  the
      assault for which the appellant was sentenced.  As a result  of  those
      Crown Court proceedings the sentencing judge made a restraining  order
      preventing him from contacting Ms Grazette.   There  was  no  evidence
      before the Panel that the appellant had sought to arrange contact with
      the children via Ms Grazette's solicitors.  One of the seven  children
      is now an adult and there was  evidence  before  the  Panel  regarding
      another child, Jahshan.  He wrote a letter indicating that it had been
      hard to grow up without a male role model and he  thought  his  father
      deserved a second chance.  He said that he loved his  father  (as  did
      the other children).  There was supporting evidence before  the  Panel
      from a number of witnesses.  The Panel took all  this  evidence  quite
      properly into  account  and  then  followed  the  five  step  approach
      recommended in the case of Razgar before  reaching  clear  conclusions
      that the respondent's decision was a proportionate response.   Section
      55 of the  Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  was  not
      directly mentioned but it  is  quite  clear  from  a  reading  of  the
      determination from paragraph 21  onwards  that  the  Panel  took  full
      account of the best interests of the children and took  specific  note
      of historic contact that the appellant had had  with  those  children,
      including the child Jahshan.

  14. We therefore take the view that the Panel were entitled to  reach  the
      conclusions that they did with regard to the appeal  under  Article  8
      and no error of law is contained in the determination.

  15. Dealing now with ground one it will be necessary for  us  to  consider
      the contents of paragraphs 398 and 399  of  the  Rules.   These  Rules
      provide as follows:-
           398.   Where a person claims that their deportation would be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and

                 (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is
                 conducive to the public good because they have been
                 convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
                 to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
                 (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is
                 conducive to the public good because they have been
                 convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
                 to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at
                 least 12 months; or
                 (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is
                 conducive to the public good because, in the view of the
                 Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm
                 or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
                 disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing
                 that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A
                 applies and, if it does not, it will only be in exceptional
                 circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
                 be outweighed by other factors.

                 Note:  Paragraph 398 inserted from 9 July 2012 with savings
                 for applications made before that date (HC 194).

           399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)
           applies if -

                 (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                       relationship with a child under the age of 18 years
                       who is in the UK, and

                       (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                       (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for
                       at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date
                       of the immigration decision; and in either case
                       (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                       leave the UK; and
                       (b) there is no other family member who is able to
                       care for the child in the UK; or

                 (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship
                       with a partner who is in the UK and is a British
                       Citizen, settled in the UK, or in the UK with refugee
                       leave or humanitarian protection, and

                       (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave
                       continuously for at least the 15 years immediately
                       preceding the date of the immigration decision
                       (discounting any period of imprisonment); and
                       (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family
                       life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

                       Note:  Paragraph 399 inserted from 9 July 2012 with
                       savings for applications made before that date (HC
                       194).


  16. As  indicated  above  the  respondent  had  successfully  amended  the
      decision notice to refer to paragraph 398(c).  Sub-paragraph  (a)  and
      (b) clearly did not apply because of the  sentence  imposed  upon  the
      appellant.

  17. At paragraph 17 of the Panel's determination  the  following  was  set
      out:

           "17.  The Record of Convictions shows a first conviction in June
                 2000 for offences which took  place  in  November  1999,  a
                 Caution in 2003 but otherwise a clean record from  1999  to
                 November 2008, and finally the  offences  in  January  2012
                 which resulted in the  making  of  the  Deportation  Order.
                 Whilst the latest offences are far more  serious  than  the
                 earlier two, and the matter for  which  he  was  cautioned,
                 because of the long  intervals  between  the  offences  and
                 because he was been convicted on just three occasions  over
                 a period of 12 years, we do not accept that  the  Appellant
                 is  a  "persistent  offend".   Paragraph  398(a)  does  not
                 therefore apply because the Appellant's  sentence  did  not
                 exceed four years.  Paragraph 398(b) does not apply because
                 the Appellant's sentence did not exceed twelve months,  and
                 Paragraph 398(c) does not apply because  the  appellant  is
                 not a persistent offender.  Paragraph 399  does  not  apply
                 because paragraphs 398(b) and 398(c) do not apply."







  18. The Panel concluded that (c) did not apply because, in their view, the
      appellant's offending had not caused serious harm and neither was he a
      persistent offender.  However the wording of sub-paragraph (c) clearly
      shows that it is for the Secretary of State to form a view and not the
      Panel.   The Secretary of State did form that  view.   It  was  not  a
      matter for the  Panel.   As  a  result  the  Panel  should  then  have
      completed the exercise by referring to paragraph 399.

  19. The effect of paragraph 399 is that deportation can be avoided if  the
      circumstances of that paragraph are  satisfied.   In  this  particular
      case sub-paragraph (a) of 399 is relevant by reason of the appellant's
      seven children.  Sub-paragraph (b) is not applicable because there  is
      no evidence of any genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner.

  20. In remaking the decision we clearly have to apply the facts as we find
      them to the requirements of 399(a).   The  children  in  question  are
      British citizens and it may well be accepted  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect any of the children to leave the  United  Kingdom
      to enable them to accompany the appellant. However, on  the  evidence,
      the  appellant  has  not  established  that  he  has  a  "genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship" with any of the  children.  Moreover
      339(a) requires that  there is no other family member who is  able  to
      care for the child(ren) in  the  United  Kingdom.   Clearly  from  the
      evidence available the children have mothers who  are  in  the  United
      Kingdom and currently provide care for the children.  For that  reason
      paragraph 399 cannot apply so  as  to  assist  the  appellant  in  his
      appeal.  The decision of the Secretary of State (as amended before the
      original Panel) is therefore  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the
      appellant's appeal under the Rules must be dismissed.



Decision

  21. The Panel's decision in respect of Article 8 does not contain an error
      of law and must stand.

  22. The Panel's decision in respect of the appeal "under the  Rules"  does
      contain an error of law and is set aside.

  23. We remake that decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.

  24. No anonymity  order  is  made  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
      application has been made before us and accordingly we do not make any
      direction in respect of anonymity.









                               Signed






                               N Poole
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 4th November 2013
