

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
DA/00730/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2014                            |On 5 August 2014          |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     L A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      11 June 2014 to the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle  in
      respect of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kamara  who
      allowed this deportation appeal by way of a determination  promulgated
      on 22 May 2014. For convenience I continue to refer to  the  Secretary
      of State as the respondent and to L A as the appellant.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 4 September  1967.
      He arrived in the UK in June 2007 and applied  for  asylum  in  August
      2007. His application was refused and  his  appeal  was  dismissed  in
      March 2011. Meanwhile, the appellant began offending in 2008  and  has
      five convictions. The last was in August 2010 when he received a  four
      month sentence for two counts of assault with intent to resist arrest.
      A deportation order was signed on 14 April 2011 and on 1 June 2012 the
      appellant  made  a  fresh  asylum  claim.  That  has  led   to   these
      proceedings.

   3.       The criticism of  the  judge  is  that  in  accepting  that  the
      appellant was gay, she failed to take account of the fact that he  had
      made no mention of his sexuality in his previous asylum claim and that
      had she done so, her other findings on  credibility  would  have  been
      affected. It is argued that the appellant's circumstances do not  meet
      the very high Article 3 threshold in health cases. Reliance is  placed
      on N (Uganda) [2008] ECHR and D [1997] 24 EHRR, that he has family  in
      Algeria and that on return he would be in the  same  position  as  any
      other  mental  health  patient.  The  grounds  point  out   that   the
      requirements of the rules have not been met and that  it  is  only  in
      exceptional cases that the public  interest  would  be  outweighed  by
      other factors; the appellant's residence of 7 years, the  presence  of
      two siblings, and the receipt of health care, were not  considered  to
      be exceptional factors. It is pointed out that the appellant  has  not
      been entitled to receive health care and  that,  whilst  treatment  in
      Algeria may not be of the same  standard,  facilities  are  available.
      Reliance is placed upon the case of  Nasim  (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT
      00025 (IAC). Finally, it is argued that the public  interest  had  not
      been properly balanced against the appellant's circumstances.

Appeal hearing

   4.       At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.  The
      appellant was present.

   5.       Mr Walker relied upon the  respondent's  grounds.  He  submitted
      that when assessing the appellant's claim of homosexuality, the  judge
      had failed  to  take  account  of  the  appellant's  failure  to  have
      mentioned  his  sexuality  during   the   course   of   his   previous
      applications. He submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  say  why  the
      appellant's circumstances were exceptional and failed to properly deal
      with the public interest factors. Had she done so,  the  appeal  would
      have been dismissed and had  the  homosexuality  issue  been  properly
      addressed this would have impacted upon his claim of involvement  with
      the Patriots.

   6.       Ms Loughran submitted that the only point the Secretary of State
      raised with respect to credibility  was  the  appellant's  failure  to
      previously mention his sexuality. She submitted that the appellant had
      given an explanation for this when he stated in his witness  statement
      that by mentioning his rape, he assumed the respondent  would  realise
      he was gay. She stated that the judge had summarised  the  deportation
      letter noting the absence of a previous reliance upon  sexuality.  The
      Tribunal found that the appellant had been candid in his evidence.  Ms
      Loughran took me through the positive credibility findings and pointed
      out that none of these had been challenged. There was a great deal  of
      medical evidence before the panel which the previous Tribunals had not
      seen. The panel was entitled to find as it  did.  The  respondent  had
      misunderstood the Tribunal's reasoning with  regard  to  the  'medical
      grounds'. this was not an N or D type case; this was a case  involving
      the risk of suicide and the judge properly looked to J [2006] EWCA Civ
      1238for guidance and followed the appropriate steps.  There was also a
      misunderstanding with respect  to  Nasim;  in  the  present  case  the
      Tribunal found that there was interference with the appellant's  moral
      and physical integrity because of the  risk  of  suicide.  The  public
      interest factors had been fully considered.  The  panel  considered  N
      (Uganda) and Uner, properly identified the  public  interest  elements
      and properly directed itself. In that context it undertook a balancing
      exercise and applied those factors to the appellant's  case.  It  took
      account of the fact that there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant was at a continued risk of reoffending.  It  considered  the
      sentencing judge's remarks and found that  the  case  was  exceptional
      because of the suicide risk. The determination was detailed  and  well
      reasoned. All the correct cases were identified. None of the  findings
      on political activities were challenged by the Secretary of State.

   7.       Mr Walker did not wish to respond.

   8.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and conclusions

   9.       Had the claim of homosexuality  been  the  main  thrust  of  the
      appellant's appeal, then it would be a  matter  of  concern  that  the
      failure to make previous mention  of  it  during  the  course  of  two
      previous asylum applications and appeals  had  not  been  specifically
      considered by Judge Kamara.  Whilst I  accept  this  is  mentioned  in
      paragraph 14 when summarising the  deportation  letter,  there  is  no
      further  attempt  to  resolve  the  conflict.  Although  Ms   Loughran
      maintained he had never been asked about his sexuality  before,  that,
      with respect, does not address the issue at all. In the absence of any
      indication of homosexuality, there would have been no reason  for  any
      questions about such personal matters to have been put.  Further,  the
      appellant's 'explanation'  of  this  omission,  that  he  assumed  the
      Secretary of State would know he was gay from the  fact  he  had  been
      raped at 14, was not considered either and it has to be said it  is  a
      very odd explanation. I fully accept that judges are not  required  to
      consider every issue but this was a major  plank  of  the  appellant's
      claim and so it should have been better addressed.

  10.        Notwithstanding that defect in  the  determination,  the  judge
      heard evidence from the appellant and found him to be  fully  credible
      in all aspects of his claim (paragraph 24). She made detailed findings
      in respect of the other elements of the  appellant's  claim,  none  of
      which have been challenged by the Secretary of State.  Those  findings
      are set  out  at  paragraphs  24-28.  The  judge  found  that  it  was
      reasonably likely that the appellant would be detained  on  return  in
      relation to a military Tribunal proceedings (paragraph  25),  that  he
      was wanted by the authorities in order to answer  questions  regarding
      the ten suspected terrorists he apprehended (ibid), that  his  act  of
      leaving the country would be perceived as anti-government (ibid), that
      he would be at risk of harm from the families  of  the  ten  suspected
      terrorists (paragraph 26) and that he would be unable to avail himself
      of  protection  because  of  the  adverse  interest  in  him  by   the
      authorities (paragraph 27).  On account of the  appellant's  political
      activities in Algeria, the judge arrived  at  a  conclusion  that  was
      supported by the evidence and which had been fully reasoned.  On  that
      basis, alone the refugee claim  is  made  out.  The  argument  in  the
      grounds that the fact that the appellant had lied about his  sexuality
      might impact upon these findings was not pursued by Mr Walker.

  11.       With respect to the appellant's mental health,  Ms  Loughran  is
      correct to point out that N and D do not deal with  cases  of  suicide
      and so they are not relevant to the issues here. The judge undertook a
      proper  assessment  of  J  and  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant's Article 3 rights would be breached  due  to  his  risk  of
      suicide.

  12.       Challenge was  made  to  the  judge's  approach  to  exceptional
      circumstances. As pointed out by Ms Loughran, however,  the  Secretary
      of State has not sought to challenge that there would be a  real  risk
      of serious harm to the appellant from the  authorities  and  from  the
      families of the suspected terrorists. That added to the suicide  risk,
      means that deportation would be unjustifiably harsh.

  13.        Detailed  consideration  was  given  to  the  public   interest
      elements. OH (Serbia) was considered and  the  weighty  public  policy
      factors were set out in paragraph 33. N (Kenya) and Uner are addressed
      at paragraphs  31  and  32.  The  panel  noted  that  the  appellant's
      offending was at the lower end of the scale, that he had not  offended
      further and there was nothing to  suggest  a  continued  risk  of  re-
      offending. It also  noted  the  circumstances  of  the  index  offence
      (paragraphs 35-36).

  14.       In conclusion, therefore, I find that  the  Tribunal  reached  a
      sustainable conclusion wand that its  findings  as  a  whole  are  not
      vitiated by the failure to specifically address the  conflict  in  the
      evidence over the appellant's sexuality.

Decision

  15.       The determination of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal
      of the appellant on refugee and human rights grounds is upheld.

Anonymity

  16.       The order for anonymity  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
      continued.


      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      4 August 2014

