
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00046/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2014                          |On 23 October 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Nyaradzo Masendeke
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adebisi Adewole, Samuel & Co Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal said that it found this appeal  more  difficult
    than most.  I understand that.  It illustrates to me just how difficult
    decisions on deportation appeals  can  be  if  the  decision-maker,  as
    decision-makers are required to do, stops and considers the  effect  of
    deportation not only on the human rights of the people  being  deported
    (who are usually entirely the authors of their own plight) but on those
    close to them whose rights have to be promoted and protected.

 2. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  Her  behaviour
    towards the United Kingdom has  been  disgraceful.   She  came  to  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor and overstayed.  During the time  that  she
    overstayed she decided that she wanted to improve her education and she
    obtained qualifications enabling her to work as a mental health  nurse.
    In some ways that  is  commendable.  What  is  not  in  the  least  bit
    commendable is that she lied and  cheated  in  order  to  obtain  those
    qualifications.  She lied and cheated her way onto a  course  and  lied
    and cheated her  way  into  a  bursary  to  pay  for  that  course  and
    aggravated her lying and cheating by using a false passport or a  false
    endorsement on a passport to give a wrong impression about  her  status
    in the United Kingdom.  These offences  were  eventually  detected  and
    came before the Crown Court. The respondent was  sentenced  to  sixteen
    months' imprisonment, the sentencing judge noticing  that  however  bad
    the offences were, and he clearly disapproved of them considerably, the
    respondent had at least had  the  moral  courage  to  face  up  to  her
    responsibilities at the first opportunity  and  she  got  the  discount
    appropriate for that expression of remorse.

 3. Clearly it is in the public interest to remove the  respondent  because
    that is what Parliament says and that is why the deportation order  was
    made.  The difficulty is that the respondent has a partner. He is a man
    who has been with her for some five years, who has  given  evidence  on
    her behalf before two quite different Tribunals and who has made a very
    favourable impression on each occasion. He wants to have children  with
    her but  has  decided  not  to  take  such  a  serious  step  when  her
    immigration status is uncertain. The First-tier Tribunal regarded  this
    as an indication of their responsibility as a  couple  rather  than  an
    indication of a lack of commitment.

 4. If the respondent is removed to Zimbabwe that relationship will end  or
    at least any hopes of establishing a nuclear family will end.  This  is
    because the respondent's partner is a soldier in the British Army.   He
    chose to serve in the army and has made it his career.   He  cannot  be
    expected to settle in  Zimbabwe.  He  would  be  most  unwelcome  there
    because of his military service.

 5. The Tribunal set out to balance  the  public  interest  in  removing  a
    person who has  committed  the  criminal  offences  committed  by  this
    respondent against the consequent disruption to rights  of  those  most
    affected by her removal and particularly the rights of her partner. The
    Tribunal was clearly impressed by  the  fact  that  her  partner  is  a
    serving soldier and has done three tours of duty in places  of  danger,
    including in Afghanistan.  The Tribunal did not explain  precisely  why
    this was important but it is clear to me from reading the determination
    that the Tribunal saw a certain tension between  permitting  a  man  to
    serve in the British Army and put his life at risk but  not  permitting
    him to develop his personal life with the  woman  of  his  choice.   It
    seemed a rather harsh thing to do to him.

 6. It is also important to remember that serious  as  these  offences  are
    they were committed rather more than ten years ago.

 7. The Tribunal directed itself correctly that the public interest was  in
    the removal of the respondent, that there had  to  be  very  compelling
    reasons  in  human  rights  terms  to  allow  the  appeal  and  decided
    hesitantly that allowing the appeal was the right thing to do  in  this
    case.  Quite clearly it had in mind the effect of removal on  the  life
    partner.

 8. I think it is worth saying, although it will be obvious to anyone  with
    any understanding of the procedures involved here, that this is  not  a
    decision that every Tribunal would have made on these  facts.  That  is
    not the point.  I have to decide if it was a permissible one or  if  it
    was the result either of a misdirection  of  law  or  of  the  perverse
    application of permissible findings of facts to correct directions.   I
    cannot find anything wrong in law.  The grounds  make  the  point  that
    deporting foreign criminals is a pressing point of concern  but  it  is
    impossible to say that the Tribunal did not know that this was the law.
     It is quite clear from the way it directed itself that it  appreciated
    fully that point.

 9. I think that properly understood this is an  example  of  the  Tribunal
    making a decision that the Secretary of State does not like and not  an
    example of  the  Tribunal  making  a  decision  that  is  unlawful  and
    certainly not for any of the reasons identified in the  grounds  before
    me.

10. It follows therefore that I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

11. The respondent to this appeal needs to understand that the Tribunal  in
    the First-tier found this decision difficult and borderline and if  she
    is so foolish as to behave in a wrong way again the chances of  finding
    anyone else offering such understanding to her or those affected by her
    removal are exceedingly slim but I cannot say  that  this  decision  is
    wrong in law and therefore I uphold it and  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2014                |



