
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00600/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2018                  |On 29 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     g m
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Shoye Legal Representative instructed by
Primarc Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on 23  April  2018  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to make  a  deportation  order  against  him
    under the automatic deportation provisions of Section 32(5) of  the  UK
    Borders Act the appellant relying on Exception 1 in Section  33(2)  and
    the provisions of Section 117C of the 2002 Act.

 2. This case has a long history.  The first decision was the subject of an
    appeal to the Court of  Appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  was
    remitted for lack of reasons back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    redone afresh.  The 2013 decision is  therefore  not  in  any  sense  a
    Devaseelan starting point and the appeal was reheard completely  afresh
    in March of this year.

 3.  On  9  January  2018,  the  appellant's  solicitors  attended  a  Case
    Management Review hearing following which the following directions were
    made:

      1) The respondent do file and  serve  all  documents  upon  which  she
         intends to rely by no later than ten  working  days  prior  to  the
         hearing.

      2) The appellant do file and serve all evidence relied upon in support
         of the appeal by no later  than  ten  working  days  prior  to  the
         hearing.

      3) The appellant do forthwith provide the Home Office with  the  names
         and addresses and Home Office reference numbers  of  any  witnesses
         who are not British nationals  if  either  party  seeks  additional
         directions  they  should  email  direct  [judge's  name  and  email
         address].

 4. On the same day 31 January 2018, the First-tier Tribunal  sent  to  the
    appellant's representatives and directly to the appellant a  notice  of
    hearing indicating that the appeal would be heard  on  27  March  2018.
    The ten working day deadline expired on 13 March 2018 but by that  date
    nothing had been filed and there was no compliance with the  evidential
    element of the directions.  On 26 March 2018  the  appellant  dismissed
    his solicitors and appeared in person at the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

 5. The appellant sought an adjournment which is dealt with at paragraphs 5
    to 7 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   The  appellant  told  the
    judge that he had instructed the Bar Pro Bono Unit who  had  asked  him
    supply them with a copy of the 2013 First-tier Tribunal  determination.
    He confirmed at the end of paragraph 5 that he had  an  email  copy  of
    that decision but had not brought it with him to the hearing.

 6. At paragraph 6 the Judge records  this  unchallenged  version  of  what
    happened next:

         "6.  ... [The appellant] confirmed that he was  happy  to  continue
             with the hearing and to  give  oral  evidence  to  update  his
             circumstances  in   particular   regarding   his   educational
             qualification.   The  appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  not
             prepared an up-to-date witness statement and would be  relying
             on his previous statement, his oral evidence and oral evidence
             from his partner ...

         7.    In  all  of  the  circumstances  and  having  regard  to  the
             overriding  interest  under  Rule   2   (First-tier   Tribunal
             Procedure Rules 2014) I decided that it would be fair and just
             to proceed  to  hear  the  appeal,  notwithstanding  that  the
             appellant was unrepresented.  I was satisfied that he received
             legal advice from his former  legal  representatives  and  had
             instructed the Pro Bono Unit for  the  proceeding  before  the
             Court of Appeal.  It made no sense  whatsoever  that  the  Pro
             Bono Unit  would  not  have  access  to  the  2013  First-tier
             Tribunal decision which was the subject matter of the Court of
             Appeal  hearing.   Furthermore,  I  was  satisfied  that   the
             appellant himself had a good  grasp  of  the  relevant  issues
             under Article 8 and that he had sufficient time  in  which  to
             obtain the relevant papers for the purposes of  representation
             and indeed to obtain legal representation.  Indeed, he  stated
             that he did have access  to  those  documents  on  email.   He
             confirmed that other than his degree certificate there were no
             other documents that he wished to rely on at the  hearing.   I
             specifically asked if he had any report from his GP  or  other
             material and he did not.  I was mindful of the fact that  this
             was a deportation appeal and a serious matter to the appellant
             but the legal issues were not complex and that it was a matter
             outstanding since 2013."

    The judge proceeded to hear the appeal and dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal. In  granting  permission,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede said

         "It  is  just  arguable  that  in  circumstances  where  there  had
         previously been a successful appeal and a remittal from  the  Court
         of  Appeal  where  there  was  a  suggestion  of  pro  bono   legal
         representation being available and where there  was  no  up-to-date
         statement available the judge arguably acted unfairly by proceeding
         with the appeal without an adjournment.   Such  an  arguable  error
         arguably impacted upon the other grounds of appeal and  accordingly
         all grounds are arguable."

 8. Mr Melvin has produced a Rule 24 Reply, which is out of time but  which
    I admit, which says this:

         "3.  It is respectfully submitted that the  judge  deals  with  the
         adjournment request in paragraphs  5  to  6  of  the  determination
         culminating in the First-tier Tribunal Judge finding 'he  confirmed
         that he was happy to continue with the hearing of the oral evidence
         to his up-to-date circumstances ... he  would  be  relying  on  his
         previous statement and his and his partner's oral evidence'.

         4.   In these circumstances it will be submitted it cannot be  seen
         as procedural unfairness.

         5.   It is further submitted that the judge has considered the best
         interests  of  the  children  (paragraph  20)  and  in  considering
         proportionality the judge (paragraph 18 to 28)  has  given  an  in-
         depth analysis of the evidence making findings open to her  on  the
         evidence provided.

         6.   It will be submitted that the decision is neither unreasonable
         nor irrational.

         7.    It  submitted  that  read  holistically  the  judgment  makes
         complete sense and discloses no material error in law."

 9. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper  Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

10.  At  the  hearing  today,   the   applicant   appeared   by   his   new
    representatives, CM Law solicitors, who accepted a retainer on the  day
    before the hearing.  Mr Shoye, a  legal  representative  with  CM  Law,
    appeared for him.

11. There was no witness statement from the appellant and no  evidence  had
    been filed about the effect of the absence of representation before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Shoye said that the appellant had been  unable
    to afford representation before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Melvin relied on his Rule 24 Reply.

Analysis

13. The grounds of appeal raise two issues,  first,  whether  there  should
    have been an  adjournment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  and
    second, the  reasonableness  of  separating  this  appellant  from  his
    children by deporting him to his country of origin.

14. I begin with the adjournment request.  The decision by  the  First-tier
    Judge to proceed with the hearing  was  unarguably  open  to  her.  The
    appellant had been legally represented until one day before the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  The appellant has not challenged the First-tier
    Tribunal's statement that he was prepared to proceed on the  day.   The
    Judge was also entitled to have regard to the  appellant's  failure  to
    comply with directions for the service of further evidence,  though  it
    seems that the only piece of further evidence he wished to put  in  was
    his degree certificate.

15. As regards the children, the question  of  reasonableness  arises  only
    under section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended), which is expressly limited to non-deportation cases.
     In order to resist deportation, the appellant needed to bring  himself
    within Exception 1 or Exception 2 in section 117C  of  that  Act.   The
    appellant in his  grounds  of  appeal  does  not  contend  that  either
    Exception 1 or Exception  2  in  Section  117C  is  applicable  to  his
    circumstances.   The Judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  proper,
    intelligible and adequate reasons for considering that  the  children's
    best interests could not outweigh the paragraph 117C(1) presumption  in
    favour of deportation.

16. Any judge now dealing with this appeal would be guided by the  decision
    of the Supreme Court in KO and Others (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53 and  the  reasoning
    of Lord Carnwath JSC, who gave the judgment of the Court, and with whom
    Lord Kerr JSC, Lord Wilson JSC, Lord  Reed  JSC  and  Lord  Briggs  JSC
    concurred, in particular at paragraph 23:

         "23. ... the expression 'unduly  harsh'  [in  section  117C]  seems
         clearly  intended  to  introduce  a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of
         'reasonableness' under Section 117B(6) [which applies to those  who
         have not committed offences in the United Kingdom]  taking  account
         of the public interest in deportation of  foreign  criminals.   ...
         The relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1),  that  is  the
         public interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals.   One  is
         looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent.  ...."

17. On the evidence which the appellant chose to put before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it was  unarguably  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant's children, whilst undoubtedly close to their  father,  would
    suffer no more than what Lord  Carnwath  describes  as  the  degree  of
    harshness which would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
    the deportation of a parent.

18. Neither of the grounds of appeal  is  arguable.   This  appeal  has  no
    prospect of success before a First-tier Judge.  There  is  no  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and this appeal
    is dismissed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      18 January 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
