
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00589/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 11 February 2020                  |On 4 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Michael [X]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Georget, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
(Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically this is  an  appeal
    by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant (Michael [X]) appealed the Secretary of State's  decision
    dated 03 September 2018 to make a decision  to  remove  him  on  public
    policy grounds under European law as a result of  a  conviction  for  a
    serious offence involving the supply of controlled class A  drugs,  for
    which he was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge R.  Sullivan  ("the  judge")  considered  the
    background [2].  She identified the relevant decision and  the  correct
    legal framework [3-8].  She went on to outline the evidence before  her
    and summarised the case put forward by both parties [11-16].  The judge
    went on to make findings of fact based on the evidence before her.  She
    made detailed findings in order to assess  whether  the  appellant  had
    acquired a right of permanent residence under EU law  that  would  give
    rise to an enhanced level of protection. The appellant had  lived  here
    for many years and if he was able to show that he had acquired a  right
    of permanent residence he would have qualified for the highest level of
    protection under regulation 27(4) of The Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016").   The  judge  made
    detailed findings and concluded that the appellant  failed  to  produce
    sufficient evidence to show that he had acquired a right  of  permanent
    residence [17-26].  In light of that finding she went on to assess  the
    case with reference to the  lower  level  of  protection  contained  in
    regulation 27(1).

4.   Although an issue was raised in the rule 24 response as to whether  the
    judge correctly assessed question of permanent  residence,  Mr  Georget
    said that he was not going to pursue the issue.  As  such  the  judge's
    findings relating to permanent residence shall stand.

5.   The judge went  on  to  assess  whether  the  appellant  represented  a
    'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental  interests  of  society'  with  reference   to   regulation
    27(5)(c).  She heard from the appellant's partner.  She noted that  the
    appellant had been with Ms [J] since 1994. In the appellant's statement
    prepared for the criminal court he had attributed the lengthy break  in
    his offending between 1994 to 2016 to his  relationship  with  Ms  [J].
    The judge said "I heard Ms [J] give powerful oral evidence that if  the
    appellant reoffends she would not tolerate it.  I accept that she is  a
    positive influence on him" [19]. The judge outlined the  evidence  from
    the appellant's mother regarding his background in the UK [20].

6.   The judge made the following findings relating to current risk at  [27-
    28]:

         "27. I have already indicated why I regard Ms  [J]  as  a  positive
             influence on the appellant.  In my  view  her  influence  will
             deter him from reoffending.  I  am  also  able  to  take  into
             account evidence which  was  not  available  to  the  decision
             maker, namely evidence of the appellant's engagement in prison
             with groups/courses to address the drug  habit  cause  of  his
             offending and the evidence from a probation  services  officer
             that the appellant has been assessed  to  represent  a  medium
             risk to members of the public, namely those addicted to  class
             A  drugs  but  that  the  risk  was   'not   thought   to   be
             current/imminent as the appellant is no longer  involved  with
             the drug culture and there is no evidence to suggest  that  he
             is likely to involve himself in similar offending behaviour in
             the future'.  The likelihood of  him  reoffending  within  one
             year was calculated at 15%,  rising  to  26%  for  reoffending
             within two years.  I also take into account that the appellant
             has been released from prison on licence, he  will  remain  on
             licence until 14 April 2022 and  is  subject  to  supervision,
             including drug testing.  As at 11 October 2019 he had been co-
             operating fully with that supervision.

         28.  Against that background I return to the  EEA  Regulations  and
             make the following findings:

             (a)  The Decision was taken on public policy and public health
                  grounds, namely to protect the public (and individual drug
                  users) from the harm and many problems which flow from the
                  supply of controlled drugs.

             (b)  The Decision was not taken for economic reasons.

             (c)  The Decision is not proportionate given the length of the
                  Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom, his close and
                  important relationship with Ms [J], his past ability under
                  her influence to desist from offending, the steps  he  has
                  taken to address his own drug misuse and  his  cooperation
                  with those now tasked to supervise him.

             (d)  The appellant does not currently represent a genuine  and
                  sufficiently serious threat  to  any  of  the  fundamental
                  interests of society because of the relatively low risk of
                  reoffending but he  should  be  under  no  illusions  that
                  further offending  will  demonstrate  that  he  cannot  be
                  trusted when he promises not to offend in future.

             (e)   I  find  that  the  decision  is  contrary  to  the  EEA
                  Regulations  because  it  is  disproportionate   and   the
                  appellant does not currently represent the required  level
                  of threat."

7.   The Secretary of State appealed the First-tier Tribunal decision.   The
    original  grounds  made  general  submissions  and  were  not   clearly
    particularised.  At the hearing, Mr Lindsay accepted that this was  the
    case and helpfully sought to crystallise three main points  that  could
    be drawn from the grounds on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State.   He
    accepted that the last two points relied on the success of the first.

       i) The judge erred  in  her  assessment  of  whether  the  appellant
          represented a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat
          affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society  for  the
          purpose of Regulation 27(5)(c).

      ii) The judge misdirected herself in relation to the  proportionality
          assessment under EU law.

     iii)  The  judge  erred  in  her  relation  to   the   assessment   of
          proportionality under Article 8 for the same reasons.

Decision and reasons

8.   In relation to the first ground, which forms the crux of  this  appeal,
    two points were put forward.  The first was that it was said  that  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons and failed to take  into  account
    relevant considerations in assessing  what  influence  the  appellant's
    partner might have on the risk of reoffending when, on the evidence, it
    seemed clear that Ms [J]'s influence had not  prevented  the  appellant
    from committing the serious index offence in 2016.   The  second  point
    was that the judge had impermissibly conflated the threat as  one  that
    needed  to  be  current  or  imminent  and  therefore  did  not  follow
    regulation 27(5)(c), which did not require the threat to be imminent.

9.   In relation to the first point the appellant accepts that  no  specific
    findings were made to acknowledge the point made by  the  Secretary  of
    State about Ms [J]'s inability to prevent him from committing the index
    offence.  Clearly it is not Ms [J]'s job to prevent the appellant  from
    committing crime; it is entirely his responsibility to ensure  that  he
    does not break the law.  However, insofar as Ms [J]'s influence  formed
    part of the judge's assessment as to whether the appellant  was  likely
    to pose a genuine and present threat of committing  similar  crime,  it
    was a relevant factor. I accept that the  judge  did  not  specifically
    acknowledge the point that is now made by the Secretary of  State.   It
    is unclear whether the point was argued by the Secretary  of  State  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing. It was not even clearly particularised
    in the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal.

10.  Arguably it was a relevant issue, but it seems clear from  the  judge's
    findings that she was aware of the circumstances and that  this  formed
    part of the overall body of evidence she considered. What she  said  at
    [19] made clear  that  she  had  considered  the  appellant's  evidence
    attributing  the  lengthy  break  in  his  offending  history  to   his
    relationship with Ms [J].   The  appellant's  antecedents  showed  many
    minor offences during his youth. There was a long  break  in  offending
    from 1994 until the far more serious index offence that took  place  in
    2016. It was reasonable to infer from this history that the appellant's
    relationship with Ms [J] may have had some influence on his  behaviour,
    albeit that it was clear that they were still in a relationship when he
    committed the index offence. Although the judge  did  not  tackle  this
    point head on, I find that any omission was not likely to have made any
    material difference to the outcome of her assessment. It is  clear  the
    judge was appraised of all the facts and took them into account. It was
    open to her to conclude that Ms [J] was still likely to be  a  positive
    influence even though  they  were  still  in  a  relationship  when  he
    committed the index offence.

11.  In any event, the first point is less relevant when one  considers  the
    professional risk assessment of the National Probation  Service  (NPS).
    It was open to the judge to place weight on the letter from Anna Cadzow
    dated 11 October 2019.  She was the officer  who  was  supervising  the
    appellant while he was on licence and who was in the best  position  to
    comment on the risk of  reoffending.   There  was  no  completed  OASys
    Report before the judge, so the information and the assessment provided
    by Ms Cadzow was an important piece of evidence.  The judge quoted some
    parts of that assessment, but it may be helpful to quote what Ms Cadzow
    said more fully:

         "Mr [X] has been assessed as  a  medium  risk  to  members  of  the
         public, more specifically those who are addicted to class A  drugs.
         Although there are no direct victims  who  can  be  specified,  the
         potential  victims  are  those  who  use  and  subsequently  become
         addicted to illicit drug use.  That said the risk is not thought to
         be current/imminent as Mr [X] is no longer involved with  the  drug
         culture and there is no evidence to suggest that he  is  likely  to
         involve himself in similar offending behaviour in the future.

         Mr [X] is assessed as being a low risk to  children,  known  adults
         and staff.

         Risk of Re-Offending:

         OGRS score  -  this  is  the  probability  of  proven  general  re-
         offending.  The calculated likelihood of Mr [X] re-offending is 15%
         within one year and 26% within two years.  This is considered to be
         a low risk.

         OVP score - the probability  of  proven  violent  offending  -  The
         calculated likelihood of Mr [X] committing a violent offence is  3%
         within one year and 6% within two years.  This is considered to  be
         a low risk.

         OGP score - the probability of proven non-violent offending  -  The
         calculated likelihood of Mr [X] committing a  non-violent  offence.
         The calculated  likelihood  of  Mr  [X]  committing  a  non-violent
         offence has been calculated as 7% within one year  and  12%  within
         two years.  This is considered to be a low risk.

         Currently I do not believe Mr [X] is a genuine or present  risk  to
         members of the public." [emphasis added]

12.  It was open to the judge  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been assessed as a medium risk of serious harm to members
    of the public and specifically to those that are addicted  to  class  A
    drugs [27].  It is uncontentious that  the  crime  that  the  appellant
    committed was a serious one and that it would  pose  a  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. The key question
    before the judge was the first part of the test contained in regulation
    27(5)(c), which was whether the appellant represented  a  'genuine  and
    present threat'.

13.  It was argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that in  quoting  the
    probation evidence at [27], which said that there was not thought to be
    a "current/imminent" risk of similar offending behaviour the judge  had
    considered the wrong test when she found at [28(d)] that the  appellant
    "does not currently represent a genuine and sufficiently serious threat
    to  any  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  because  of  the
    relatively low risk of reoffending."  The  risk  did  not  need  to  be
    imminent. Her finding was not in accordance with regulation 27(5)(c).

14.  In my assessment this submission reads too much into the words used  by
    the judge in the decision. It seems clear that the judge gave weight to
    the assessment  of  the  probation  officer  who  was  responsible  for
    supervising the appellant. It was open to her to do so.  I accept  that
    the wording of the first paragraph of the assessment  used  the  phrase
    "current/imminent", but the  judge  merely  quoted  that  part  of  the
    report. Elsewhere it is quite clear that the assessment,  both  by  the
    probation officer and the judge,  was  focused  on  the  likelihood  of
    reoffending. The judge noted that there was a low risk of  reoffending.
    Later in the assessment,  the  probation  officer  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not represent "a genuine or present risk" to  members  of
    the public, which was a similar assessment to the test  the  judge  was
    required to apply. The  judge  was  obliged  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant posed a "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat" at
    the date of the hearing. Nothing in her  finding  at  [28(d)]  suggests
    that she wrongly required the threat to be imminent. The word "current"
    simply denotes that the assessment was made at the date of the hearing.



15.  The grounds of appeal  made  some  other  points  about  the  NPS  risk
    assessment scoring.   The  OGRS  score  calculated  the  likelihood  of
    reoffending of 15% within one year and 26% within two years,  but  even
    on the face of the evidence from the probation service  this  was  only
    considered to be a low risk of reoffending.  The OGP  score  which  was
    the probability of proven non-violent reoffending was even lower.   The
    likelihood of committing a non-violent offence was 7% within  one  year
    and 12% within two years.  In short, all of the risk  assessments  were
    that he was a low risk of reoffending. It was  open  to  the  judge  to
    place weight on evidence from the probation officer, which  made  quite
    clear that he was not thought to  be  a  genuine  or  present  risk  to
    members of the public. The likelihood of reoffending in the foreseeable
    future was low. It is not arguable that the judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant posed a low risk  of  reoffending  was  outside  a  range  of
    reasonable responses to the evidence.

16.  I asked Mr Lindsay to point to  the  evidence  that  the  Secretary  of
    State relied to say that the appellant might a present risk  given  the
    content of the professional risk assessment undertaken by NPS. The only
    point that he was able to  make  was  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether at the end of the licence period the  appellant  would
    be likely to reoffend. It is not clear whether this point was even made
    to the judge in submissions. It is speculative in the  absence  of  any
    evidence to suggest that the appellant is likely to reoffend beyond the
    'low' risk assessment made by NPS.

17.  I conclude that it was open to  the  judge  to  consider  the  positive
    influence of his relationship with Ms [J],  the  evidence  relating  to
    rehabilitation, and the professional risk assessment. Albeit the nature
    of the offence led him to be  assessed  as  posing  a  medium  risk  of
    serious harm to drug users if  he  committed  a  further  offence,  the
    likelihood of him committing a  further  offence  was  assessed  to  be
    'low'. It was open to the judge to conclude that the appellant did  not
    represent a genuine, present or sufficiently serious threat to  one  of
    the fundamental interests of society to justify his removal  on  public
    policy grounds.

18.  The point made in the  grounds  relating  to  Schedule  1  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016 was unparticularised and  was  not  developed  in  any
    meaningful way at the hearing. The judge referred to Schedule 1 at [8].
    The public policy considerations outlined in Schedule 1 are general  in
    nature. Clearly the judge considered that a drugs offence was a serious
    matter that affected  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
    [27(a)]. In so far as  paragraph  3  of  Schedule  1  relates  to  risk
    assessment, the provision itself is general in  nature  and  would  not
    have precluded the judge from placing weight on the  professional  risk
    assessment of the NPS. As a matter of fact, the judge  found  that  the
    appellant had produced substantive evidence to show  that  he  did  not
    represent a threat for the purpose of paragraph 5 of Schedule 1. Having
    concluded that the appellant did not represent a present threat it  was
    not necessary for the  judge  to  conduct  a  detailed  proportionality
    assessment  taking  into  account  the  extent   of   the   appellant's
    integration in the UK. In short, it is difficult to see how anything in
    Schedule 1 would have made any material difference to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

19.   The  other  two  grounds  relating  to  proportionality   also   fail.
    Following the decision in Munday  (EEA  decision:  grounds  of  appeal)
    [2019] UKUT 00091 the judge erred in making an apparently off the  cuff
    statement that the appeal also succeeded under Article 8 [29]. However,
    the error makes no material difference to an appeal brought on the sole
    ground that the decision breaches the appellant's rights under  the  EU
    Treaties when she had already undertaken a  proportionality  assessment
    under EU law. The judge's findings relating to the genuine and  present
    threat posed by the appellant  were  sustainable.  She  considered  the
    appellant's personal circumstances including his length  of  residence,
    his  family  ties  and  other  factors  that  were  relevant   to   the
    proportionality assessment. Those findings were open to her to make  on
    the evidence.

20.  For these reasons, I conclude the First-tier Tribunal decision did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law that would  have  made
    any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]    Date 25 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

