
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00365/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 21 March 2018                              |On 23 March 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             IRENEUSZ SOBOTNICKI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M Ross, of LKW, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 22 December  1986.    The
    SSHD's letter and decision notice dated 19 June 2017 state that  he  is
    to be deported under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 and  advise
    him of his right of appeal to the FtT under regulation 36 and  schedule
    2 of the regulations.

 3. The appellant filed notice of appeal to the FtT  dated  30  June  2017,
    stating in his grounds simply that the  decision  breaches  his  rights
    "under the community treaties in respect of entry to  or  residence  in
    the UK".

 4. FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC heard the appeal on 12 October 2017.  His
    decision was promulgated on 29 November 2017.  Parties were at odds  on
    whether the appellant had acquired the  right  of  permanent  residence
    under regulation 15 and so subject not simply  to  "grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health" under regulation 27  (1)  but
    to "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public  security"  under
    regulation 27 (3).

 5. The presenting officer submitted that he should be deported even by the
    higher criterion (paragraphs 28 and 32) while  the  solicitor  for  the
    appellant was said to be unable to make any submission  on  that  basis
    (paragraph 32).  The judge  held  that  permanent  residence  had  been
    established  and  expressed  disappointment  that  he  had  no  "proper
    submissions" on that basis (paragraphs 32, 38 and 41).  He then said at
    paragraph 42:

         "...  the  appellant  ...  has  established  permanent   residence.
         Consequently, I am not in a position  to  uphold  the  respondent's
         decision.  It may  be  of  course  that  once  the  respondent  has
         reconsidered ...  [she]  ...  will  take  the  view  that  ...  the
         appellant ... ought still to be deported.  However, that is not the
         basis on which the  respondent's  decision  appears  to  have  been
         issued so to that  limited  extent  ...  I  require  to  allow  the
         appeal."

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the  UT.   At  part  C  of  her
    application, "reasons for appealing", she advanced two errors of law:

         (1)      the judge incorrectly remitted the appeal to the FtT  when
         he had no power to do so.  Greenwood (No 2) [2015]  UKUT  00629  is
         cited.

         (2)      Failure to resolve a conflict on a material matter, namely
         "the appellant's residence status and whether he poses  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat to justify deportation".

 7. (The language of ground 2 is excerpted from regulation 27 (5)).

 8. FtT Judge Landes  granted  permission  on  10  January  2018,  although
    observing on ground (1)  that  what  the  judge  did  might  have  been
    consistent with Greenwood.  On ground (2), the judge did appear to have
    made a  finding  on  permanent  residence,  but  arguably  should  have
    proceeded to resolve the issue even in absence of detailed submissions.

 9. In his skeleton argument, Mr Ross deals with the tests  for  permission
    and for error of law, and submits that the decision might stand on  the
    basis of the finding of permanent residency.

10. I indicated that I was satisfied that the decision could not stand.

11. Schedule 2 of the regulations deals with the application  of  the  2002
    Act to appeals under the regulations.  Section 84 of  the  Act  applies
    "as though the sole permitted grounds of appeal were that the  decision
    breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  treaties  in  respect  of
    entry to or residence in the UK".

12. Greenwood is now to be read subject to Charles  (human  rights  appeal:
    scope) [2018] UKUT 00089.  However, the intricacies do not  affect  the
    plain outcome of this case.

13. The FtT was bound to resolve the ground of appeal before it, and  erred
    in law by failing to do so.  Its decision must be set aside.

14. The case is remitted to the FtT for further decision.

15. Parties agreed that there was no reason to interfere with the  findings
    on permanent residence, and no reason why the case might not come again
    before Judge Clapham.  Further listing is a matter for the FtT.

16. Mr Ross said that the appellant was likely to seek to introduce further
    evidence. I indicated that any application should be made  as  soon  as
    possible, and that a decision on it would also be a matter for the FtT.



17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            20 March 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




