
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00829/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                              MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUSTAFA YASAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. B Bundock, counsel instructed by Wilson and Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal from a decision  of  FtT  Judge
    Finch (as she then was) allowing  the  respondent's  appeal  against  a
    decision to deport him by reason of his criminal conduct.

 2. The respondent is a Turkish national born in May 1957 and thus  now  58
    years old. He is of Kurdish ethnicity. He applied for asylum in the  UK
    in February 1989. He was refused refugee  status  but  granted  ELR  in
    October 1991 and subsequent extensions of stay.

 3. The respondent married in Turkey in 1973. His wife was born in  January
    1956 and is 59 years old. There are three  surviving  children  of  the
    marriage born in June 1976, October 1976, and July 1981.  His wife  and
    children arrived in  the  UK  in  April  1989  and  were  also  granted
    extensions  of  stay.  In  March  2000  all  the  family  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain. In November 2000 the  respondent  his  wife
    and son applied for naturalisation.  His  wife  and  son  were  granted
    British citizenship  in  2005  but  the  respondent's  application  was
    refused as  by  then  he  was  not  of  good  character.  Each  of  the
    respondent's three children are married or in a permanent  relationship
    with partners in the  United  Kingdom;  between  them  there  are  four
    grandchildren. Mrs Yasar has four brothers in the UK with whom she  has
    close relations. She has suffered from depression for the previous  ten
    years; arthritis in her shoulder, and high blood pressure. She receives
    disability allowance as a result of her mobility problems.

 4. The respondent was arrested for conspiracy to supply a controlled Class
    A drug, heroin, on 23 March 2001. He was tried  and  was  convicted  at
    Harrow Crown Court on 20 December 2001. He was sentenced to a  term  of
    five years imprisonment in February 2002. He  appealed  his  conviction
    with leave of the single judge. On 30  June  2003  his  conviction  was
    quashed and a retrial was directed. He was released from prison  on  14
    July 2003.  On 7 April 2006 he was once  again  found  guilty  and  was
    sentenced to 3 years 11 months imprisonment.  He  did  not  serve  this
    lesser term as he had already completed the five year  sentence.  There
    is no information in the papers as to why it took  nearly  three  years
    for the re-trial to take place.

 5. Although, given the passage of time, none of  the  papers  relating  to
    trial conviction and sentence are  available,  the  eventual  level  of
    sentence following a trial tends  to  indicate  that  at  re-trial  the
    sentencing judge assessed that the respondent played a lesser  role  in
    the offence or had mitigation that led him to be treated as  such.  His
    offending behaviour thus took place 14 years ago. There is no  evidence
    of any previous convictions before the events of 2001  or  any  further
    offending after completion of his sentence in 2003.

 6. In 2012 he applied to the Home Office for his ILR to be transferred  to
    his current passport. This  seems  to  have  led  to  an  inquiry  that
    resulted in a decision to deport him being made in April 2014. There is
    again no information on the papers why it was only  eight  years  after
    his reconviction that this decision  was  taken  other  than  that  the
    presenting officer at the hearing before Judge Finch  described  it  as
    'unfortunate'. Given the impact of the delay on the  family  and  their
    reasonable expectations of  continued  cohabitation,  as  well  as  the
    significant changes in law and practice in such cases since 2006,  that
    is something of an understatement.

 7. The appeal came on for hearing before Judge Finch in November 2014. The
    judge heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  wife  and  three
    children supplementing their witness statements. There  was  a  written
    report of an independent social worker,  detailing  the  interdependent
    family  relations  that  he  had  observed  in  a  domestic  visit  and
    commenting on the wife's mental and physical health and the  impact  of
    deportation on her.

 8. She heard submissions on the application of paragraphs 399 (a) and  (b)
    of the Immigration Rules to the facts of the case and took  account  of
    the guidance as to assess an Article 8 human rights in the light of the
    rules designed to provide a code for such assessments since  2012.  The
    judge also directed herself, as to the relevant considerations that she
    was required to take into account by the  terms  of  s.  117  B  and  C
    inserted by Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2014. She noted  the
    very serious nature of the offence, the fact that the more serious  the
    offence is the greater the public  interest  in  deportation,  and  the
    legitimate inferences to be drawn from the length of the sentence as to
    his level of participation in it.  She noted  that  as  the  respondent
    received a sentence of less than four years the  public  interest  that
    required the respondent's deportation was subject to Exception  2  that
    applied where the offender had a genuine and subsisting relationship or
    child and the effect on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

 9. Having properly directed herself as to the requirements of statute  and
    the approach to human rights claims directed by the Immigration  Rules,
    the judge applied her findings of fact to the  relevant  tests  and  in
    particular whether the respondent's deportation would be  unduly  harsh
    on his family members.

10. The judge then recited the uncontroversial facts that:
      i. The marriage had lasted some 42 years from 1973,  was  genuine  and
         subsisting and had not  been  entered  into  at  a  time  when  the
         respondent's status was precarious.
     ii. The wife had lived in the UK for  26  years  at  the  time  of  the
         hearing and each of the children had lived  here  for  the  greater
         part of their lives.
    iii. The wife receives help and social support from her brothers in  the
         United Kingdom where her husband, who is not in the best of  health
         himself, cannot  help.  She  is  in  receipt  of  higher  level  of
         disability allowance
     iv. She relies on her husband for daily personal care in getting out of
         bed, dressed, washed, and  sanitary  functions.  She  is  not  well
         versed in English and relies on her husband  for  shopping,  travel
         and emotional support.

11. Before his conviction Mr Yasar had been working in  various  capacities
    and supporting his family. Since his release from prison, he  had  been
    in  ill  health  and  spent  his  time  with  his  wife,  children  and
    grandchildren; one of his sons in law had suffered injuries  in  a  car
    accident that restricted his ability to care for  his  children.  There
    were concerns expressed by his wife and the independent  social  worker
    as to how the appellant would survive by himself.

12. The judge then indicated at [23] and [25] of the decision  that  taking
    all the evidence before her into account that it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect the wife either to return  to  Turkey  with  her  husband  or
    remain in the United Kingdom without him.

13. The Secretary of State lodged grounds of  appeal  contending  that  the
    judge failed  adequately  to  explain  her  findings  on  unduly  harsh
    because:
      i. in respect of a possible  return  to  Turkey,  the  judge  did  not
         mention the Secretary of State's decision letter to the effect that
         there were medical facilities in Turkey and that the  wife  was  of
         Turkish origin and must have retained ties there.
     ii. in respect of a possible separation of the spouses, why the  wife's
         brothers could not  substitute  for  the  personal  care  that  the
         husband received.

14. Permission to appeal was refused by the  FtT  on  the  basis  that  the
    grounds in reality amounted to no more than assessments reached by  the
    judge without misdirection. Permission was granted by UT Judge Kekic.

15. Ms Fijiwala developed her grounds of appeal with  vigour,  but  as  she
    developed her points the more we were persuaded that  the  response  of
    the FtT to the application for permission to  appeal  was  correct  and
    this appeal was a sophisticated attempt to endeavour to substitute  the
    Secretary of State's views for the careful assessment  reached  by  the
    judge without misdirection.

16. In MAB (para 399; unduly harsh) USA [2015] UKUT 000435  a  constitution
    of this Tribunal observed that unduly harsh was something  more  severe
    than uncomfortable, inconvenient and unwelcome  and  something  of  the
    flavour of  inordinately  severe  and  bleak  was  required.  They  are
    ordinary words that require no precise definition in their  application
    but this seems to capture the flavour of the requirement  in  both  the
    Rules and the Act. An overall assessment is required.

17. It seems to us unsurprising to reach the conclusion that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh or inordinately bleak to  expect  a  woman  nearly  60  to
    either live part from her husband of  42 years, with whom she had  been
    consistently cohabiting for the last 26 years with the exception of the
    30 month period when he was serving his sentence, and on whom  she  now
    depends for intimate care and support,  or abandon her home,  siblings,
    children and grandchildren and the domestic arrangements  developed  in
    the  UK  over  the  past  26  years  in  the  country  of  her  present
    nationality. Huang [2007] 2 AC 167  AC is a case whose principles still
    resonate in this jurisdiction despite the numerous legislative and case
    law developments since it was decided. As Lord Bingham put it at [18]:
         'Human beings are social animals.  They  depend  on  others.  Their
         family, or extended family, is the group on which many people  most
         heavily depend, socially, emotionally and often financially.  There
         comes a  point  at  which,  for  some,  prolonged  and  unavoidable
         separation from this group seriously inhibits their ability to live
         full and fulfilling lives. Matters such  as  the  age,  health  and
         vulnerability of the applicant, the closeness and previous  history
         of the family, the applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
         emotional support of the family, the prevailing cultural  tradition
         and conditions in the country of origin and many other factors  may
         all be relevant.'

18. Of course there is a strong public interest in deporting those who deal
    in class A drugs, but  the  sentence  was  under  four  years  and  the
    statutory  scheme  contemplated  that  the  public  interest  could  be
    outweighed by the respect  to  be  given  to  family  life,  where  the
    consequences of deportation would be unduly harsh.  Further,  for  this
    consequence to result from offending behaviour prosecuted 14 years  ago
    and where no deportation action had  been  taken  for  eight  years  is
    itself a weighty consideration in the proportionality exercise.

19. In our judgment, there was no  error  of  self-direction  made  by  the
    judge; all the evidence was considered and a holistic assessment  made.
    The judge did not base her decision on an absence of medical facilities
    in Turkey, or the absence  of  linguistic  ties  with  her  country  of
    origin. She did not need to spell out these considerations in order  to
    sufficiently explain her decision, although they  formed  part  of  the
    overall picture in the case,  to  which  she  indicated  that  she  had
    regard.

20. We add, for completeness, that in the light of the  references  to  the
    respondent's employment prior  to  his  sentence,  we  raised  with  Ms
    Fijiwala whether this was a case to which the Secretary of State should
    have applied the EU law principle of public policy  by  reason  of  the
    Ankara Agreement and its implementing measures, and the case law of the
    Court of Justice. This explains  that  Turkish  workers  who  are  duly
    integrated into the labour force of the host  state  by  achieving  the
    unconditional right  to  take  employment  after  four  years  economic
    activity may  only  be  expelled  where  their  presence  represents  a
    sufficiently serious present threat to one of the fundamental interests
    of society: see in particular Case 383/03 Dogan [2005]  ECR  where  the
    principles were applied to a Turkish worker who received a  three  year
    sentence for class A drug dealing.

21. In the end we accepted  her  submission  that  there  was  insufficient
    information on the evidence as  to  the  nature  and  duration  of  the
    employment activity to have required either the Secretary of  State  or
    the judge to consider the issue. We stress that in this kind  of  case,
    it will be  important  for  their  legal  representatives  to  properly
    explore the employment history in the light of the  EU  case  law,  and
    where an offender is unrepresented for a judge to raise  the  issue  if
    there is reason to believe it is applicable.

22.  Finally, Mr Bundock invited us to continue the  anonymity  order  made
    below. We understand why, out of an abundance of caution, it  was  made
    below, pending the determination of this appeal, but we do not consider
    that a sufficient case has been made to depart from  the  principle  of
    open justice. We will revoke the order and refuse anonymity.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed
           [pic]
THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE   Date 20 November 2015
