
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00219/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2016                  |On 29 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ROBERT [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  to  the
      respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before the
      First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, Robert [S], was born on 3 March
      1972 and is a male citizen of Poland.  He appealed to the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Hillis) against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
      State dated 24 April  2016  to  deport  him  to  Poland  pursuant  to
      Regulation 19, 21 and 24 of the Immigration  European  Economic  Area
      (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed  his  appeal
      under the 2006 Regulations and on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
      ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to  the
      Upper Tribunal.

   2.  The  Appellant  appeared  on  eleven   separate   occasions   before
      Magistrates' Courts between October  2007  and  April  2016  and  was
      sentenced to a  number  of  community-based  sentences,  including  a
      period of 28 days'  imprisonment  (March  2012)  for  an  offence  of
      shoplifting.  As Judge Hillis noted [12], "In summary  five  offences
      of shoplifting, three offences of drunk and disorderly behaviour, one
      offence for assaulting a police constable in  the  execution  of  his
      duty and failing to surrender to custody."

   3. At [47] Judge Hillis concluded:

       i. I conclude, for the reasons set out above,  that  the  respondent
          has  failed  to  show,  to  the  required  standard,   that   the
          appellant's residence in the UK is not conducive  to  the  public
          good and is not justified on the grounds of public policy, public
          security or public health as required by Regulation 19 of the EEA
          Regulations 2006 and his deportation is contrary  to  his  treaty
          rights.

   4. The judge went on to conclude at [48] that the appellant's  right  to
      "private/family life with his partner, Miss Atif, with whom he has  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship in the UK will be breached by his
      deportation."  The judge later noted that the Presenting Officer  did
      not submit to him that the  relationship  with  Miss  Atif  was  "not
      genuine and subsisting."

   5. The grounds of appeal are set out  in  four  paragraphs.   The  first
      paragraph reads:

       i. It is respectfully submitted that  the  FTTJ  has  erred  in  his
          conclusion that the appellant's deportation would be contrary  to
          his Treaty Rights.  It is respectfully asserted that having found
          in the first instance and by the appellant's own  admission  that
          he was not in fact exercising Treaty Rights having worked in  the
          UK  unlawfully  throughout  his  period  of  residence,   it   is
          misdirected  to  conclude  that  deportation  in  light  of   his
          offending would therefore be contrary to his Treaty Rights.   The
          appellant has not demonstrated that he is a qualified person  and
          has accepted that he is in fact not exercising treaty  rights  in
          the UK as such there can be no interference.

   6. The grounds of appeal are correct in stating that the  appellant,  by
      his own admission, had never worked lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom
      and had never paid any income tax or national insurance contributions
      (as noted by the judge a [15]).  The judge addressed the question  of
      the appellant's abuse of Treaty Rights at [42-46].  In  summary,  the
      judge found the appellant's illegal working "does not appear to be an
      effort to circumvent the requirement to be a qualified person ... but
      is more likely to have been a desire to avoid paying income  tax  and
      NIC in the UK as money paying those taxes would have rendered  him  a
      qualified person."   I  am  uncertain  as  to  the  meaning  of  that
      sentence.  The grounds of appeal [2] describe this observation of the
      judge as "misdirected in the extreme" pointing out that free movement
      within the European Union relied upon workers paying  taxes  required
      of them in member states where they may be working.   I  agree.   The
      fact remains that this appellant  has  never  worked  legally  whilst
      there was no evidence that he has ever been a jobseeker  or  that  he
      has qualified for Treaty Rights in any other capacity.   The  passage
      of the judge's decision which I have referred to above (it appears at
      [44]) appears to suggest that the appellant lacked the  intention  to
      avoid exercising Treaty Rights and that, in consequence, his  failure
      to exercise those rights should not be held against him.  I  consider
      such conclusion does indeed fall into the  category  of  an  "extreme
      misdirection."  The appellant was either exercising Treaty Rights  or
      he was not; it matters not as to his intentions or lack of them.   If
      he did not  exercise  Treaty  Rights,  then  that  fact  altered  the
      protection to which he might be entitled under the 2006 Regulations.

   7. The second matter which led Judge Hillis to discount  the  fact  that
      the appellant had not been  exercising  Treaty  Rights  concerns  the
      residence card issued to Miss Atif by the respondent  in  2015.   The
      judge notes [45] that there was "no evidence or submission before  me
      that [the residence card] was  obtained  by  deception."   The  judge
      observes  that  "the  appellant  must  have  been  regarded  [by  the
      respondent] as a qualified person when  Miss  Atif  was  granted  her
      residence card ...."  This observation appears to have led the  judge
      to conclude that the Secretary of State is, by issuing the  residence
      card, now prevented from asserting that the appellant is not and  has
      not been exercising Treaty Rights.  I find that the  judge  erred  in
      law in reaching such a conclusion.  First, we have no  evidence  that
      the residence card  was  properly  obtained.   On  the  contrary,  it
      appears that it was not given that the  appellant  had  never  worked
      legally or been a jobseeker within the United Kingdom.  It  may  well
      be the case (as stated in the grounds of appeal at [3]) "that  it  is
      only a requirement to demonstrate economic activity in the UK at  the
      time of the application [to obtain a residence card]."  I also  agree
      with the respondent's submission that Miss Atif's residence card  was
      "wholly parasitic" upon the treaty rights supposedly enjoyed  by  the
      appellant.  It follows that the appellant enjoyed no such rights, and
      the residence card issued to Miss Atif has been void or not valid  ab
      initio.

   8. Judge Hillis should have concluded, on the evidence before him,  that
      the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  protection  under  the   2006
      Regulations because he was not at the date of the decision or at  the
      date of the hearing or, indeed, at any time during his  residence  in
      the United Kingdom exercising Treaty Rights.   He  has  never  fallen
      within any of the definitions of a qualified person (regulation 6) so
      had no extended right to remain beyond an initial period of 3  months
      (regulation 13(1) and see also regulation 14(1)). The appellant never
      sought legitimate work but rather chose  to  work  illegally  without
      paying tax. I therefore set aside Judge  Hillis'  decision  and  have
      remade the decision.  The appeal against the decision to  deport  the
      appellant dated 24 April 2016 is dismissed. Article 8  ECHR  was  not
      pursued in the Upper Tribunal but insurmountable obstacles in so  far
      as it may remain a  ground  of  appeal,  I  dismiss  it.  Whilst  the
      appellant may be in  a  subsisting  relationship  with  Ms  Atif,  no
      evidence has been produced to show  that  the  relationship  may  not
      reasonably be  continued  abroad.  On  the  other  hand,  the  public
      interest in removing the appellant, an individual who has  chosen  to
      work illegally in the United Kingdom, is very considerable.



   9. Notice of Decision

  10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 12  July  2016
      is set aside.  I remake the decision.  The appellant's appeal against
      the Secretary of State's decision to deport him dated 24  April  2016
      is dismissed.

  11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 29 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
