
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00032/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|London                               |                                     |
|On Monday 25 November 2019           |On Monday 13 January 2020            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 LUIS RAMOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik, Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

    1. By a decision promulgated on 4 September 2019, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Plimmer found an error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Place, itself promulgated on 28 May 2019.   She  therefore  set
       aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Her error of law  decision
       is annexed to this decision for ease of reference.

  FACTUAL BACKGROUND

    2. The Appellant is a national of Portugal.  He was born  on  20  August
       1988 and came to the UK at some time during 1998 when  aged  nine  or
       ten years old.

    3. On 10 September 2004, the Appellant was  sentenced  to  seven  years'
       imprisonment for manslaughter and conspiracy to commit robbery.   Due
       to his age, his detention was within a Young Offenders'  Institution.
       A  deportation  order  was  made  against  him,  but  the   Appellant
       successfully appealed against that order.  His appeal was allowed  by
       the Tribunal by a  decision  dated  23  August  2007.   The  Tribunal
       concluded that the Appellant was by then integrated into the UK.   He
       had received most of his education and underwent most  of  his  "life
       experiences" in this  country.   By  contrast,  he  had  few  if  any
       personal or cultural links to Portugal.  At that time, the  Appellant
       was said to be a medium risk of harm to the public but  there  was  a
       low risk of re-conviction.  The Tribunal concluded that the Appellant
       was not a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
       public.  That decision was not challenged further. The Appellant  was
       released from detention on 3 January 2008.

    4. The Appellant was convicted of the following offences thereafter  and
       prior to the index offence in this appeal:

              . 11 July 2011:   possession of a class B drug

              . 1 August 2012:  possession of a class B drug

              . 8 May 2014: driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol

       None of those convictions led to any period of imprisonment.

    5. The basis of the Respondent's  deportation  order  on  this  occasion
       arises from an incident which occurred on 15 January  2017  when  the
       Appellant caused the death of two young women  as  a  result  of  his
       dangerous driving.  On 16 October 2017, the Appellant  was  convicted
       of causing death  by  dangerous  driving  and  was  sentenced  on  30
       November 2017 to a term of imprisonment  of  sixty-three  months.  He
       remains in detention.

    6. On 7 January 2019, the Respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
       Appellant under  regulations  23(6)(b)  and  27  of  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

    7. The Appellant has a daughter from a previous relationship  who  lives
       with her mother but with whom the Appellant maintains contact.    His
       mother also continues to live in the UK as  does  his  brother  (with
       whom the Appellant was convicted in 2004) and his  brother's  family.
       He is  now  in  a  relationship  with  Ms  [AD],  a  British  citizen
       originating from Bulgaria.  The couple are engaged.

    8. The Appellant has been employed in  various  capacities  in  the  UK.
       Prior to the index offence, he had aspirations to qualify as a  Civil
       Engineer and had embarked on a degree course to that end.

  ISSUES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK

  Level of Protection

    9. The first and central issue between  the  parties  which  I  have  to
       determine is to what level  of  protection  against  deportation  the
       Appellant benefits under EU law; in other words, the level  to  which
       the Respondent needs to establish her case.

   10.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  the  Appellant  acquired   permanent
       residence on 6 April 2004 which has not been lost.  For that  reason,
       it is common ground that the Respondent needs to show that there  are
       serious grounds for deporting the Appellant.

   11. The Appellant contends however that he is  entitled  to  the  highest
       level of protection based on ten years' continuous  lawful  residence
       which has not been broken by his recent term of imprisonment.  If  he
       establishes that case, the Respondent would need to show  that  there
       are  imperative  grounds  for  the  Appellant's   deportation.    The
       Respondent did not provide  a  position  statement  for  the  hearing
       before me as she was  directed  to  do  by  UTJ  Plimmer  but,  as  I
       understood Mr Lindsay's submissions, the Respondent accepts that  she
       is unable to show that there are imperative  grounds  to  deport  the
       Appellant.  As Mr Malik pointed  out,  the  Respondent  did  not  put
       forward a positive case that imperative grounds exist at the  hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal (see [9] of that decision) and no such
       positive case was put to me.

   12. The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations are as follows:

           "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


           23. ...

                (6)    Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8),  an  EEA  national
                who has entered the United Kingdom or the family  member  of
                such a national who has entered the United  Kingdom  may  be
                removed if -

                    ...

                    (b)    the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the
                    person's removal  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
                    policy, public security or public health  in  accordance
                    with regulation 27; or

                ..."

           "Decisions taken on grounds of public  policy,  public  security
           and public health


           27. -  (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision"  means  an
                EEA decision taken on the grounds of public  policy,  public
                security or public health.

                ...

                (3)    A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a
                person with a right of permanent residence under  regulation
                15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy  and  public
                security.

                (4)    A relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  except  on
                imperative grounds of public security in respect of  an  EEA
                national who-

                    (a)     has  a  right  of  permanent   residence   under
                    regulation 15 and who has resided in the United  Kingdom
                    for a continuous period of at least ten years  prior  to
                    the relevant decision; or

                    ...

                (5)    The public policy and public security requirements of
                the United  Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise
                conferred by these  Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the
                fundamental interests  of  society,  and  where  a  relevant
                decision is taken on grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security it must  also  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                following principles-

                    (a)    the decision must comply with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;

                    (b)    the decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;

                    (c)    the personal conduct of the person must represent
                    a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                    affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society,
                    taking into account past conduct of the person and  that
                    the threat does not need to be imminent;

                    (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case
                    or which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                    do not justify the decision;

                    (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not
                    in themselves justify the decision;

                    (f)     the  decision  may  be  taken  on   preventative
                    grounds, even in the  absence  of  a  previous  criminal
                    conviction, provided the grounds  are  specific  to  the
                    person.

                (6)    Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of
                public policy and public security in relation  to  a  person
                ("P") who is resident in the United  Kingdom,  the  decision
                maker must take account of considerations such as  the  age,
                state of health, family and economic  situation  of  P,  P's
                length of residence in the United Kingdom,  P's  social  and
                cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
                of P's links with P's country of origin.

                ...

                (8)     A  court  or  tribunal   considering   whether   the
                requirements of this regulation are met must (in particular)
                have regard to the considerations contained  in  Schedule  1
                (considerations of public policy, public  security  and  the
                fundamental interests of society etc.).

   13. My attention was drawn to the following case-law in relation  to  the
       issue of whether imperative grounds apply:

         . Secretary of State for the Home Department v MG (Case  C-400/12:
           16 January 2014)

         . MG (prison - Article 28 (3)(a) of Citizens Directive  (Portugal)
           [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC)

         . Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Vomero  (Case  C-
           424/16: 17 April 2018)

         . Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Franco  Vomero
           (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49

         . Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Franco  Vomero
           (Italy) [2019] UKSC 35

         . Secretary of State for the Home Department v Denis Viscu  [2019]
           EWCA Civ 1052

   14. I have read and taken into account those judgments.   However,  since
       there was no dispute as to the test which applies (as opposed to  the
       manner in which it operates), I need do no more than  summarise  what
       that test is.  That appears most succinctly at [31] of  the  judgment
       in Viscu citing from  the  CJEU's  judgment  in  B  v  Land  Baden  -
       Wurttemberg (Case C-316/16) [2019] QB 126 as follows:

           "As to whether periods of imprisonment may,  by  themselves  and
           irrespective of periods of absence from the host  Member  State,
           also lead, where appropriate to a severing of the link with that
           State and to the discontinuity of the  period  of  residence  in
           that State, the Court has held that although, in principle, such
           periods of imprisonment interrupt the continuity of  the  period
           of residence, for the purpose of Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive
           2004/38, it is nevertheless necessary - in  order  to  determine
           whether  those  periods  of   imprisonment   have   broken   the
           integrative links previously forged with the host  Member  State
           with the result that the person concerned is no longer  entitled
           to the enhanced protection provided for in that provision  -  to
           carry out an overall assessment of the situation of that  person
           at the precise time when the question of expulsion  arises.   In
           the context of that overall assessment, periods of  imprisonment
           must be taken into consideration together with all the  relevant
           factors in each individual case, including, as the case may  be,
           the circumstance that the person concerned resided in  the  host
           Member State for the 10 years preceding  his  imprisonment:  see
           MG's case paras 33-38"

   15. In terms of the factors which apply, the CJEU set out  the  following
       guidance (cited at [32] of the judgment in Viscu):

           "72.   As part of the overall assessment, mentioned in paragraph
           70 above, which in this case, is  for  the  referring  court  to
           carry out, it is necessary to take into account, as regards  the
           integrative links forged by B with the host Member State  during
           the period of residence before his detention, the fact that, the
           more those  integrative  links  with  that  State  are  solid  -
           including from a social and cultural and family perspective,  to
           the point where, for example, the person concerned is  genuinely
           rooted in the society of that State, as found by  the  referring
           court in the main proceedings - the lower the probability that a
           period of detention could have resulted  in  those  links  being
           broken and, consequently a discontinuity of the  10-year  period
           of residence  referred  to  in  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
           2004/38.

           73.    Other relevant factors in  that  overall  assessment  may
           include...first, the nature of the offence that resulted in  the
           period of imprisonment in  question  and  the  circumstances  in
           which  that  offence  was  committed,  and,  secondly,  all  the
           relevant  factors  as  regards  the  behaviour  of  the   person
           concerned during the period of imprisonment.

           74.    While the nature of the offence and the circumstances  in
           which it was committed shed light on the  extent  to  which  the
           person concerned has, as the case may  be,  become  disconnected
           from the society of the host Member State, the attitude  of  the
           person concerned during his detention may,  in  turn,  reinforce
           that disconnection or, conversely, help to maintain  or  restore
           links previously forged with the host Member State with  a  view
           to his future social reintegration in that State.

           75.    On that last point, it should also be borne in mind that,
           as the Court has already pointed out, the social  rehabilitation
           of the Union citizen  in  the  State  in  which  he  has  become
           genuinely integrated is not only in his  interest  but  also  in
           that of the European Union in general..."

   16. Finally, for the sake of completeness, I have regard to the Court  of
       Appeal's recent judgment in Terzaghi v Secretary  of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2017.  Although that was handed  down
       on 20 November 2019, neither party drew it to my attention, and I did
       not therefore hear submissions on it.  However, the judgment does not
       alter the principles as put forward to me by the  advocates  in  this
       case, but it does provide a very clear and concise exposition of  the
       way in which the test for imperative grounds is to operate at [12] of
       the judgment as follows:

           "The following propositions were common ground  before  us:  (1)
           the 10 year period referred to in regulation  21(4)  is  counted
           back from the date of the decision to deport, see MG  (Portugal)
           at paragraph 24, Warsame at  paragraph  10  and  FV  (Italy)  at
           paragraph 65; (2) the 10 year period  has  to  be  a  continuous
           period of residence in the United Kingdom, see MG (Portugal)  at
           paragraph 25  although  this  does  not  prevent  some  absences
           provided that there has not been a transfer of  'the  centre  of
           the personal, family or occupational  interests  of  the  person
           concerned'; (3) periods  of  imprisonment  will,  in  principle,
           interrupt the continuity of residence for the  10  year  period,
           see MG (Portugal) at paragraph 36 and FV  (Italy)  at  paragraph
           70.  This is because the imposition of a prison sentence  showed
           non-compliance with the values expressed by the society  of  the
           host  member  state  in  its  criminal  law,  see  Onuekwere  at
           paragraph 26; but (4) if a citizen of  the  European  Union  has
           resided for 10 years in the relevant state before the period  of
           imprisonment the  earlier  period  '  together  with  the  other
           factors  going  to  make  up  the  entirety  of   the   relevant
           considerations in each  individual  case',  may  be  taken  into
           account in determining whether the person has  regulation  21(4)
           status, see MG (Portugal) at paragraph  36  and  FV  (Italy)  at
           paragraph 71; (5) integration is based on only  on  'territorial
           and temporal factors but also on qualitative elements,  relating
           to the level of integration  in  the  host  member  state',  see
           paragraph 25 of Onuekwere and account should  be  taken  of  the
           following criteria to consider whether  integrative  links  have
           been  broken   including   'how   the   penalty   is   enforced;
           consideration of the offence committed; general behaviour  while
           in detention; acceptance  and  completion  of  treatment;  work;
           participation  in   educational   and   vocational   programmes;
           participation  in  the  enforcement   of   the   sentence;   and
           maintenance of personal and  family  ties  in  the  host  member
           state', see paragraph 123 of the Advocate General's  opinion  as
           approved by the judgment of the Court  at  paragraph  73  in  FV
           (Italy); and (6) the cases where there has been a  prior  period
           of 10 years residence and then a period of imprisonment  in  the
           lead up  to  the  decision  to  deport  have,  for  purposes  of
           regulation 21(4) status, been referred to as 'a  maybe  category
           of cases', see Warsame at paragraph 9."

       I note as an aside that the decision in that case was taken under the
       EEA Regulations 2006 and that regulation 21 corresponds to regulation
       27 of the EEA Regulations 2016 which applies in this case.

  Other Issues

   17. As I have already noted, if I conclude that the Respondent  needs  to
       show that there are imperative grounds to  deport  the  Appellant,  I
       need go no further and the Appellant will succeed in his appeal.

   18. If I conclude that the imperative grounds test is  not  met,  then  I
       need to go on to consider  whether  there  are  serious  grounds  for
       believing that the Appellant is a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
       serious threat to public policy or security.  That must be  based  on
       the  individual  threat  which  the  Appellant  poses  and  does  not
       incorporate considerations such as deterrence.  I must also  consider
       principles such as the proportionality of the decision to  deport  in
       the event that this becomes relevant.

  THE EVIDENCE

   19. I have before me the Appellant's original bundle of evidence to which
       I refer below as necessary as [AB/xx].  I also have  a  supplementary
       bundle from the Appellant to which I refer as [ABS/xx].   Finally,  I
       have a Respondent's bundle to which I refer as [RB/xx].

   20. Before I turn to the oral evidence given at the hearing before me,  I
       begin by noting the basis on which an  error  of  law  was  found  as
       appears at [10] and [11] of the Judge Plimmer's decision; in  essence
       that  Judge  Place  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for   her
       conclusions that the Appellant benefits from  the  highest  level  of
       protection as the Judge did not engage with the circumstances of  the
       offence in 2017 and made no reference to the Appellant's behaviour in
       prison.   Furthermore,  the  Judge's  reliance  on  the   Appellant's
       relationship with his daughter did not address  the  consequences  of
       the Respondent's imprisonment from 2017.

   21. At [12] of her decision, however, Judge Plimmer concluded that "[t]he
       fact finding is likely to be limited to the updated evidence as there
       has been no challenge to the findings of fact made by the  FTT".   It
       is therefore convenient to set out Judge Place's findings in order to
       incorporate those into my decision:

           "24.   In making my findings I have taken  account  of  all  the
           documentation before me.

           25.    I found all 3  witnesses  to  be  truthful  and  credible
           witnesses of fact.  Relying on their evidence, I find  that  the
           Appellant came to the UK in 1998 with his mother and brother.  I
           find that, though he still is able to speak Portuguese,  he  has
           no other cultural, social or family link with Portugal and  that
           he has been in the UK continuously since 1998, save for a  brief
           visit to Portugal to renew his passport.  I find that that visit
           did not interrupt his continuity of residence for  the  purposes
           of Regulation 3.

           26.    I find that the Appellant has an 8 year old  daughter  in
           the UK.  Though I was not given direct evidence on the point,  I
           find on the balance of probabilities  that  his  daughter  is  a
           British citizen.  I  find  that  before  he  was  imprisoned  in
           October 2017 he saw her on a regular basis and communicated with
           her even more regularly.  I accept [LB]'s evidence  that  he  is
           still in contact with her several times a  week  by  phone  from
           prison.

           27.    I find that the Appellant has strong family links in  the
           UK with his mother and brother and his brother's family.

           28.    I note from the decision of Immigration Judge  Holden  in
           2007, when the Appellant was still in custody for  manslaughter,
           that the Tribunal on that occasion  accepted,  in  allowing  his
           appeal against deportation, that the  Appellant  was  integrated
           into UK society to the extent that he had spent the majority  of
           his life and education in the UK, had little or no  personal  or
           cultural links to Portugal and had a good record in prison.

           29.    I find that  in  the  approximately  9  �  years  between
           periods  of  imprisonment   the   Appellant   strengthened   his
           integration into UK society by working -  there  is  documentary
           evidence that he was employed between September 2012  and  April
           2015 and between September 2016 and March 2017 - and by becoming
           a father to a child who has spent all of her 8 years of life  in
           the UK.

           ...

           34.    Counting back 10 years from the Respondent's decision  of
           7th January 2019 brings us to 7th January 2009.   The  Appellant
           spent some 15 months (October  2017  to  January  2019)  of  the
           required 10 year period in  prison.   The  question  for  me  is
           whether  that  period  of  imprisonment  should  be   taken   as
           interrupting his continuity of residence.

           35.     I  am  required  to  take  account   of   all   relevant
           circumstances.  Starting with the circumstances which I consider
           weigh against the Appellant, I note the severity of the  offence
           which led to his being imprisoned.  Although the  witnesses  and
           even Mrs Nicholson persisted in  referring  to  the  'accident',
           there should be no hiding from the  fact  that  he  committed  a
           crime which led to the death of  2  people.   Again,  I  do  not
           accept Mrs Nicholson's submission that, in effect, this  offence
           was a 'one  off'.   Between  his  periods  of  imprisonment  the
           Appellant had accumulated a number of offences.  It is true that
           none had led to a period of imprisonment  but  they  include  an
           offence of drink driving.  Through drink driving  the  Appellant
           might have killed someone  earlier.   I  find  that  his  latest
           offence is part of an escalating pattern  of  offending  in  the
           area of driving.

           36.    I note too, that it is not disputed  that  the  Appellant
           was warned in a letter dated  19th  December  2007  that  if  he
           offended further he would  be  subject  to  deportation  action.
           Notwithstanding that warning the Appellant went on to  commit  a
           number of less serious offences and eventually the offence which
           led to 2 people being killed.

           37.    On the other hand, I note that the Appellant was found by
           the Immigration Judge in 2007 to have integrated into UK society
           and that the Tribunal in that case took account of  his  conduct
           in prison in deciding that he was so integrated.  His first time
           in prison, in other words, contributed to his  integration  into
           UK society.

           38.    The Appellant spent over 9 years  and  9  months  out  of
           prison  between  offences.   His  integration  was  strengthened
           significantly by the birth of  his  daughter  in  2010  and  his
           ongoing contact with her.  I find that  he  has  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with her and that she would not
           be able to join him in Portugal because of her  mother's  family
           commitments to  the  UK.   I  find  that  it  would  be  in  his
           daughter's best interests for the Appellant to remain in the UK.

           39.    The Appellant has spent a total of some 21 years  in  the
           UK.  He has no links to Portugal other than an ability to  speak
           the language...."

   22. Mr Lindsay objected to the preservation of the  finding  at  [37]  of
       Judge Place's decision which he said was wrong in law in light of the
       Supreme Court's 2019 judgment in Vomero (see [45] of that  judgment).
       The Supreme Court was  there  concerned  with  whether  a  period  of
       imprisonment can count towards the five years required for  permanent
       residence.  The Supreme Court held that the period must be  completed
       prior to imprisonment for the index offence.  The  period  in  prison
       cannot count towards the required five years' period.   I  accept  to
       that extent that the final sentence of [37] of Judge Place's decision
       may be  infelicitously  worded.   However,  that  makes  no  material
       difference in this case because,  on  any  view,  the  Appellant  has
       completed a  period  of  five  years'  continuous  residence  between
       periods of imprisonment.  Integration is only  relevant  to  the  ten
       years'  period  if  that  period  is  completed.   Also,  the   first
       Tribunal's finding as to integration is only a starting point and can
       be displaced by subsequent events.

   23. In light  of  the  potential  relevance  of  the  earlier  period  of
       imprisonment to the Appellant's integrative  links,  however,  it  is
       necessary to have regard to precisely what was found by the  Tribunal
       in relation to the earlier period of imprisonment.   The  hearing  at
       that time took place on 10 August 2007.  The Appellant  had  by  that
       time been present in the UK for about nine years.  He  was  sentenced
       on 10 September 2004 to a period of detention in a  Young  Offenders'
       Institution for seven years as a result of a conviction in July 2004.
        At the time of conviction and sentence, the Appellant had  therefore
       been at liberty in  the  UK  for  about  six  years.   The  Appellant
       remained in detention at the relevant time; his earliest release date
       was 13 January 2008.  No issue therefore arose in relation to whether
       there were imperative grounds requiring his deportation.  The finding
       as  to  integration  was  made  in   the   context   of   considering
       proportionality.  The finding made by the Tribunal on  that  occasion
       was as follows:

           "We find from the background material supplied to  us  and  from
           our  observations  at  the  hearing,  that  the  Appellant   has
           integrated into the  United  Kingdom  to  the  extent  that  the
           majority of his education and life experiences have taken  place
           in the United Kingdom.  He has, in effect, little or no personal
           or  cultural  links  to  Portugal.   His  immediate  family  are
           resident in the United Kingdom.  We also find from the  evidence
           at the hearing that he is in good health and has  obtained  some
           skills whilst in custody so as to enable him to either  continue
           with his education and/or  find  employment  as  a  painter  and
           decorator."

   24. Although Judge Plimmer preserved the findings of fact made  by  Judge
       Place, she also observed that the Judge had given inadequate  reasons
       to support her conclusion that the Appellant was so integrated in the
       UK that the periods of imprisonment had not broken the  link  and  he
       could therefore show ten years' continuous residence. It is therefore
       necessary for me to say something about the evidence which was before
       Judge Place to which reference was not made in her findings.

   25. Dealing first with the period following his release from detention in
       2008 and  re-imprisonment  in  November  2017,  the  Appellant  gives
       evidence in his statement at [AB/349-351] that he was employed  first
       as a courier in 2010 before starting an  apprenticeship  in  2012  in
       highway maintenance which he completed in 2014. He began a degree  in
       civil engineering in 2016 and had completed the first  year  of  that
       course before his latest conviction (see witness statement of Ms  [D]
       at  [ABS/1-3,  paragraph  [6]).   Letters  of  support  from  various
       employers and his  college  lecturer  appear  at  [AB/222-226].   The
       Appellant came to the UK with his mother as a  child.   Most  of  his
       education was therefore in the UK (although of course  some  of  that
       will have been whilst he was in detention for the earlier offence  of
       which he was convicted in 2004)

   26. The Appellant's mother and brother and his brother's family remain in
       the UK.  The Appellant's mother, Vera Cristina, provided a  statement
       for the First-tier Tribunal hearing which is at [AB/91-93]; she  also
       gave oral evidence at that hearing.  She there explains that she  and
       the children came to the UK to avoid an abusive partner/father.   She
       also records that she was born in Angola before  moving  to  Portugal
       aged seventeen/eighteen years and had no  family  in  Portugal.   She
       herself lived in  Portugal  for  only  about  seventeen  years.   She
       confirms  that  the  Appellant  has  lived  with  her  when  not   in
       detention/prison and has helped her with her various health problems.



   27. The Appellant's brother, Nuno Ramos has provided  a  statement  which
       appears at [AB/388-390].  He also gave  oral  evidence  before  Judge
       Place. The statement confirms the evidence of the Appellant's  mother
       as to the family's background.  It also confirms that  the  Appellant
       has  a  HNC/HND  in  civil   engineering   and   has   completed   an
       apprenticeship in that field.  The Appellant's brother confirms  that
       the family has no relatives in Portugal; he has himself not  returned
       to Portugal since 1998 - the Appellant has returned once to renew his
       passport.  The Appellant's brother also provides evidence  about  the
       Appellant's daughter who is also close to his own two  children.   He
       says that [C] "desperately misses her father".  She told  her  mother
       that it was difficult for her to be at the Appellant's  home  because
       "the house 'smelled like daddy' and  that  made  her  miss  him  even
       more".

   28. The Appellant's former partner and the mother of his child, [LB]  has
       also provided a statement which is at [AB/94-95] and wrote  a  letter
       at [AB/122].  She too gave oral evidence before Judge  Place.   There
       is documentary evidence that both she  and  her  daughter,  [C],  are
       British citizens.   [C] was born in December 2010.   In  her  letter,
       [LB] describes the relationship between the Appellant and  [C]  as  a
       very strong one and that, before his  imprisonment,  he  had  contact
       with her twice a week (when [C] went to his house) and called her all
       the time.   [LB]  refers  to  [C]'s  behaviour  worsening  since  the
       Appellant was sent to prison.  The Appellant's involvement  in  [C]'s
       life is confirmed by a letter from her pre-school.  In her statement,
       [LB] confirms that the Appellant has called [C] from  prison  two  to
       three times per week.  [LB] also points out that she has three  other
       children.  Two are adults.  One remains a teenager.  The two  younger
       children require support due to learning  disabilities  and,  in  the
       case of the teenage boy, other mental health conditions.  She  points
       out that she cannot take her other children with  [C]  to  visit  the
       Appellant in Portugal.

   29. Ms [D] is the Appellant's fianc�e.  She provided a statement dated 20
       April 2019 for the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  at  [AB/337].   She
       confirms that they entered into a relationship in 2011.  They  became
       engaged in August 2016.  The couple had planned  to  get  married  in
       2019 but those plans had to be put on hold  due  to  the  Appellant's
       conviction.  Ms [D] also provided a further  statement  at  [ABS/1-3]
       which speaks of the Appellant's qualifications  and  aspirations  and
       his bond with his daughter with whom she has  also  formed  a  strong
       bond.   She says that she would struggle to go to Portugal  with  the
       Appellant as she has elderly parents who depend on  her.   She  lives
       with them presently. She elaborated on that evidence before me.   She
       now says that she would find it impossible to go with  the  Appellant
       to Portugal because of the situation of her parents.

   30. The Appellant also gave  oral  evidence  before  me  and  was  cross-
       examined although no further  witness  statement  was  provided.   He
       accepted the criticism made in the OASys report (with  which  I  deal
       below) that he had done things on impulse in  the  past  and  without
       thinking.  He said that he accepted that he "needs  to  practice  and
       ensure that he takes other  people's  feelings  into  consideration".
       When asked whether that meant that he accepted that he still had work
       to do to deal with his behaviour, he said that there is "always  more
       work to do" but "not much".  He did not think that  everything  which
       he did was on impulse but accepted that more could be done to address
       his compulsive behaviour.  He would be helped in that regard  by  his
       family support.

   31. The Appellant said that, since his release in  2008  until  his  more
       recent imprisonment he had made positive changes to his life and  had
       come a long way.  He accepted that he had been convicted  since  2008
       on six occasions, but he said that they were all non-violent and non-
       gang offences.  He accepted that he had committed those offences  and
       that, as a result of his actions, two innocent people had lost  their
       lives.  However, he said that these were all "terrible mistakes which
       [he] was paying for".

   32. The Appellant accepted that the recent offence was  not  an  accident
       because he was acting dangerously, driving at speed and had  breached
       a red light.   When he was referred to his statement which  described
       the offence as an accident, he said that he did  not  mean  that  the
       incident itself was an accident but the events  of  the  day  of  the
       offence.  He did not know  how  to  describe  it  other  than  as  an
       accident.  However, he fully accepted that it was  not  an  accident.
       He had pleaded guilty to causing death by  dangerous  driving.    The
       Appellant accepted that he had driven away  from  the  scene  of  the
       incident  and  had  not  offered  medical  assistance,  but  he   had
       telephoned for the emergency services  and  gave  his  name  and  his
       correct address.  He had just panicked but, because he had given  his
       particulars, he knew it was only a matter of time before  the  police
       would come for  him.   His  home  was  near  to  where  the  incident
       occurred.

   33. He confirmed that he has  maintained  contact  with  [C]  by  regular
       telephone calls since being in prison.  He feels that he has let  her
       down.  He says that he would not commit any further  offences  as  he
       could not put his family, his fianc�e and his  daughter  through  the
       same experience.   When asked whether [C] would be able to visit  him
       in Portugal with either [LB] or Ms [D], he said that he did not know.
        That would be a matter for his current or ex-partners.

   34. The Appellant pleaded guilty to  the  offence  of  causing  death  by
       dangerous driving (and two associated driving offences for  which  he
       was sentenced  concurrently).   As  a  result,  I  do  not  have  any
       sentencing remarks in relation to the index offence.  I do,  however,
       have the sentencing remarks in relation to the offence in 2004  which
       led to the Appellant's first conviction.  The Appellant was  at  that
       time a minor.  The sentencing remarks show  that  the  Appellant  was
       part of a gang (including the  Appellant's  brother)  who  robbed  an
       individual in his home.  The individual was, in  the  course  of  the
       robbery, bound and gagged, hit with a baseball bat and stabbed in the
       legs.  He subsequently died from asphyxiation.  The Appellant claimed
       that he remained outside the house as a look-out  but  that  was  not
       accepted.  However, the Judge did accept that the Appellant "probably
       played a lesser role" and "came in as the youngest of  the  offenders
       at  the  last  minute."  The  sentence  which  the  Judge  considered
       appropriate was one of eight years but, because he had spent  a  year
       in care on an intensive supervision and surveillance  programme,  the
       sentence handed down was seven years.

   35. I have already quoted from the Tribunal decision in relation to  that
       earlier offence.  The Tribunal  recorded  at  [23]  to  [25]  of  its
       decision that the "Appellant  has  made  good  use  of  his  time  in
       custody".  Based on the courses and his motivation to change as  well
       as his risk profile and a supporting letter from one of the  officers
       at the YOI where the Appellant was detained, the  Tribunal  concluded
       that the Appellant did not at that time pose a genuine,  present  and
       sufficiently serious threat.

   36. An OASys report was completed in relation to the Appellant  dated  30
       March 2018 ([AB/302-332]). The report provides  some  detail  of  the
       index offence.  It corroborates the Appellant's account that  he  did
       not immediately depart the scene of the accident but panicked as  the
       police arrived.  However, the Appellant  told  the  compiler  of  the
       report that the offence occurred when he  tried  to  beat  a  traffic
       light which had changed to amber.  He said that the two victims  were
       crossing the road as he did so even though the pedestrian  light  was
       on red.  However, the report notes a different version taken from the
       CPS papers.  The Appellant is  said  to  have  been  seen  on  camera
       breaking "approximately 2 sets of red lights which  activated  a  red
       light camera" ([2.1]).  His behaviour at the time of the  offence  is
       assessed to have been "extremely reckless and risky" as the Appellant
       accepted ([7.5]).  The compiler of the report notes at  [11.10]  that
       "Luis states that normally he does not  act  impulsively  and  thinks
       things through for best results. In relation to the  current  offence
       this quite obviously indicates that  this  was  an  impulsive  action
       taken at the last minute.  The fact that he had previously breached 2
       sets of red lights before this collision took place would  raise  the
       question on whether he actually planned not to stop  at  any  of  the
       lights which may have been due to  the  time  of  the  offence."  The
       report shows that the Appellant was tested for alcohol and  drugs  on
       arrest at his home and that both tests came back negative.

   37. The assessment of the report is that  the  Appellant  recognises  the
       impact  and  consequences   of   his   actions   and   has   accepted
       responsibility for the  offence.   However,  it  is  noted  that  the
       offence is part of a pattern of similar offending and  an  escalation
       in seriousness. The report assesses a 15% chance that  the  Appellant
       will offend within one year of discharge and a  26%  chance  that  he
       will do so within two years.  However, he is said to be at a low risk
       of violent reoffending (5% year one and 9% year two) and a  low  risk
       of non-violent reoffending (7% year  one  and  13%  year  two).   The
       compiler of the report assesses that the risk is linked to  impulsive
       behaviour and that the  risk  is  likely  to  be  greatest  when  the
       Appellant perceives that  there  is  no  risk  and  without  thinking
       through his actions.  The Appellant is assessed to be a  medium  risk
       of serious harm to the public and otherwise a  low  risk.   A  medium
       risk indicates that "there are identifiable  indicators  of  risk  of
       serious harm.  The offender has the potential to cause  serious  harm
       but is unlikely to do so unless there is a change  in  circumstances,
       for example, failure  to  take  medication,  loss  of  accommodation,
       relationship breakdown, drug or alcohol misuse".

   38. The Appellant's bundle contains  certificates  showing  that  he  has
       completed the following courses:

              . Restorative Justice & Victim Awareness Programme

              . Beyond Cravings Programme

       There is no evidence about what those courses entailed.

  SUBMISSIONS

   39. Mr Malik  provided  a  helpful  skeleton  argument  setting  out  the
       Appellant's position.  As I have already noted, there was no position
       statement from the Respondent.  I heard oral  submissions  from  both
       representatives.

  Appellant

   40. Dealing first with the level of protection  against  deportation,  Mr
       Malik invited me to have regard to the three separate  periods  which
       he said were relevant to the issue  whether  imperative  grounds  are
       required to be shown.  First, the Appellant has  resided  in  the  UK
       from 1998 to 2019 that is a period of twenty-one years.  Second,  the
       Appellant was at liberty between the two periods of detention from  3
       January 2008 to at the earliest 14 October 2017.  He was not in  fact
       incarcerated until sentence on 30 November 2017.  That is a period of
       nine years and eleven months.  That period,  he  says,  falls  to  be
       considered  when  looking  at  whether  the  Appellant   had   forged
       integrative links which had been broken by his most recent period  of
       imprisonment.  Third, the entire period prior  to  30  November  2017
       should be considered to be one where integrative links were built up,
       particularly in light of the earlier appeal decision  in  2007  which
       found that the Appellant was integrated even though he was  still  in
       detention at the relevant time following the manslaughter conviction.
        Mr Malik submitted that  the  concept  of  integrative  links  being
       broken does not change over time.  The previous appeal decision dealt
       with whether the links formed to that point had been broken  by  that
       period of detention and  concluded  that  they  had  not.   Mr  Malik
       accepted that this was not a preserved finding.  However, he  pointed
       out that the basis  of  the  previous  Tribunal's  decision  was  the
       Appellant's behaviour whilst in detention which was a relevant factor
       (see [50] of the judgment in Viscu).  The finding was  also  part  of
       the background to which I had to have regard following the Devaseelan
       guidance.

   41. In relation to the offending between the two more  serious  offences,
       Mr Malik pointed out that those were two of possession  of  drugs  in
       2011 and 2012 and one of driving whilst over the limit.  He  accepted
       that criminal offences were serious by definition but submitted  that
       some were more serious than others.  He asserted  that  it  was  only
       those which lead to imprisonment which  diminish  integrative  links.
       He  accepted  however  that  those  other  offences  were  admissible
       considerations  although  he  did  draw  to  my  attention  that  the
       Appellant had spent more than ten years in the UK by the time of  the
       first of the intervening offences if one included the period spent in
       prison.

   42. As Mr Malik submitted and I accept, whether the Appellant  has  built
       up integrative links with the UK is a value judgment.  The fact  that
       the Appellant had spent a period of very nearly ten years at  liberty
       between  the  two  periods  of  detention  was,  he  said  a  "deeply
       admissible"  consideration.   The  question  whether  the  period  of
       imprisonment for the index offence had broken those links was also  a
       matter of assessment.  The OASys report was relevant as was  evidence
       of the courses completed whilst in prison.   Although  the  Appellant
       had completed few courses, it was difficult to see what more he could
       do as he was limited by the courses on offer to him.  He had not  yet
       been released and therefore had not had the opportunity to  show  how
       he would behave on licence.  The  OASys  report  indicates  that  the
       index offence was related  to  a  character  trait  namely  impulsive
       behaviour.  The Appellant had addressed that.  The Appellant has  the
       further motivation since his first offence of a daughter with whom he
       enjoys a close relationship.  That is a powerful motivating factor.

   43. In relation to the evidence concerning integrative links and  whether
       those were broken by  the  recent  imprisonment,  Mr  Malik  drew  my
       attention to paragraphs [25] to [32] of Judge Place's decision  which
       I have set out at [21] above.   He drew my attention to Schedule 1 to
       the EEA Regulations which set out the factors to which I have to have
       regard which includes the best interests  of  the  Appellant's  child
       (paragraph 7(k) of Schedule 1).  I should also  have  regard  to  the
       fact that Ms [D] is a British citizen with a good  job  and  her  own
       family in the UK.  She could not relocate to Portugal.

   44. In the event that I was unpersuaded that the Appellant  attracts  the
       highest level of protection, Mr Malik also submitted  that  I  should
       find that there were not serious grounds to show that  the  Appellant
       is a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  public
       policy or security.  He pointed out that rehabilitation is a  "deeply
       material" factor.  He referred to the evidence of a lack of family in
       Portugal and the presence of all family members in the UK; also, that
       the Appellant's last twenty-one years are "entrenched in the UK".  Mr
       Malik submitted that, on those facts  which  are  not  disputed,  the
       prospects of the Appellant's rehabilitation  are  higher  in  the  UK
       where he has family members, friends  and  his  daughter  whereas  in
       Portugal he would be entirely alone.

   45. In terms of the risk which the Appellant poses, Mr Malik pointed  out
       that the offence was one which did not involve the intention to  harm
       or kill.  He submitted that the offence concerned the manner  of  the
       Appellant's driving and was  tantamount  to  strict  liability.   The
       Appellant  had  accepted  responsibility  for  the  offence  and  had
       accepted that it was not right to call it an accident  since  he  had
       killed two people.  Mr  Malik  also  referred  to  the  low  risk  of
       reoffending found in the OASys report.

  Respondent

   46. Mr Lindsay urged me to have regard to the entirety of the Appellant's
       criminal history.  As he put it, that history is "book-ended" by  two
       very serious offences both giving rise to lengthy  sentences.   Those
       offences were manslaughter for which the Appellant was convicted aged
       sixteen years to a term of seven years and causing death by dangerous
       driving in 2017 for which he had been sentenced  to  five  years  and
       three months. Mr Lindsay pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  had  the
       opportunity to reform on his release in 2008 but had  not  taken  it.
       That was relevant both to the risk of reoffending and  the  issue  of
       integrative links.  The criminal law imprisons those  who  break  the
       law because it recognises the lack of conformity with societal norms.
        Imprisonment therefore shows a lack of integration.

   47. Mr Lindsay also pointed out that those two offences were not the only
       ones  of  which  the  Appellant  had  been  convicted.   There   were
       convictions also in 2011, 2012 and 2014.  Although  those  were  more
       minor, he said that they show widespread  offending  in  the  interim
       period.  There was no  lengthy  period  when  the  Appellant  was  at
       liberty during which he had not offended or was  not  convicted.   He
       was released from his first offence on 3 January 2008 and  imprisoned
       again on 30 November 2017.  The ten years' period dates back from the
       date of the Respondent's decision on 7 January 2019.  At  that  date,
       the Appellant was  already  in  prison.   If  one  counts  back  from
       November 2017, the Appellant had not been at liberty for  ten  years.
       There was no clear continuous period of ten years when the  Appellant
       was at liberty in the UK even if one ignored the other offences.

   48. Mr Lindsay accepted  that  the  strength  of  integrative  links  was
       important and relevant to whether those links were broken.   However,
       he submitted that in this case the links were not strong.   That  the
       Appellant had built up a period of residence of five years to qualify
       for  permanent  residence  did  not  mean  that  there  were  strong,
       integrative links.  After all, he pointed out that, as  indicated  by
       the Supreme Court's judgment in Vomero in 2019, a person entitled  to
       rely on the highest level  of  protection  must  by  definition  have
       permanent residence.  It is a pre-requisite.

   49. Mr Lindsay also pointed to the escalation in the seriousness  of  the
       Appellant's offending culminating in the index offence.  The  conduct
       giving rise to that offence and the pattern of  offending  shows,  he
       said, a disregard of the law and the safety  of  others.   The  OASys
       report provides support for that  submission.   Although  Mr  Lindsay
       recognised that the OASys report  indicated  that  the  risk  of  the
       Appellant reoffending was a low one, he submitted  that  the  numbers
       are still high, and it could not be ruled out that if  the  Appellant
       impulsively reoffended again the seriousness would not be the same as
       on the occasion of the index offence.  He pointed out that  the  risk
       of  violent  reoffending  was  close  to  1:10  and  the  chance   of
       reoffending within two years was more than 1:4.

   50. Mr Lindsay submitted that if the Appellant's evidence were taken with
       the OASys report, it showed that the Appellant would continue to  act
       in a way which was incompatible with societal values.  The  Appellant
       had admitted that  he  needed  to  practise  more  and  take  others'
       feelings into account which was recognition that  he  had  not  dealt
       with his own impulsive behaviour.  Although Mr Lindsay accepted  that
       the index offence was not one of intention, he pointed out  that  the
       Appellant's actions  had  still  led  to  two  violent  deaths.   The
       Appellant's  reference  to  the  offence  as  an  accident  and   the
       suggestion that other convictions were non-violent suggested that the
       Appellant tended to minimise the seriousness of his offending.   That
       is relevant to the risk of reoffending and the degree of integration.
        Although Mr Lindsay accepted that the Appellant had  pleaded  guilty
       to the index offence, he pointed out that this was  in  the  face  of
       compelling evidence.  Although the Appellant now takes responsibility
       for the offence, he accepts that he panicked at the  time  and  drove
       away.

   51. Mr Lindsay therefore submitted that the Appellant could not show that
       he was entitled to the highest level of protection; due to the extant
       risk of reoffending, the real and extant risk of  serious  harm,  the
       lack of a ten years' period of continuous residence and the  lack  of
       integrative links.

   52. If I accepted that submission, Mr Lindsay  submitted  that  I  should
       conclude that there are serious grounds in this  case  for  deporting
       the Appellant.  He also submitted that I should find the  deportation
       to be proportionate in light of all the circumstances.   Although  it
       was said that the Appellant's mother and daughter could not accompany
       the Appellant to Portugal to live, there was no reason why they could
       not visit.   The  Appellant  himself  provided  no  such  reasons  in
       evidence.  The Appellant's presence in the UK was a sufficient threat
       to public policy and security which was a weighty  factor.   Although
       best interests of [C] were  a  relevant  consideration  they  were  a
       primary consideration and not the paramount one  and  therefore  they
       could be and would be outweighed by the Appellant's offending.

  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

  Imperative Grounds

   53. The Appellant has resided in the UK now for about  twenty-one  years.
       Of that period, he has spent about five and a half years in detention
       - three years and four months between 2004 and 2008 and two years and
       two months between November 2017 and the present time.   He  has  not
       completed a period of ten years at liberty between the two periods of
       detention; that period was one of nine years and approximately eleven
       months.  Neither had he completed a period of ten  years  at  liberty
       prior to his first period of detention.  On  that  occasion,  he  had
       spent about six or seven years in the UK.  As  such,  unless  one  is
       able to amalgamate the two periods at liberty, the  Appellant  cannot
       achieve  the  necessary  period  of  residence  such  as  to  require
       imperative grounds for deportation.

   54. I do not accept Mr Malik's proposition that the periods of  detention
       can count towards the ten years'  residence.  Although  I  accept  of
       course that the ten years' period must be counted back from the  date
       of decision - here 7 January 2019 - the case-law does not support  an
       argument that the period of residence in detention can  itself  count
       towards the ten years' period (see in particular  point  (4)  of  the
       analysis  in  Terzaghi  set  out  at  [16]  above).   The  issue   of
       integrative links is a separate one.  If the Appellant had spent  ten
       years at liberty prior to his incarceration, then  that  issue  would
       arise but otherwise not.

   55. This is an unusual case.  The Appellant's period of lawful  residence
       is, as Mr Lindsay put it, "book-ended" by two substantial periods  of
       detention for separate and unconnected offences.  Even if  the  first
       period of detention did not break the Appellant's  integrative  links
       (as the previous Tribunal found), the Appellant still could not  show
       a ten years' continuous period of residence because of the breaks  in
       residence formed by those two periods of detention.  For that reason,
       the Appellant has failed to establish  that  imperative  grounds  are
       required to justify his deportation.  I  do  not  therefore  need  to
       consider whether the period  of  detention  from  November  2017  has
       broken the Appellant's integrative  links.   I  do  however  need  to
       consider whether the Appellant should be deported on the  basis  that
       he is permanently resident in the UK which I now move on to do.

  Serious Grounds; Genuine, Present and Sufficiently Serious Threat

   56. In light of the Appellant's permanent residence, the  Respondent  has
       to show that there are serious grounds for deporting the Appellant to
       Portugal.  My assessment of that issue requires me first to  consider
       whether there are serious grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant
       remains a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.   The
       assessment of the threat must be based on  the  Appellant's  personal
       conduct and does not include factors such as deterrence.   Obviously,
       whilst what I have to assess is whether the threat is a present  one,
       the Appellant's past actions are or may be  highly  material  to  his
       propensity to reoffend.

   57. I begin with the Appellant's  first  offence  when  he  was  still  a
       teenager.  I am satisfied that this has no  bearing  on  whether  the
       Appellant is a current risk.  The nature of the  crime  committed  at
       that  time  is  wholly  different   to   those   offences   committed
       subsequently.  The  crime  was  gang-related.   It  was  a  crime  of
       intentional violence at a time when the Appellant was  a  very  young
       man although recorded in the evidence before the  first  Tribunal  as
       being very mature.  The Appellant's brother was also involved and the
       Judge records that the Appellant's own involvement  was  at  a  lower
       level and that he was brought in at the last minute.   The  Appellant
       has not committed any crime of intentional violence since his release
       in January 2008.  I am satisfied that the Appellant does not  pose  a
       threat now of committing a further offence of that nature.

   58. I can also largely disregard the two convictions of  drug  possession
       in 2011 and 2012.  Whilst not  wishing  to  downplay  the  threat  to
       society of drug abuse, the offences involved Class B  drugs  and  not
       Class A drugs and the offences were  of  simple  possession  and  not
       supply.  It is not suggested that the Appellant has offended then  or
       since as a result of drug abuse.    There  is  no  evidence  that  he
       continues to use drugs.  There is no mention of this as a risk factor
       in  the  OASys  report.   The  only  potential  relevance  is  as  an
       indication of the Appellant's disregard of the law.

   59. The other offence for which the Appellant was convicted  in  2014  of
       driving whilst under the  influence  of  excess  alcohol  is  however
       relevant.  The index offence  is  one  involving  driving.   To  that
       extent, the index offence involves an escalation.  However, the index
       offence was not committed by the Appellant whilst under the influence
       of alcohol.  On the other hand, it is relevant not  only  because  of
       the nature of the  offence  but  also  because  it  again  shows  the
       Appellant's disregard for the law  and  also  his  impulsive  nature.
       That is highly material to the index offence and current threat.

   60. Turning then to the  index  offence,  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Malik's
       characterisation of that offence as one which is to be  equated  with
       an offence of strict liability.  Whilst I  accept  that  the  offence
       does not involve intention to cause harm, it does involve a  standard
       of driving which is considered to be "dangerous" rather  than  simply
       careless in nature.   As such, a degree of disregard for  the  safety
       of others and recklessness is involved.    The  consequences  of  the
       Appellant's actions were very serious indeed involving the deaths  of
       two innocent pedestrians.  Such disregard for  the  safety  of  other
       road users indicates a lack of regard for the law.

   61. I accept Mr Lindsay's submission that the nature of  the  Appellant's
       past offending indicates that,  if  he  were  to  offend  again,  the
       consequences could be very serious. The Appellant has  been  involved
       in or responsible for the death of three innocent persons.  As  such,
       I accept that if the threat posed by the Appellant is a  genuine  and
       present one, it is sufficiently serious.  The crux of  the  issue  is
       whether the threat is one which is genuine and present.

   62. This is an unusual case in that the risk posed  is  not  due  to  any
       motivation based on circumstances.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the
       index offence was motivated by financial  need  or  alcohol  or  drug
       abuse.  I have already noted that, whilst this might  have  been  the
       case in relation to the earlier offences, the index offence  was  not
       said to be have been caused by drug or alcohol  use.   The  causative
       factor disclosed  by  the  OASys  report  is  said  to  be  impulsive
       behaviour due to lack of recognition of risk.  The categorisation  of
       risk as "medium" is, as I have already noted, indicative of a lack of
       likelihood to offend unless circumstances change but here it  is  not
       the Appellant's circumstances that have caused the offending  in  the
       first place. As such, it is quite difficult to  assess  whether  that
       risk is likely to materialise.

   63. The fact that the Appellant acts in an impulsive manner  and  without
       thinking is a facet of his personality and might also indicate a lack
       of maturity.  I note however  that  the  evidence  before  the  first
       Tribunal was that he is very mature, and he did not  come  across  in
       his evidence to me as immature.   His  evidence  was  considered  and
       thoughtful.  He has accepted however that he does need to adjust  his
       behaviour to ensure that he  does  not  offend  in  this  way  again.
       Although he did say that the work to deal with this was ongoing, I am
       satisfied that he has recognised the need to change  this  aspect  of
       his personality and will do so.  I do not place weight  on  the  fact
       that he still recognises that there may be more to do.  His  evidence
       is that he recognises that he has made a "terrible mistake" and  will
       not wish to repeat it.  He is now aware of the consequences  of  such
       actions.  Although he had committed a serious offence when he  was  a
       teenager and, as Mr Lindsay submitted,  should  have  recognised  the
       consequences at that stage, the nature of  that  offence,  being  one
       involving some pre-meditation is very different to the index offence.
        The Appellant has not committed a further  offence  of  that  nature
       during the nearly ten years that he was at liberty between  terms  of
       imprisonment.

   64. I also note the low percentages of risk given in  the  OASys  report.
       Although I accept that the risk is not  negligible,  the  percentages
       given are still low.

   65. There is an additional difficulty in this case  caused  by  the  fact
       that the Appellant remains in detention and, as such, it is difficult
       for him to show that he has rehabilitated.  He  has  undertaken  some
       courses whilst in detention aimed at  addressing  his  offending.   I
       accept Mr Malik's submission that the  extent  of  those  courses  is
       dictated by what is on offer in the  place  where  the  Appellant  is
       detained.  I do not give weight to the fact that  the  Appellant  has
       not undertaken any further courses.

   66. I cannot place great weight on the Appellant's personal circumstances
       (although those are of course relevant to the proportionality of  the
       decision to deport).   As  I  have  already  noted,  the  Appellant's
       offending was not caused by his circumstances.  Further, most if  not
       all of the circumstances were in existence at the date of  the  index
       offence.   However,  the  stability  of  the   Appellant's   personal
       circumstances is certainly not a negative  factor  in  terms  of  the
       threat which he poses.  He is in  a  committed  relationship  with  a
       British citizen who he plans to marry.  He also has a child with whom
       he has a very strong relationship and who will provide some incentive
       to him to change his ways.  He also has a supportive  family  in  the
       UK.  The Appellant has obtained qualifications whilst in the UK which
       he will be able to use to his advantage and he may be able to  resume
       his degree course which he had started before the index offence  once
       he is released from detention.  Those are all  factors  which  should
       encourage him to address his behaviour.

   67. This is a finely balanced case.  However, taking  all  of  the  above
       factors together, I am satisfied that there are not  serious  grounds
       to show that the Appellant is a genuine and present threat.  I accept
       that if the threat were to materialise, then it would be sufficiently
       serious.  However, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  accepted
       responsibility for his offending and has shown by  his  evidence  his
       commitment to ensure that he does not reoffend.

   68. In light of that conclusion, I do not need to go on to deal with  the
       proportionality  of  the  decision  to  deport  but  I  do   so   for
       completeness.  I have already set out what the  factors  which  would
       weigh in the Appellant's favour  in  that  regard.   However,  had  I
       concluded that the Appellant is a genuine and present  threat,  given
       the seriousness of the risk should that threat materialise,  I  would
       have had no hesitation in concluding that the decision to deport  was
       still proportionate.   The Appellant is a young man who  is  fit  and
       able.  He speaks  Portuguese.   He  has  qualifications  which  would
       assist him in finding work in Portugal.  Whilst deportation would  or
       is likely to disrupt the permanence of his relationships in  the  UK,
       his partner could, if she chose to,  accompany  him.   His  child  is
       cared for by her mother and  could  maintain  telephone  contact  and
       visit the Appellant in Portugal as could the Appellant's other family
       members.

  CONCLUSION

   69. For those reasons, the Appellant's appeal succeeds.  He  cannot  show
       that imperative grounds are  required  to  justify  his  deportation.
       However, the Respondent has failed to show that serious grounds exist
       to justify the Appellant's deportation.  He  is  not  a  genuine  and
       present threat to public policy and public security.

       DECISION

       The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


  [pic]


  Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
  Dated: 7 January 2020



                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00032/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 LUIS RAMOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mrs Abone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    None


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against  a  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 28 May 2019, in  which  it  allowed
       the appeal of the respondent, an  EEA  citizen,  against  a  decision
       dated 7 January 2019 to deport him pursuant to the Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006.



Issue in dispute

    2. The key issue in dispute before the FTT was whether the  respondent's
       integrative links with the UK were broken when he was sentenced to 63
       months imprisonment, having been convicted  on  16  October  2017  of
       causing death by dangerous driving.

    3. The FTT took the following matters into account as tending to support
       a break in integrative  links:  the  severity  of  the  offence:  the
       offending was part of an escalating pattern in the  area  of  driving
       bearing in mind previous offending; following his  successful  appeal
       against a decision to deport him  as  a  result  of  his  seven  year
       sentence for manslaughter in 2004, the respondent had been warned  in
       2007 that if he offended again he would  be  subject  to  deportation
       action.

    4. The FTT balanced these factors  against  matters  in  favour  of  the
       retention of integrative links: a previous 2007 Tribunal  found  that
       the respondent had integrated into  UK  society  notwithstanding  his
       offending; his integration between offending had been strengthened by
       the genuine and subsisting relationship he had with his daughter (who
       was born in 2010); the respondent had spent a very lengthy period  of
       time (21 years) in the UK from a  young  age  and  had  no  links  to
       Portugal other than an ability to speak the language.

    5.  The  FTT  concluded  that  on  balance  the  respondent  had  forged
       integrative links prior to his latest period of imprisonment and  the
       effect of this sentence was not such as to  break  those  integrative
       links.  This meant that the "imperative" grounds applied, and as this
       high threshold could not be made out, the FTT allowed the appeal.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

    6. In wide-ranging grounds of appeal, the SSHD appealed against the  FTT
       decision, submitting inter alia, that the FTT failed to give adequate
       reasons for concluding that integrative links had  not  been  broken.
       The SSHD relied upon B v Land Baden-Wurttemberg; SSHD v Vomero (Cases
       C-316/16 and C-424/16), [2018] Imm AR 1145 ('Vomero') to support  his
       submission that all relevant matters were  not  taken  into  account.
       The CJEU emphasised that in  determining  whether  integrative  links
       with the host Member State had been broken a holistic assessment must
       be undertaken and said this at [83]:

           "...the condition of having 'resided in the  host  Member  State
           for the previous ten years' laid down in that provision  may  be
           satisfied where an overall assessment of the person's situation,
           taking into account all  the  relevant  aspects,  leads  to  the
           conclusion that, notwithstanding that detention, the integrative
           links between the person concerned and  the  host  Member  State
           have not been broken. Those aspects  include,  inter  alia,  the
           strength of the integrative links forged with  the  host  Member
           State before the detention of the person concerned,  the  nature
           of the offence that resulted in the period of detention imposed,
           the circumstances in which that offence was  committed  and  the
           conduct  of  the  person  concerned  throughout  the  period  of
           detention."

    7. FTT Judge Osborne granted the SSHD permission to appeal to the UT.

Hearing

    8. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by the appellant  or
       his representative on record. My clerk telephoned the  representative
       on record but there was  no  response  and  no  explanation  for  the
       failure to attend.

    9. I indicated to Ms Abone that there was an error of law in  the  FTT's
       decision (for the reasons I set out below)  but  that  it  should  be
       remade by the UT at an adjourned hearing, having given the respondent
       an opportunity to provide updated evidence.  Mrs  Abone  agreed  with
       this approach.

Discussion

   10. I have no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  FTT's  decision  is
       inadequately reasoned.  Although the FTT set out  its  assessment  in
       relation to some of the relevant factors,  it  failed  to  take  into
       account or give reasons for failing to address two relevant  matters,
       as identified at [83] of Vomero: (i) the circumstances in  which  the
       2017 offence was committed and; (ii) the conduct  of  the  respondent
       during  the  course  of  his  imprisonment  from  2017.   These   are
       particularly relevant matters in this case.  The 2017 offence  was  a
       very serious one that resulted in a lengthy sentence, yet the FTT has
       not engaged with the circumstances that led the respondent to  behave
       in such an utterly reckless manner that his driving led to the deaths
       of two people.  In addition, the FTT has made  no  reference  to  the
       respondent's  behaviour  in  prison.   It  is  noteworthy  that   the
       respondent chose not to attend the hearing and  the  FTT  found  that
       there was no good reason for this.  The FTT was  obliged  to  address
       the circumstances as at the date of the deportation decision but  has
       referred to no evidence  addressing  the  respondent's  behaviour  in
       prison from 2017.

   11. In addition, the FTT placed considerable weight on  the  respondent's
       relationship with his daughter  as  significantly  strengthening  his
       integration but does not address the undeniable  consequence  of  the
       respondent's  imprisonment  from   2017:   the   strength   of   that
       relationship had been  significantly  weakened  by  the  respondent's
       lengthy imprisonment.

Disposal

   12. I have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the factual  findings
       required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this is an
       appropriate case to be remade in the UT,  at  an  adjourned  hearing.
       The fact finding is likely to be limited to the updated  evidence  as
       there has been no challenge to the findings of fact made by the FTT.



Decision

   13. The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

   14. The decision shall be remade in the UT.



Directions

    1) The respondent shall file and serve all evidence  relied  upon  in  a
       consolidated indexed bundle before 16 September 2019.

    2) The SSHD shall file and serve a position statement two  weeks  before
       the hearing.

    3) The hearing shall be listed before any UT judge  on  the  first  date
       after 1 October 2019.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 August 2019

