
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00888/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2016                            |On 19 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                 ahmet demir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a rehearing of the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent to make a deportation order in accordance  with  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 following  his  conviction  in  August
    2011 at Snaresbrook Crown Court of causing grievous  bodily  harm  with
    intent to do grievously bodily harm.  He was sentenced  to  66  months'
    imprisonment.  He was released on licence on  13  December  2013.   His
    licence expires in August 2016.

2.   Part of the decision to deport includes a  decision  dated  24  January
    2014 to revoke  his  refugee  status  after  the  respondent  gave  the
    appellant and the UNHCR an opportunity to respond to her decision.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 6 November 1967.  He is  a
    Kurd.  He entered  the  UK  in  July  1999  and  claimed  asylum.   The
    application for asylum was refused.  He appealed against that  decision
    and in a determination promulgated in March 2002, an Adjudicator, Mr  J
    G Macdonald, allowed  his  asylum  appeal.   He  also  found  that  the
    appellant's rights under Article 3 of the ECHR would  be  infringed  by
    his removal.  On 10 May 2002, the appellant was granted refugee  status
    and indefinite leave to remain (ILR) in the UK.

4.   Following his conviction for GBH, the respondent issued  the  appellant
    with the notification of his liability to automatic deportation  on  30
    August 2012 and asked to provide evidence as to whether  any  exception
    under Section 33 of the 2007 Act applied.  Within his  undated  written
    response, the appellant submitted that he could not  return  to  Turkey
    because he was a refugee.

5.    On  17  December  2012,  the  appellant  was  invited  to  rebut   the
    presumption that Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 applied to his case and  that  he  had  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and constituted a danger to  the  community.
    In their response, dated 21 January  2013,  his  legal  representatives
    submitted that his proposed removal from  the  UK  would  result  in  a
    breach of his human rights under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  due  to  his
    private and family life in the UK.  The  respondent  stated  that  they
    failed to rebut the  presumption  that  he  had  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and constituted a danger to the community.

6.   On 10 September 2013 the appellant was informed  of  the  intention  of
    the Home Office to cease his refugee status  and  he  was  afforded  an
    opportunity to submit representations  in  support  of  his  continuing
    entitlement  to  refugee  status.   On  29  October  2013   his   legal
    representatives made written submissions against  the  notification  of
    intention to cease his refugee status.

7.   On 24 January 2014, a decision was made to cease his refugee status  in
    view of the fact that Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Refugee Convention  and
    subsequently paragraph 339A(v) of the Immigration Rules, now applied.

8.   The appellant appealed the Secretary of State's decision.   His  appeal
    was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 April 2015.

9.   In a decision promulgated on 1  December  2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy considered that the judge made material errors of law  in  the
    determination and set aside  her  decision.   He  considered  that  the
    appeal should be heard afresh on all issues.

10.  The reasons for finding that the judge made errors of law are  set  out
    Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy's determination at paragraphs 35 to 39 as
    follows:

    "35. I have  first  considered  whether  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
         considering the  provisions  of  Section  72  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act.  I  consider  that  she  did  so.   She
         accepted, of course, that the appellant had  been  convicted  of  a
         particularly serious offence - it was incumbent on  her  to  do  so
         given the length of the sentence.  However I consider  her  reasons
         for finding that the appellant was not a continuing danger  to  the
         community was a decision which was unreasoned.   The  five  matters
         which she sets out in paragraph 43 of the determination are not, in
         themselves, sufficient to rebut the  presumption.   The  sentencing
         remarks of the judge make it clear just how vicious the  attack  on
         the victim was.  It may be the appellant's only sentence but it was
         a criminal act in which he played a central role and  he  not  only
         denied that he played a central role at trial but clearly did  not,
         when discussing the matter with his probation officer,  accept  the
         full culpability of his decision.  The judge simply appears to have
         ignored the context in which the crime was committed  -  a  context
         which must include the appellant's other crimes.


    36.  The fact that the appellant has been on licence and  committed  no
         further offences is surely an issue on which little  weight  should
         be placed given that he has, at the present  time  the  deportation
         proceedings acting as a brake on any further  activity  -  moreover
         the terms of the licence itself  would  lessen  the  likelihood  of
         offences being committed.


    37.  The reason that he is unlikely to constitute a danger  because  he
         has been prepared to engage in rehabilitation work  and  cooperated
         with the Probation Service is one which is hardly decisive and  the
         fact that he has engaged in some lifestyle changes such as his  use
         of drugs and alcohol was  a  conclusion  only  based  on  what  the
         appellant and his sister had said - there was no evidence  that  he
         had given up alcohol completely and no certificate to show that  he
         was no longer taking drugs.  The fact that he is  living  with  his
         sister is hardly a deterrent effect - he has always had his  family
         around him while he was committing not only the index  offence  but
         the other offences.  The reality is that  the  probation  officer's
         report pointed out a number of factors which have not changed  such
         as the fact that the appellant is  not  working  and  indeed  never
         seems to have worked here to any extent.  I  simply  conclude  that
         the decision of the judge, on the evidence before her was  not  one
         that was open to her.


    38.  Furthermore turning to the issue of whether or not  the  appellant
         still has a well-founded fear of persecution in Turkey, the reality
         is that the determination of the Adjudicator in  2002  should  have
         been taken as a starting point but as a starting point  only.   His
         findings were that the appellant was a  sympathiser  -  but  not  a
         member of the MLKP and that, although detained and ill-treated  for
         two days on one occasion and briefly on the second occasion when he
         was asked to become an informer, he was not charged with any crime.
          The reality is that since 2002 the case  law  relating  to  asylum
         seekers has moved on and the judge did not consider whether or  not
         the fact that the appellant had been detained  thirteen  years  ago
         but not arrested would mean that he would be on any watch list now.
          That was a serious lacuna in her consideration of whether  or  not
         the appellant was entitled to refugee status.  Similarly given  the
         appellant's age she should surely have  asked  herself  that  given
         that the appellant left Turkey in 1999 and indeed he had  not  been
         called up for national service he would be penalised now for having
         left the country without having  done  national  service.   In  any
         event there was nothing  to  indicate  that  the  appellant  was  a
         conscientious objector.  She should  surely  have  considered  that
         issue.  Finally she should have  considered  the  law  relating  to
         military  service  and  the  treatment  of  those  who  return  and
         undertake military service taking into account relevant  background
         information.


    39.  For these reasons I consider that the judge made  material  errors
         of law in the determination and I set aside her decision."


11.  At the hearing before me, Mr Walsh relied on:

    (1)  His skeleton argument.


    (2)  Index to appellant's personal bundle.


    (3)  Index to appellant's background bundle.


    (4)  Turkey 2014 Human Rights Report by  United  States  Department  of
         State.


    (5)  Letter from the National Probation Service dated 27  January  2015
         and the OASys Assessment dated 27 January 2015 attached thereto.


12.  The appellant who was in court was not called  to  give  evidence.   Mr
    Walsh said that the  appeal  was  going  to  proceed  by  way  of  oral
    submissions only.

13.  Mr Whitwell said that he would have cross-examined the appellant if  he
    had been called.  He would be raising credibility because  of  what  is
    set out page 15 of the OASys Report.  The appellant said  therein  that
    he has two sisters in the UK, and one  in  Turkey.   He  also  has  two
    brothers there, one younger than him.  He said he used to go  back  and
    forth to Turkey to visit.

14.  Mr Whitwell sought an adjournment because the  appellant's  bundles  of
    documents had been given to him this morning  and  he  needed  time  to
    respond properly to the background evidence.  He submitted  that  there
    could be common ground between the Secretary of State and the appellant
    on the basis of the objective evidence and that common ground could  be
    given by way of written submissions if  required.   He  again  repeated
    that he would have cross-examined the appellant if he had  been  called
    to give evidence as he would be raising credibility in relation to  the
    assertion by the appellant that he used to visit Turkey.

15.  Mr Walsh objected to the adjournment request saying that the  case  had
    been going on for too long, the issues had been identified by the Upper
    Tribunal namely whether the appellant was a danger to  the  public  and
    would be at risk on return and the revocation of  his  refugee  status.
    He submitted that the appellant's objective evidence was in the  public
    domain.   He  had  no  objection  to  the  respondent  making   written
    submissions after the hearing.  He  accepted  that  the  appellant  has
    family in Turkey.  It was not the appellant's case that his family life
    in the UK could not trumped by the case before the Tribunal.

16.  Following consideration of the arguments,  I  refused  to  adjourn  the
    hearing and the appeal proceeded by way of oral submissions.

17.  Mr Walsh submitted that there are  two  issues  arising  which  he  has
    identified in his skeleton argument.  They are:

    (1)  whether the certification of the appellant's appeal under  Section
         72 is made out, and


    (2)   whether  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would  breach  the
         Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and Article 3 ECHR.


    To assess the first issue the Tribunal must  decide  if  the  appellant
    constitutes a danger to the community.  There is no  issue  as  regards
    the seriousness of the index offence.  In respect of the second  matter
    the starting point is the correctness  of  the  revocation  of  refugee
    status and risk on return to Turkey.


18.  As regards the first issue, Mr  Walsh  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    offence was a particularly serious crime.  In considering  whether  the
    appellant constitutes a danger to the community, Mr Walsh relied on the
    letter from the National Probation Service.  The letter said  that  the
    appellant is currently  registered  as  a  MAPPA  (Multi-Agency  Public
    Protection Arrangement) nominal of Category 2,  Level  1.   This  means
    that his case is reviewed by the Borough Multi-agency  Risk  Management
    panel on a quarterly basis and can be safely managed by  the  Probation
    Service as a lone service.

19.  The letter also said that the appellant has a total  of  nine  previous
    convictions.  In the main possession of class B/C  drugs  is  the  main
    pattern of offending behaviour.  However, the index offence is the most
    serious of his offending.  A recent Police Intelligence check indicated
    that there has not been any further offending behaviour.  The last  BIU
    check was dated on 4 December 2014.
20.  The letter also said that individuals are also assessed  by  the  OASys
    (Offender Assessment System) which is a probation/prison tool to assist
    practitioners assess how likely an offender  is  to  reoffend  and  the
    likely seriousness of any offence they are likely to commit.   It  will
    assess the risk of harm an offender poses  to  themselves  and  others.
    The appellant is at this time assessed as being a medium risk  of  harm
    to the public, medium risk of harm to known individuals and a low  risk
    of harm to children and a low risk of reoffending.  These are based  on
    the nature of the offence, static and actuarial social factors that can
    affect risk.  Since his release on  licence  on  13  December  2013  on
    licence, the appellant has been living with his sister.

21.  Mr Walsh relied on the OASys Report.  It was recorded n July 2014  that
    there has not been any further offending behaviour that the author  was
    aware of.  The appellant continued to deny that he was a violent man or
    that he participated in the offence.  He continued to sign on weekly to
    the Home Office Immigration Unit.  In supervision they  have  discussed
    affiliation to  gangs  and  that  BRU  could  assist  in  checking  any
    activity.  They have also discussed family/friends  loyalties  but  the
    appellant refutes any negative  activities.   The  appellant  could  be
    evasive when probing about negative influences or peers, but  was  able
    to acknowledge that their role was about protection of the  public  and
    risk assessment.

22.  It was recorded in December 2014 that the  appellant  continued  to  be
    compliant with his licence and that there was no  offending  behaviour.
    The appellant was in total denial, and as time  went  on  he  has  been
    challenged about negative peers he associated with and he continued  to
    cite that there were acquaintances that he hung around with when he was
    bored.  The report said that the mere fact that the appellant has  been
    able to verbalise insight and awareness of the  impact  on  the  victim
    indicated that he was able to accept responsibility.  He was a pleasant
    man to work with but it did take a lot of probing  and  challenging  to
    get him to this point.

23.  At page 25 in respect of "Attitudes", it  was  recorded  in  July  2014
    that it was difficult to ascertain  what  progress  the  appellant  was
    making in terms of his attitude as he could be evasive.   He  continued
    to refute that he had any involvement in the index offence.  He  admits
    to being present at the scene but not actively involved and that it was
    a case of mistaken identity.  In challenging his lifestyle,  he  linked
    his offending to his past lifestyle at that time.  In December 2014 the
    report said that he had progressed in terms of  his  attitudes  towards
    negative activity.   He  had  been  able  to  share  insight  into  his
    offending in the index offence and cites that he led a shallow attitude
    because of the socialising he did back then as he  was  bored  and  not
    working.  He cited that he had a lot of time in custody to  reflect  on
    his behaviour, the people he associated with and how  the  consequences
    of his  actions  have  harmed  and  impacted  others.   Motivating  the
    appellant to address his offending behaviour remained challenging as he
    was evasive which meant constant probing was necessary, but once one is
    able to gain entry into his thoughts, this was the usual way to gain  a
    better understanding of his insight into his attitude.
24.  Mr Walsh relied on page 31 of  the  OASys  Report  to  the  OVP  (OASys
    Violence Predictor).  In the first year  he  scored  11%,  18%  in  the
    second year and the OVP risk of reoffending was low.  It was report  in
    December 2014 that whilst it has taken the appellant a lengthy time  to
    open up about the offence, he has admitted that he was present and  was
    party to the  assaults  of  the  victim.   He  denies  being  the  main
    instigator and cites that it was peer  pressure  that  incited  him  to
    assault  the  victim  alongside  with  the  others.   He  denies  using
    excessive force to assault the victim and cites that it was others that
    hurt him badly.  He was vague in his account and minimised his  account
    which was constantly challenged.  He talked of  hanging  around  a  bad
    crowd as he was not in employment and had nothing to  do.   The  report
    has said that the appellant has been able to gain  insight  since  they
    have been working together  to  address  the  offending  behaviour  and
    associated factors.  Given that substance misuse  was  present  at  the
    time of the offence, the appellant  acknowledged  that  this  may  have
    inhibited his actions, that he still minimised his view.

25.  Mr Walsh relied on page 36 where it was said that the appellant  is  at
    medium risk of serious harm to the community.  He explained  that  this
    meant that the offender has the potential to cause serious harm but  is
    unlikely to do so unless  there  is  a  change  in  circumstances.   He
    submitted that according to the report, the risk factors at the time of
    the offence were longer a current risk  trigger,  although  the  author
    said that regular discussion about victims' issues and  victim  empathy
    as well as ways of avoiding further offending situations  and  managing
    his anger will continue throughout the licence period.  Recall will  be
    considered if any risk concerns occur and there  is  non-compliance  of
    the increased risk of harm demonstrated by the appellant in  the  index
    offence.

26.  Mr Walsh submitted that bearing in mind  that  the  index  offence  was
    committed in 2010, and the appellant was  convicted  in  2011  and  was
    released on licence after serving two years two  months,  I  should  be
    satisfied in the light of the OASys Report that he is not at present  a
    danger to the public.  Article 33(2) of the Convention  which  operates
    as an exclusion clause should be construed narrowly.  He submitted that
    the appellant is on supervision and the community has that  protection.
    Therefore he is not in danger of being  a  risk  to  the  public.   The
    Secretary of State reached  that  view  in  2014  but  since  then  and
    fourteen months later, with continued supervision, the  appellant  does
    not pose a danger to the public.

27.  Mr Walsh relied on the appellant's supplementary witness  statement  in
    which he indicates the courses he  trained  on  in  prison.   Mr  Walsh
    submitted that this was an  indication  of  somebody  engaging  in  the
    rehabilitation process.  The danger must  be  serious  to  justify  the
    Section 72 certificate.

28.  With regard to the second issue, Mr Walsh relied on paragraphs 3.4  and
    3.5 of his skeleton argument.  He submitted that  the  respondent  must
    establish that the appellant can no longer be  a  refugee  because  the
    circumstances in connection with which he  has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee have ceased to  exist;  and  that  if  there  is  a  change  in
    circumstances, it has to be of a durable and fundamental nature.

29.  Mr Walsh submitted that the appellant left  Turkey  in  1999.   It  was
    found that he had been detained twice and on the second occasion he was
    interrogated,  ill-treated  and  separated  from  other  detainees  and
    interrogated about other people.  After three days he was  released  by
    the police who required him to report if he had  any  more  information
    about other people he had been interrogated about.  His father arranged
    his departure before the reporting conditions kicked in.  The appellant
    relied on the fact that he was a draft evader.

30.  Mr Walsh submitted that the appellant was arrested in  connection  with
    his association with the  MLKP,  an  illegal  organisation.   Mr  Walsh
    relied on the USSD Report which said  that  the  security  forces  used
    excessive  force  to   disperse   protests,   detaining   hundreds   of
    demonstrators and charging  many  under  the  anti  terror  law.   This
    resulted  in  numerous  deaths.   According  to  the   Non-Governmental
    Organisation (NGO) Human Rights Foundation, 45 protest  related  deaths
    occurred  during  the  year  2014.   The  report  also  said  that  the
    constitution of Turkey and the law prohibit torture  and  other  cruel,
    inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, but there  were  reports
    that  some  government   officials   employed   them.    Human   rights
    organisations continue to report  allegations  of  torture  and  abuse,
    especially of persons who were in police custody but not in a place  of
    detention, and during demonstrations and  transfers  to  prison,  where
    such practices were more difficult to  document.   Police  officers  in
    several parts of the country used  disproportionate  force  to  disrupt
    protests.

31.  He relied upon an article  dated  10  January  2016  which  included  a
    report by the Turkish Human Rights Foundation that between  August  and
    January, 162 civilians have been killed in confrontations  between  the
    outlawed Kurdish Workers  Party  (PKK)  and  the  Turkish  Army  during
    curfews in Turkey's Kurdish cities.  Mr Walsh submitted that Turkey has
    reverted to its previous circumstances so it cannot be  said  that  the
    changes there have been durable and fundamental.  He submitted that the
    Turkish regime is  intolerant.   The  appellant  is  from  Izmir.   The
    detention and ill-treatment practices do not meet the  lower  standard.
    He submitted that even members of the HDB, which is a legal party, have
    been  subjected  to  detention  and  ill-treatment   by   the   Turkish
    authorities.   He  submitted  that  reports  and  recent  examples   of
    circumstances pertaining to those  associated  with  MLKP  attract  the
    hostility of the authorities in Turkey.  It cannot  be  established  on
    the objective evidence that the change of circumstances in Turkey  have
    been durable and fundamental.

32.  Mr Walsh relied  on  the  respondent's  Operational  Guidance  Note  on
    Turkey issued in May 2013.  The OGN  relied  on  the  country  guidance
    decision in IK (Returnees - records  -  IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2014]  UKIAT
    00312.  He relied on the Tribunal's finding that the  computerised  GBT
    system has a defined and limited ambit.  It comprises only  outstanding
    arrest warrants,  previous  arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,
    possible draft evasion, refusal to perform  military  service  and  tax
    arrears.  The GBTS is fairly widely accessible  and  is  in  particular
    available to the border police and  booths  in  Istanbul  Airport,  and
    elsewhere in Turkey to the security forces.   The  Tribunal  also  held
    that if a person is held for questioning either at the  airport  police
    station after arrival or  subsequently  elsewhere  in  Turkey  and  the
    situation justifies it, then some additional enquiry could be  made  of
    the authorities in his local  area  about  him,  where  more  extensive
    records may be kept either  manually  or  on  computer.   Also  if  the
    circumstances so justify, an enquiry could be made of the  anti  terror
    police or MIT to see if an individual is of material interest to  them.
    If there is a material entry in the  GBTS  or  in  the  border  control
    information, or if a returnee is travelling  on  a  one  way  emergency
    travel document (which Mr Walsh said the appellant would be  travelling
    on), then there is a reasonable likelihood that he will be identifiable
    as a failed asylum seeker and could be sent to the airport  police  for
    further investigation.

33.  Mr Walsh submitted that the appellant's profile on return will  include
    that he escaped when he was due  to  report  to  the  police.   On  the
    evidence and in light of the objective evidence, he submitted that  the
    appellant remains a refugee.

34.  Mr Whitwell relied on the respondent's letter of 24 January  2014  upon
    the cessation of refugee status and the decision that Section 32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applies.

35.  Mr Whitwell relied on the sentencing judge's remarks in respect of  the
    index offence.  The sentencing judge said "It follows from  the  jury's
    verdict  on  this  day  in  January  within  a  matter  of  minutes  of
    encountering Mr Tashina you summoned five or more young  men  with  the
    intent that they should inflict, cause, grievous harm to  the  man  you
    had just met and you succeeded in your object."

36.   Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  in  the  appellant's  current   witness
    statement, at paragraph 6, he  said  that  at  the  time  that  he  was
    undeveloped, naive and foolish to participate and he failed to  predict
    and understand the consequences and impact on his life,  relatives  and
    friends.  Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  the  appellant's  reference  to
    "participate"  does  not  accord  with  the  appellant's  role  in  the
    sentencing judge's remarks and this indicates a lack of remorse.

37.  In relation to the probation officer's assessment the appellant was  at
    low risk of reoffending, Mr Whitwell said that this  was  more  nuanced
    than that.   At  page  40  under  the  "Predictor  Scores  %  and  Risk
    Category", the appellant was assessed as medium risk of reoffending  in
    year one  and  two.   He  submitted  that  it  can  be  seen  from  the
    certificates of redevelopment  and  progress  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    appellant's witness statement that only one stems  from  cannabis;  the
    rest relate to reading and writing and IT.

38.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the Section  72  certificate  has  not  been
    rebutted by the appellant in light of the evidence.  The seriousness of
    the offence has not been questioned.

39.  In respect of the second issue, Mr Whitwell accepted that the  starting
    point was the determination in March 2002.  The judge  held  that  this
    was an appellant who was a draft evader and who has been mistreated  at
    the hands of the authorities.  He was only released by the  authorities
    on certain conditions that he would report back to the police  station.
    He was in breach of those conditions.   There  was  evidence  that  the
    police have acted on that breach and have gone to the appellant's  home
    and have questioned his parents about  his  whereabouts.   Mr  Whitwell
    submitted that the appellant was a sympathiser  and  not  a  member  of
    MLKP.  He has no convictions.  It has been seventeen years since he has
    been in the UK.

40.   Mr  Whitwell  questioned  the  appellant's  credibility  against.   He
    submitted that the  evidence  at  page  15  of  the  OASys  Report  was
    relevant.  The appellant said that he used to  go  back  and  forth  to
    Turkey to visit.  However in his original witness  statement  dated  25
    November 2014, he said he had not returned to Turkey since 1999.   This
    puts a different complexion on his case.  It begs the question  how  he
    was able to travel back and forth on a  travel  document  that  has  no
    stamps.  The submissions go to IK which considers whether an  appellant
    is able to travel and bypass the GBTS  system  and  border  control  in
    Turkey.

41.  Mr Whitwell submitted that military service in  Turkey  starts  in  the
    twentieth year of birth.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the appellant  was
    born in 1977.  Military service is for fifteen  months.   According  to
    paragraph 33 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter, liability for  military
    service continued to the age of 41, except  on  grounds  of  health  or
    disability.  Mr Whitwell noted that Mr Walsh did  not  push  the  draft
    evasion point.  He therefore failed to see how the appellant could rely
    on the Refugee Convention on the evidence.

42.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the OGN at paragraph  3.9.13-3.9.15  focuses
    on the level of involvement by an appellant in the left wing group.  In
    this case the appellant was a sympathiser and not a member of the MLKP.
     Mr Whitwell accepted that the background  evidence  relied  on  by  Mr
    Walsh postdates the OGN.  He also accepted that  the  circumstances  in
    Turkey have slipped back but submitted that they were nowhere near  the
    circumstances in 2004 for example.  He submitted that the news articles
    from human rights organisations should be  treated  with  caution.   Mr
    Whitwell relied on paragraphs 22 to 27 of the  cessation  letter  where
    the Secretary of State makes her argument in respect of  the  objective
    evidence.

43.  Mr Whitwell submitted that IK did not  remove  circumstances  where  an
    appellant whose home area is  in  the  south  east  could  relocate  to
    Istanbul.  The appellant's lack of conviction or arrest will  not  make
    him fall foul of the GBTS  system  and  therefore  he  would  not  fall
    squarely within IK.

44.  Mr Walsh in reply submitted that the appellant's evidence in the  OASys
    Report that he went back and forth to Turkey was not brought up at  the
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shamash.   According  to  his
    instructions the issue came up before a judge at an  adjourned  hearing
    on 24 November 2014.  I looked at the Record of  Proceedings  for  that
    day and indeed the judge  said  that  "another  issue  that  arose  was
    mentioned in the OASys Report  that  the  appellant  may  have  visited
    Turkey on a number of occasions.  Counsel's instructions were  that  he
    did not have an interpreter when speaking to the probation officer  and
    may have misunderstood.  The HOPO suggested that checks could  be  made
    to see whether the appellant has travelled since  arrival  in  the  UK.
    Material to a proper determination of the protection claim  if  he  has
    returned to Turkey in the meantime.  Protection claim is at  the  heart
    of this case."

45.  Mr Walsh said that he did  not  know  what  the  Secretary  of  State's
    enquiries have revealed.  First-tier Judge Shamash found the  appellant
    to be a refugee.  This issue did not form  part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case before Judge Shamash.  He  said  the  information  in  the
    OASys Report cannot be used at this stage.  It is too  late  and  wrong
    for the Secretary of State to rely on it at this stage.

46.  In response to Mr Whitwell's submission that there was a  certain  lack
    of remorse on the part of the appellant, Mr. Walsh submitted  that  the
    OASys Report at December 2014 showed a big progression on the  part  of
    the  appellant.   He  was  released  in  2013  December.   He  has  not
    reoffended according to the experts and the  courses  he  undertook  in
    prison were to help him build up life skills.  Mr Walsh maintained that
    in light of the objective evidence, the changes  in  Turkey  cannot  be
    said to be fundamental and durable.

Findings

47.  The first issue that I must consider is whether  the  certification  of
    the appellant's appeal under Section 72 is made out.

48.  Section 72(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states  that,  for  the  purposes  of  Article  33(2)  of  the   Geneva
    Convention, a person is  presumed  to  have  been  convicted  by  final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime, and constitute  a  danger  to
    the community of the UK, where he has:

    .    been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and


    .    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.


49.  The consequences of applying Section 72  to  a  person  is  that  their
    claim for asylum will be refused as they do not qualify for a grant  of
    asylum under the Immigration Rule 334 on the basis that  Article  32(2)
    of the Geneva Convention applies to him and  as  a  result  the  Geneva
    Convention does not prevent removal from the UK.

50.  It is not disputed that in 2010 the appellant committed a very  serious
    crime.  Indeed on 5 August 2011 at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court,  he  was
    convicted of causing grievous bodily harm with intent  to  do  grievous
    bodily harm, for which he was sentenced to 66 months' imprisonment.

51.  The argument by Mr Walsh that  the  Section  72  certificate  has  been
    rebutted focuses on the appellant's lack of re-offending since  he  was
    released on licence in  December  2013,  and  the  progression  of  his
    understanding of the offence committed by  him.   In  support  of  this
    argument Mr Walsh relied on the OASys Report and its assessments.

52.  I was not persuaded on the evidence that  the  appellant  has  rebutted
    the Section 72 certificate.  The sentencing  judge  was  clear  in  his
    comments as to the particular role  played  by  the  appellant  in  the
    crime.  He said the appellant was the instigator and took a  lead  role
    in the offence with the intent  that  the  five  or  more  men  he  had
    summoned within a matter of minutes of encountering Mr  Tashina  should
    inflict, cause, grievous bodily harm to the man he had just met and  he
    succeeded in his object.  Four years later  in  July  2014,  the  OASys
    Reports clearly indicated that the appellant was in denial and  had  no
    appreciation of the offence that  he  had  committed.   There  was  one
    instance in December 2014 when it was said that it  had  taken  a  long
    time for the appellant to open up about the offence  and  had  admitted
    that he was present and party to the assault of the victim.  Yet,  from
    the evidence before me, he denied being the main  instigator  and  said
    that it was peer pressure  that  incited  him  to  assault  the  victim
    alongside with the others.  He denied using excessive force to  assault
    the victim and cited that it was others that hurt him  badly.   He  was
    vague in his account and minimised his  account  which  was  constantly
    challenged.   Insofar  as  this  was  progression,  I  found  that  the
    appellant's constant minimisation of his role in the crime indicated to
    me that he continues to remain a danger to the community.  I also  note
    from his current witness statement that he used the word  "participate"
    which, I found to be a further indication of the appellant's failure to
    appreciate the role that he played in the crime.

53.  I accept that since  his  release  on  licence  in  December  2013  the
    appellant has not committed any  further  offences.   I  attach  little
    weight to this because I agree with  what  UTJ  McGeachy  said  in  his
    decision. It  is  this;  that  at  the  present  time  the  deportation
    proceedings are acting as a break on  any  further  activity  and,  the
    terms of the licence itself would lessen  the  likelihood  of  offences
    being committed.  A  recurring  theme  in  the  OASys  Report  was  the
    appellant's assertion that he became involved in the crime  because  he
    was not working and was bored.  I had no evidence before  me  that  the
    appellant has found employment.  I accept that  he  has  been  engaging
    with the rehabilitation and supervision process.  However, he has  been
    assessed as being at medium risk of serious harm to the public.  Medium
    risk of serious harm is defined as an offender having the potential  to
    cause serious harm but is unlikely to do so unless there is a change in
    circumstances,  for  example,  failure  to  take  medication,  loss  of
    accommodation, relationship breakdown, drug or alcohol misuse.  At  the
    present time the appellant has  accommodation  with  his  sister  as  a
    result of the bail condition placed upon him.  He is unemployed.  There
    was no evidence that he was no longer taking drugs or abusing  alcohol.
    In the circumstances, I am unable to find  that  the  appellant  is  no
    longer of medium risk of serious harm to the public, bearing  mind  the
    particular role he played in the index offence.

54.  For the reasons given above, I am not persuaded that the appellant  has
    rebutted the certificate.

55.  I assess the second issue - whether the deportation  of  the  appellant
    would breach the Refugee Convention relating to the Status of  Refugees
    and Article 3 of the ECHR - in the context of  the  objective  evidence
    placed before me.  Mr Whitwell accepted  that  the  objective  evidence
    relied on by Mr. Walsh post-dated the OGN Report of 2013.

56.  I accept Mr Walsh's submission that  the  change  in  circumstances  in
    Turkey since the appellant's grant of refugee status in 2002,  have  to
    be of a fundamental nature and durable.   In  light  of  the  objective
    evidence drawn to my attention by Mr Walsh, I am unable  to  find  that
    the change in circumstances  in  Turkey  since  2002  have  been  of  a
    fundamental nature and durable.  The Turkish  authorities  continue  to
    arrest  and  detain  political  opponents  and  those  associated  with
    political parties that are considered to be illegal in Turkey.

57.  The appellant was found to be a sympathiser of  the  MLKP  Party.   The
    objective evidence shows that  members  of  the  MLKP  continue  to  be
    harassed  and  persecuted  by  the  Turkish  authorities.   Since   the
    breakdown of the peace process, it appears that circumstances in Turkey
    are volatile to say the least.  In the light of the objective evidence,
    I do not find that the changes in Turkey since 2002 can be said  to  be
    of a fundamental nature and durable.

58.  There is however the issue  of  credibility  which  was  raised  by  Mr
    Whitwell right at the beginning of the hearing.  This was in respect of
    what is recorded at page 15 in the OASys Report. It  is  recorded  that
    the appellant said "he used to go back and forth to Turkey  to  visit."
    The issue had arisen at an adjourned hearing on 24  November  2014.  It
    must have been  because  a  similar  report  issued  on  19  June  2014
    contained the same information.  No directions were issued by the judge
    requiring the Secretary of State to look into this matter.  The  matter
    was not raised before First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash.  It was raised
    before me by Mr Whitwell.  Mr Walsh did not seek an adjournment to take
    instructions on the matter and did not call the  appellant  to  resolve
    the credibility issue that had been raised by Mr  Whitwell  who  argued
    that this  evidence  contradicted  the  appellant's  assertion  in  his
    original witness statement dated 25  November  2014  that  he  had  not
    returned to Turkey since 1999.

59.  Mr Walsh chose to rely on  the  instructions  given  at  the  adjourned
    hearing on 24 November 2014, namely, that the appellant did not have an
    interpreter and must  have  misunderstood  what  he  was  being  asked.
    Consequently, Mr Walsh submitted that it was too late for  Mr  Whitwell
    to raise it.  I disagree.  The  OASys  Report  dated  27  January  2015
    contains 47 pages.  At  page  15  and  elsewhere  in  the  report,  the
    appellant said a lot of things and gave a lot of personal  information.
    None of these other details has been challenged.   Indeed,  the  report
    was relied on by Mr. Walsh.  I find that this matter  could  have  been
    resolved had the appellant been called to clarify the matter.   He  was
    not called and this evidence remains as a credibility  issue.   In  the
    absence of any challenge to anything else he said in the  report  about
    himself and  his  family,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  a  lack  of  an
    interpreter meant that the appellant misunderstood what  he  was  being
    asked.  If this particular assertion had no truth in it, the  appellant
    could have addressed it either in a statement following  the  adjourned
    hearing on 24  November  2014  or  approached  the  National  Probation
    Service to either delete or amend the report or given oral evidence  to
    resolve the  issue.   Whilst  the  HOPO  o  24  November  2014  made  a
    suggestion that this evidence could be  verified,  there  was  no  such
    evidence before me.  The appellant's assertion that he used to go  back
    and forth to Turkey to  visit  remained  in  the  report  and  was  not
    evidence that I could ignore. I have no evidence on what  document  the
    appellant would have used to travel back and forth  to  Turkey  on  his
    visits.   Nevertheless  relying  on  his  evidence,  to  which  I  give
    considerable weight, I find that the fact that the appellant  was  able
    to  make  those  visits  undermined  his  claim  to   be   a   refugee.
    Accordingly, I  reach  the  conclusion  that  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant would not breach the Convention relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees and Article 3 of the ECHR.

60.  I dismiss the appellant's appeal.





Signed                                  Date: 18 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


