


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00547/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 22 December 2016                     |On: 04 January 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              nasrudin diiriye
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Bond, instructed by Irving & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision to deport him  from
the United Kingdom pursuant to Regulation 19(3)(b) and Regulation 21 of  the
Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the   EEA
Regulations").

The appellant is a citizen of Sweden, born on 19 August 1993 in  Sweden,  of
Somali origin (his  mother  was  a  Somali  national  who  acquired  Swedish
citizenship after being recognised as a refugee in  Sweden).  He  claims  to
have first entered the United Kingdom at the age of 5  years  in  1999  with
his mother and siblings and to have resided here since that  time  with  his
mother, and latterly with his sister. He  completed  primary  and  secondary
education and obtained GCSEs, further to which he completed a BTEC  National
Diploma in Sport and started  a  Foundation  Degree  in  Sports  Science  at
university, which he did not complete due to his criminal convictions.  From
April 2010 he accumulated  several  convictions  and  on  6  July  2012  was
convicted of causing grievous bodily harm and sentenced to three years at  a
Young Offenders Institute.

As a result of that conviction, the appellant was served, on 23 April  2013,
with a notice of decision to make a deportation order. He  appealed  against
that decision and his appeal was heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  4
November 2013 and allowed in a decision promulgated  on  24  December  2013.
The respondent sought unsuccessfully  to  challenge  that  decision  in  the
Upper Tribunal after being granted permission to do so.  Deportation  action
was accordingly not pursued.


However on 8 May 2015 the appellant was  convicted  of  a  further  offence,
possession of a weapon in a public place and causing actual bodily harm.  He
was sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment. On 18 June 2015 the appellant  was
notified of his liability to deportation  and  was  invited  to  complete  a
questionnaire, which he did together with representations made  on  14  July
2015.

On 3 November 2015 the respondent made a decision to  deport  the  appellant
under the EEA Regulations. In  making  her  decision,  and  in  her  further
reasons letter of 6  November  2015,  the  respondent  considered  that  the
appellant posed a serious risk of harm to the public  and  referred  to  his
five convictions between 7 April 2010 and 8 May 2015. He had  been  assessed
in a previous NOMS assessment in July 2012 as posing a medium  risk  of  re-
offending and had  since  re-offended.  The  respondent  accepted  that  the
appellant had been continually resident in the UK for ten years and that  he
had acquired a permanent right of residence and noted the  findings  of  the
previous  Tribunal.  However,  when  applying  the  "integration  test"   in
Tsakouridis  (European  citizenship)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09,  it  was  not
accepted that he qualified for enhanced protection on imperative grounds  of
public security under regulation 21(4). It was considered that he  would  be
able to establish himself in Sweden, where he had lived until the age of  5,
noting that there was a large Somali diaspora in  Sweden  and  that  he  had
distant  relatives  there.  It  was  considered  that  he  had   failed   to
demonstrate an ongoing commitment to rehabilitation or integration into  the
community  of  the  UK.  The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant's
deportation was justified on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
security and,  furthermore,  that  his  deportation  would  not  breach  his
Article 8 human rights.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard on  15
June 2016 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott.  Judge  Scott  noted  that,
whilst the Upper Tribunal had found, following a grant of permission to  the
respondent to challenge the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
appellant's previous appeal, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  by
finding  that  the  appellant  qualified  for  the  enhanced  protection  on
imperative grounds,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  found  that  the  error  was
immaterial owing to the findings of substantial prospects, at that time,  of
the appellant's rehabilitation. The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
appellant, his mother, his two sisters and  his  girlfriend  and  considered
the documentary evidence produced by both parties, including  evidence  from
the appellant of his work and volunteering.


At [43] of his decision the judge recorded that  both  representatives  were
agreed that the appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence  under
regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations; that he had not resided in the  United
Kingdom continuously for a period  of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the
decision to deport him, taking into account  his  periods  of  imprisonment;
and that the decision to remove him could not be taken  except  "on  serious
grounds of public policy or security" under  regulation  21(3)  rather  than
"imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  under  regulation  21(4).   The
respondent's representative was also recorded as having  accepted  that  the
imperative grounds could not be made out in any event.


Following that concession, the judge proceeded to determine the appeal on  a
consideration of whether there were serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
public security for deporting the appellant. The judge  concluded  that  the
appellant's personal conduct  met  the  test  of  representing  "a  genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
interests of society" in regulation 21(6). He  concluded  further  that  the
respondent's decision to deport the appellant to Sweden  was  proportionate,
in terms of regulation 21(5) and (6). He was not satisfied  that  there  was
more than a possibility of rehabilitation in the UK and considered that  his
prospects of rehabilitation in Sweden were reasonable, in particular  as  he
would be removed from the bad company and influences  which  he  blamed  for
his past offending. The judge concluded that  the  decision  to  deport  the
appellant was proportionate and  he  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
Regulations, in a decision promulgated on 6 September 2016.


The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
grounds that the First-tier Tribunal  had  not  properly  engaged  with  the
correct test as to whether there were  sufficient  grounds  to  justify  the
appellant's deportation from the UK. It was submitted in the  grounds  that,
as a  result  of  that,  and  whilst  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
imperative grounds protection as of right, he was still entitled to  a  very
high degree of protection likely to  be  equivalent  to  imperative  grounds
because of the extent of his integration in the UK, a matter with which  the
Tribunal had failed to engage. The grounds also referred to  the  fact  that
the appellant had  been  re-classified,  in  a  letter  from  the  probation
service which was attached, as a medium risk of serious harm to the public.

Permission to appeal was initially refused in the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
was subsequently granted on 16 November 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith,
on the following grounds:


      "The principal ground on which permission is  sought  relates  to  the
      issue whether the respondent needs to show that there  are  imperative
      grounds  or  only  serious  grounds   to   justify   the   appellant's
      deportation. On my reading of [43] of the  decision,  that  is  not  a
      concession by the appellant that he  could  not  show  himself  to  be
      entitled to the benefit of more than just serious  grounds.  It  is  a
      recognition that he could not show that he  has  resided  continuously
      for a period of ten years prior to the decision  to  deport  when  his
      periods of imprisonment are removed from the  equation.  A  concession
      that only serious grounds apply  is  inconsistent  with  the  document
      entitled "Grounds" which is with the application for permission and is
      also included in the appeal bundle. The decision made by the  previous
      Tribunal allowing the appeal pre-dates the judgment in  MG.  Although,
      according to the decision ([8]) the finding  that  imperative  grounds
      apply here was found to be in error, it is arguable  that  it  remains
      necessary in a case such as this and in accordance with MG to consider
      the degree of integration as a whole.


      There is reference in the grounds to a reassessment of the risk  which
      the appellant poses. The letter from the  Probation  Service  was  not
      attached to the  application  and  I  cannot  therefore  consider  the
      relevance of that. It is open to the appellant to make an  application
      to rely on this as further evidence in accordance  with  the  Tribunal
      Rules."


The appeal was then listed for an error of law hearing and came before me.

Appeal hearing and submissions

Ms Bond relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department v Franco Vomero (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49, which  post-
dated the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.  She  submitted  that  the
concession made on behalf of the appellant in the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
based on the Court of Appeal decision in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ  1199,  whereas  matters  had  since
moved on, with the decision of the Supreme Court and the  referral  made  by
the Supreme Court to the Court of Justice (CJEU). It seemed that  there  was
now almost a sliding scale of  consideration  of  the  level  of  protection
depending on length of residence in the host state and the question  of  how
to calculate residence and the acquisition of enhanced protection  based  on
length of residence was still a matter of uncertainty and was therefore  the
subject of the referral to the CJEU. As such, Ms Bond invited me  to  decide
the issue in the appellant's favour.

Mr Wilding relied on the case of Warsame v The Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 16 and the extracts therein  from  MG  which
referred at [35] to [38] to "maybe" cases,  namely  cases  where  there  had
been ten years' continuous residence prior  to  a  period  of  imprisonment,
which was the case with this appellant. In those cases MG held that  it  was
relevant to undertake an overall assessment to  determine  whether,  at  the
time of the deportation decision, the integrative  links  previously  forged
in those ten years, had been broken. Mr Wilding submitted that  Judge  Scott
had in effect conducted such an "overall assessment" in his findings,  which
covered all the relevant considerations  which  the  Supreme  Court  had  in
mind, and crucially had considered  integration  and  rehabilitation.  There
was therefore nothing in the Supreme Court's decision in Vomero which  would
assist the appellant and Judge Scott was entitled to conclude as he did.


In response, Ms Bond submitted that the concession made by  the  appellant's
representative  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  no  longer  a   good
concession in light of the  Supreme  Court's  reference  to  the  CJEU.  The
appellant was entitled to enhanced protection as  a  matter  of  law.  Judge
Scott's overall assessment was made in light of the  concession  that  there
was no automatic entitlement to enhanced protection, but the CJEU  may  well
decide that enhanced protection goes simply with  length  of  residence.  Ms
Bond submitted that she did not agree that enhanced protection was based  on
integration, but that it was length of residence that was relevant.  In  any
event, she did not accept that  two  short  periods  of  imprisonment  would
break the appellant's  integrative  links  and  furthermore,  there  was  no
basis, on the appellant's personal conduct,  for  a  conclusion  that  there
were serious grounds justifying deportation.

Consideration and findings.

In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith said  that  she  did  not
read [43] as a concession by the appellant that he could  not  show  himself
to be entitled to the benefit of more  than  just  serious  grounds,  but  I
cannot read it any other way, particularly when reading  the  last  part  of
the relevant sentence: "and that the decision to remove  him  could  not  be
taken except "on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  security"  under
regulation 21(3) rather than "imperative grounds of public  security"  under
regulation 21(4)". It is absolutely plain that the appeal proceeded  on  the
basis that the level  of  protection  to  be  considered  was  the  "serious
grounds" in regulation  21(3)  and  specifically  not  "imperative  grounds"
under regulation 21(4). I do not consider that the "grounds" referred to  by
Judge  Smith,  which  were  the  grounds  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
undermine the concession in any way and I  note  that  the  grounds  seeking
permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal  specifically  state  that  "whilst  the
appellant was not entitled to imperative grounds protection  as  of  right".
Indeed Ms Bond did not seek to suggest that there  was  no  concession.  Her
submission was that the concession should now be  treated  as  withdrawn  in
light of the Supreme Court reference to the CJEU. It  is  also  relevant  to
note that, whilst Judge Smith, in granting permission, referred to the  fact
that the decision made by the previous Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  pre-
dated the judgment in MG, the subsequent appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal
did not and indeed  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  making  its  decision  quoted
extensively from that case. I therefore  find  that  the  appellant  is  not
assisted by the terms of the grant of permission.

With regard to the submissions made by Ms Bond, which relied  for  the  most
part upon the uncertainty of the basis for  determining  an  entitlement  to
enhanced protection in  light  of  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  and  the
reference to CJEU, I note that  that  did  not  form  part  of  the  grounds
seeking permission, despite the fact that the judgment of the Supreme  Court
was delivered prior to the grounds being prepared and indeed  prior  to  the
promulgation of the judge's decision. That in  itself  calls  into  question
the appellant's ability to rely on the grounds raised at the hearing.


However, that aside, it seems to me that Ms Bond's submissions  were  purely
speculative and were based upon an assumption  that  the  reference  to  the
CJEU would result in a conclusion that enhanced protection was  acquired  as
of right as a result of  ten  years'  residence  in  the  UK  and  that  the
question of integration was not a decisive one.  That  cannot  be  a  proper
reason to set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is  clear
that Judge Scott made his decision on the basis of the law as  it  stood  at
that time and on the basis of a concession made as a result of  the  current
jurisprudence. This is not a case where the law has since changed so  as  to
require a different outcome from that reached by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
The legal position remains as it was  at  the  time  Judge  Scott  made  his
decision. In the event that the reference to the  CJEU  elicits  a  response
that would suggest an entitlement for the appellant to succeed on the  basis
of having acquired an enhanced protection,  it  may  well  be  open  to  the
appellant to make further representations at that  point  and  to  apply  to
revoke any deportation made against him. At the present time, however,  that
can be no more than speculation.

Ms Bond also submitted that there was almost a sliding  scale  in  which  to
consider the level of protection and that the longer the  residence  in  the
host country, the greater should be the level of protection.  That  was  the
point in fact raised  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission,  where  it  was
asserted that, whilst the appellant was not entitled to  imperative  grounds
protection as of right, he was still entitled  to  a  very  high  degree  of
protection likely to be equivalent to imperative grounds protection  because
of the extent of his integration in the UK. My understanding  of  Ms  Bond's
submission was that that was a matter recognised in MG and that  it  may  be
reinforced by the CJEU. However  there  is  no  suggestion  in  any  of  the
jurisprudence thus far, and it is pure speculation that the  CJEU  would  so
find, that there  was  anything  other  than  the  two  distinct  levels  of
protection, on the basis of five years' or ten years'  residence  and  there
was anything in between those two distinct stages. The weight  to  be  given
to lengthy residence was relevant  insofar  as  it  affected  the  level  of
integration and the possibility of previous  integrative  links  not  having
been  broken,  a  matter  upon  which  the  courts  based  their   decisions
subsequent to the judgment in Tsakouridis and which was the  basis  for  the
findings of the CJEU in MG when considering the "maybe  cases"  as  referred
to in Warsame. Those cases all pre-dated the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
and would thus have  been  known  to  the  appellant's  representative  when
making the concession that he did.

Accordingly, it seems to me that there is no reason to treat the  concession
made on behalf of the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  invalid
or withdrawn. Whilst I am not aware of  the  precise  reasoning  behind  the
concession, other than it was to some extent based on the previous  findings
of the Upper Tribunal, the fact  remains  that  the  appellant  was  legally
represented by counsel who would  have  been  fully  appraised  of  all  the
recent relevant  jurisprudence  relating  to  the  acquisition  of  enhanced
protection and to the emphasis placed on integration in that  jurisprudence.
It cannot be the case that a concession should be treated  as  withdrawn  or
treated differently because of subsequent possible developments in  the  law
which are no more than speculative.


In any event, it seems to me that, on the findings made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, which have not been  challenged,  the  appellant  could  not  have
succeeded, and cannot succeed, in establishing  that  he  had  acquired  the
enhanced level of protection in regulation 21(4).  The  judge,  having  full
regard to the appellant's length  of  residence  in  the  UK  prior  to  his
imprisonment and thereafter and to the age and  circumstances  in  which  he
came to the UK, as well as to his lack of  ties  to  Sweden  and  all  other
relevant  circumstances,  made  clear   findings   on   rehabilitation   and
integration, concluding that  there  was  no  more  than  a  possibility  of
rehabilitation  in  the  UK  whereas  there  were  reasonable  prospects  of
rehabilitation in Sweden and that that  was  relevant  to  the  question  of
integration. When considering such findings in the  context  of  the  CJEU's
decision in MG, at [38], it seems that the only answer has to  be  that  the
appellant's integrative links to the UK  have  been  broken  by  his  latest
offending and  imprisonment,  taken  in  light  of  his  previous  offending
history  and  imprisonment,  and  that  he  cannot  therefore  show  himself
entitled  to  the  enhanced  level  of  protection.  Accordingly  the  judge
properly  proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal  on  the  "serious  grounds"
protection level.

As for the very last  point  made  by  Ms  Bond,  namely  that  the  judge's
decision on the "serious grounds" level was unjustified, that appears to  me
to be an attempt to widen the grounds of appeal, whereas that  was  not  the
basis of the challenge and the judge's  findings  in  that  regard  had  not
previously been challenged. I do not consider it open to  the  appellant  to
seek at that very last stage to challenge the judge's  conclusions  in  that
respect. In any event it seems to me that the judge's assessment was a  very
careful and thorough one, including all relevant matters, and  that  he  was
perfectly entitled, for the reasons fully and cogently  given,  to  conclude
that there were  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public  security
justifying the appellant's deportation.

For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  requiring
the decision to be set aside.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's deportation appeal therefore stands.



                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
