
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00436/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2016                             |On 12th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                      j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, Counsel instructed on behalf of
     Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Proceedings

 1. The  parties  before  the  Tribunal  both  agreed  that  the  anonymity
    direction that had been made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be
    continued as set out above.

 2. The Appellant, with permission appeals the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hanes) who in a determination promulgated on 29th  June
    2015 dismissed his appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  made
    for a deportation pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.



 3. The Appellant's immigration history can  be  summarised  briefly.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on 24th February 2008 using his  own  passport
    with a valid entry clearance until 31st October 2008 as a student.   On
    21st October 2008, an application  for  further  leave  to  remain  was
    refused  (due  to  unpaid  fees).   On  30th  October  2008  a  further
    application for leave to remain was also refused due to the wrong  form
    being used.  On 20th February 2009 a further application for leave  was
    made which was refused on 3rd March 2010 due to the  application  being
    out of time and as a result of poor attendance at college.  On 8th June
    2010 the Appellant was  arrested  but  the  charges  were  subsequently
    dismissed and he was served with an IS151A.  The Appellant was released
    in June 2010 on a temporary basis and according  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, he failed to report and was listed as an absconder.

 4. On 15th September 2010 he claimed asylum and was interviewed in respect
    of that claim.  The Secretary of State subsequently refused that  claim
    on 15th October 2010 and the Appellant  did  not  appeal  against  that
    decision.  It is asserted by the Secretary of State that the  Appellant
    failed to report  after  18th  November  2010  and  was  listed  as  an
    absconder.

 5. The Appellant was arrested on 19th September 2011 for the index offence
    that gave rise to the deportation proceedings and on  14th  March  2012
    was convicted and sentenced of five years imprisonment as a  result  of
    convictions relating to drugs offences.

 6. On 15th May 2012  the  Appellant  was  informed  of  his  liability  to
    deportation and on 26th February 2014  a  deportation  order  was  made
    pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007  following  that
    conviction.  A supplementary refusal letter was issued on 27th  January
    2015.  The Appellant appealed against the decision and the appeal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hanes) on 8th June 2015.

 7. The basis upon which the Appellant's case was advanced was set  out  by
    the Judge at [2].  It was conceded on behalf of the Appellant that  the
    Appellant was excluded from claiming humanitarian  protection  pursuant
    to paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules and also that there  was  no
    Article 8 claim based on  either  family  or  private  life.   In  this
    context it was not disputed that neither paragraph 339 or 339A  applied
    to the Appellant and it was also conceded  on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  raised  which  would
    outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.   There  was  no  appeal
    either on mental health grounds under Articles 3 or 8 and thus the only
    issue on appeal before the Judge was firstly, whether the Appellant was
    excluded from protection as a refugee under Section 72 of the 2002 Act;
    and secondly if excluded, would deportation  breach  his  rights  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and  thirdly  if  not  excluded,  was  the
    Appellant at risk of persecution or ill-treatment if returned  to  Iran
    based on his political beliefs.

 8. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and took into account three
    bundles of documentation provided on behalf of the Appellant set out at
    [3] and the material provided  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 29th June 2015  the  Judge  dismissed  his
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds and thus dismissed his appeal
    under the UK Borders Act 2007.  When considering Section 72 of the 2002
    Act reached the conclusion at [10]  that  the  Appellant  had  provided
    sufficient evidence to rebut the  presumption  that  he  constituted  a
    danger to the community for the purposes of Section 72 and  thus  found
    he was not excluded from protection of the Refugee Convention.

 9. However in detailed findings of fact set out at paragraphs [28  to  47]
    the Judge rejected the factual basis of his claim  to  be  at  risk  on
    account of his political activities in and outside  of  Iran  and  also
    rejected his account that he would be at risk on return to  Iran  based
    on  his  claimed  blogging  activity.   The  Judge's  findings  can  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The Appellant claimed that he was  at  risk  on  account  political
         activities in and outside of Iran relating to  the  production  and
         distribution of anti-regime  flyers  between  2005  and  2010  this
         resulted in a warrant for his arrest.  At [29] and [30]  the  Judge
         noted a number of inconsistencies concerning the factual  basis  of
         his claim which the Judge set out at  [29]  and  [30].   The  Judge
         found   that   the   Appellant's   evidence   was   "riddled   with
         inconsistencies" and compared the Appellant's factual account given
         in 2010 with his recent 2014 statement and also the contents of  an
         OASys Report at a psychiatric report provided on his behalf.

     ii) In respect of the arrest warrant at [31-32]  the  Judge  considered
         the evidence of the Appellant which  included  a  letter  from  his
         mother relating to events in Iran and also a letter from  a  lawyer
         summarised [26] and findings made in respect of that at [32].   The
         Judge considered the Appellant's factual account as to whether  the
         interest shown on him by the authorities by an arrest warrant being
         issued and/or a court summons.  The Judge  considered  the  factual
         account in the light of the Country  Information  Report  for  Iran
         dated November 2014.  Having done so,  the  Judge  found  that  the
         objective material confirmed that an original  summons  would  have
         been left with a family member and that  an  arrest  warrant  would
         have been published.  In respect of both  of  those  documents  the
         Appellant had failed to produce a copy of any document, that  is  a
         copy of the original summons which should have  been  left  with  a
         member family in accordance with the objective  material  and  that
         the arrest warrant, which would not have been left with the  family
         would have been published.  The Judge gave  little  weight  to  the
         handwritten letter from the  Appellant's  mother  for  the  reasons
         given [32] and in relation to the letter from the  lawyer  at  [32]
         gave no weight to it for the reasons given at [32] namely, that  it
         did not clarify whether there  was  a  summons  or  arrest  warrant
         against the Appellant, the date  of  these  summons  had  not  been
         disclosed nor the particulars of the claimed defence, nor  on  what
         date committed nor was it clear that  the  file  remained  open  or
         closed.

    iii) Therefore the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  no
         political profile when he left Iran as a 17 year old  and  that  he
         had fabricated his account in relation to the leaflets.

     iv) Dealing with the sur place claim based on his blogging activity the
         Judge at [33] found that the Appellant had failed  to  mention  his
         blog during his first interview in 2010 at a time in which  he  had
         been blogging in 2008 to 2011.  The Judge found at [34] that  there
         were both "major and minor discrepancies" which went to the core of
         the blogging claim and identified that one of  those  discrepancies
         was that he had never made any mention having a  blog  when  making
         his first asylum claim until several months after  the  deportation
         order was made against him  in  2014  and  made  reference  to  the
         evidence  in  this  respect.   The  Judge  took  into  account  his
         explanation for this at [34]  and  in  the  light  of  the  medical
         evidence which the Judge had  previously  summarised  but  rejected
         that explanation for the reasons given at [34] and [41].  The Judge
         found that not only had he not made reference to it earlier,  there
         was no explanation as to how he had produced blogs whilst a patient
         in an acute psychiatric ward.  That there was  no  evidence  before
         the Judge of the hospital having either free or paid  for  internet
         access of patients and the Judge  found  it  implausible  that  the
         Appellant would have been blogging for the reasons given  at  [34].
         The Judge also found that a subscription to Alexa was  required  to
         access the website and  that  there  was  no  evidence  as  to  any
         subscription for an independent source.

      v) At [35] the Judge contrasted his claim in the UK to being an active
         blogger with the findings that she made in relation to his previous
         conduct and found  that  it  did  not  support  the  profile  of  a
         political activist [35].  The Judge found no reasonable explanation
         as to why he would delete emails to his paternal uncle but maintain
         a blog with his name and photograph on it.  The  Judge  found  that
         the Appellant's uncle he would have been in a position  to  provide
         support had not attended the hearing [35].

     vi) The Judge considered  the  supporting  evidence  and  made  adverse
         credibility findings relating to that at [36, 37].

    vii) At [38] the Judge found  the  Appellant  to  be  "manipulative  and
         habitually untruthful and not a credible witness".  The Judge found
         that there were numerous  significant  discrepancies  and  was  not
         satisfied the supporting documentation in respect of  his  blogging
         claim was genuine.  The Judge took into account a  submission  made
         that he did not have the opportunity to fabricate the blogs but the
         Judge found that that submission ignored the  possibility  that  he
         may have been assisted by someone else and gave reasons for that at
         [38].

   viii)  At  [42]  whilst  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  this  was   an
         "opportunistic sur place claim" the  Judge  nonetheless  considered
         whether he would be at risk of  return  applying  the  decision  in
         Danian v SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ 3000.   The  Judge  in  this  respect
         considered the decision of AB and Others (internet activity - state
         of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257  noting  that  this  was  not  a
         country guidance decision. The judge took into account  what  would
         happen at the "pinch point on return" and  made  reference  to  the
         level of blogging in  Iran  [43].   Taking  into  account  all  the
         evidence the Judge was not satisfied that there  was  a  real  risk
         that  the  Appellant's  blog  had  been  detected  by  the  Iranian
         authorities.  In  the  alternative,  even  if  the  blog  had  been
         detected and marked by the Iranian  authorities,  when  considering
         the pinch point at the airport, the Judge  was  not  satisfied  the
         Appellant with his specific profile would be of sufficient interest
         to the authorities such as to lead to a real risk  of  persecution.
         Thus the Judge dismissed his appeal.

10. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused
    initially by the First-tier Tribunal. Permission  was  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 25th September 2015.

11. I heard from both representatives who made their submissions before me.
     Mr Schwenk on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the written  grounds
    which amounted to nine separate Grounds of Appeal. Ms Johnstone  relied
    upon the Rules 24 response filed.  The submissions that  I  heard  from
    both parties are set out in the Record of Proceedings.  The submissions
    will be incorporated into  my  consideration  of  whether  or  not  the
    grounds demonstrate that the Judge's decision involved a making  of  an
    error on a point of law.

12.  Dealing with Ground 1, Mr Schwenk  submitted  that  the  judge  placed
    undue weight on the contents of the OASys Report  and  the  psychiatric
    reports  when  reaching  adverse  credibility  findings  at  [30].   He
    submitted that these documents are not ones in which an assessment  was
    made of whether the Appellant's fear of persecution  was  well-founded.
    Furthermore he submits that there was no evidence  that  there  was  an
    interpreter or that he could check if mistakes  in  the  narrative  had
    been made and thus it was unsafe to rely upon such documentation.

13. It is plain from reading the determination as a whole  that  the  judge
    made a number of adverse credibility findings against the Appellant and
    not just those set  out  at  [30]  to  which  Ground  1  relates.   The
    determination is a comprehensive  and  detailed  analysis  of  all  the
    issues advanced before the Tribunal and include  detailed  findings  of
    fact made upon the  relevant  matters,  including  the  oral  evidence,
    before the Tribunal.  This is  a  case  in  which  the  judge  had  the
    advantage of hearing the Appellant's claim being the subject of  cross-
    examination.  Thus when considering an assessment  of  credibility  the
    determination should be read as a whole.

14. In my view it was open to the judge  to  consider  the  narratives  and
    factual information given by the  Appellant  in  both  the  psychiatric
    reports and the OASys Report when reaching the findings  at  [30].   At
    that paragraph,  the  judge  highlights  what  might  be  described  as
    "obvious discrepancies" in the accounts that he has given at  different
    times, for example, the judge records that he told the  writer  of  the
    OASys Report that he was involved in the student riots  in  2009  (when
    the Appellant was in the UK and had been arrested twice which  was  not
    true).  The judge was entitled to rely upon the contents of the  report
    and that of the psychiatric reports.  As Mrs Johnstone  submits, at  no
    time had it been raised that the narrative contents  of  those  reports
    were either factually wrong or there had been any  mistakes  made  when
    recounting   the   Appellant's   narrative   when    it    was    taken
    contemporaneously.  Whilst the Appellant denied in  his  oral  evidence
    that he had stated those matters, it had not been raised  at  any  time
    before  that.   Whilst  I  would  accept  that  there  is  always   the
    opportunity for mistakes to be made, these  were  reports  compiled  by
    professionals in the  probation  service  and  by  psychiatrists.   The
    Appellant himself confirmed in the screening interview (Annex  C)  that
    he spoke both English and Farsi.  The doctor in fact stated that he had
    carried out the interview in Farsi and thus it could  not  be  said  in
    that case that there was likely to be any mistake made.

15. As set out above they are not the only adverse credibility findings but
    form part of a number of adverse findings set out in the  body  of  the
    determination from [28] to [47].  Whilst the purpose of the reports are
    not to consider the fear of persecution,  in  my  view  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely on  the  contents  of  those  reports  concerning  the
    factual details given by the Appellant.  It was therefore open  to  the
    judge to find that there were obvious inconsistencies  in  his  account
    generally.  Consequently I find no error of law in the approach of  the
    judge on this issue.

16. Dealing with Grounds 2 and 3, they relate  to  the  objective  evidence
    concerning the document referred to  by  the  Appellant  as  either  an
    arrest warrant or a summons and the  letter  produced  by  the  Iranian
    lawyer.

17. It is submitted that the guidance (COIS  report  dated  November  2014)
    referred to by the judge was not a document that  was  before  her  and
    that she gave no indication that she intended to rely upon it.   It  is
    further asserted that the  judge  misapplied  that  objective/  country
    evidence and that this had led to her giving no sustainable reasons for
    rejecting the evidence of the lawyer.

18. As to procedural unfairness, in general terms it is not for  the  judge
    to assemble evidence and if the judge is  aware  of  material  evidence
    then it should be brought to the parties' attention, which  may  extend
    beyond the date of  the  hearing.   In  this  context  the  judge  made
    reference to a COIS Report dated November 2014 and the section relating
    to arrest warrants and summons.  The COIS Report of that date had  been
    referred to in the Respondent's decision letter as  a  document  relied
    upon, although it is right to observe not in the context of  an  arrest
    warrant or summons, it is a document that forms part  of  the  decision
    making process  in  home  office  appeals  as  the  source  of  country
    materials.   As Mrs Johnstone submitted  this  is  a  document  in  the
    public domain and is relied upon by the Secretary of State as objective
    material  concerning  factual  claims  made   in   respect   of   court
    documentation.  However, even if the judge was in error in  considering
    the material without giving the parties notice of it,  I  am  satisfied
    that it was not a material error as the grounds advanced now concerning
    the contents of the objective material were the grounds advanced before
    the judge at the time and do not  demonstrate  that  the  judge  either
    misapplied that country evidence nor as the grounds state, did it  lead
    the judge to reject the lawyer's letter.

19. Mr Schwenk submitted that the judge misapplied the country evidence and
    gave no sustainable reasons for rejecting the lawyer's letter.

20. The COIS Report  of  November  2014  referred  to  arrest  warrants  at
    paragraph 2.8.17 in the following terms: they have to be  signed  by  a
    judge, a warrant for arrest should be served on the accused at his last
    known address and if the address is unknown, or the accused  cannot  be
    found at his last known address, then proper service would  take  place
    through publication of the warrant.  The members of the  family  cannot
    be served instead unless they acknowledge that they are  not  aware  of
    his whereabouts.  If the accused cannot be  found  the  arrest  warrant
    will be passed to the law enforcement officers to arrest the Appellant.

21.  Thus the evidence in the COIS Report is that  the  arrest  warrant  is
    served on the accused at the last known address.  On the facts  of  the
    case before the judge it was common ground  that  the  address  of  the
    Appellant was known and also that he was not found  at  the  house  and
    therefore following the objective evidence, proper service  would  take
    place through  publication  of  the  warrant  in  a  widely  circulated
    newspaper.  If the accused cannot be found, the  material  states  that
    the arrest will be passed to a law enforcement officer.  Therefore  the
    evidence given by the Appellant is consistent that the  arrest  warrant
    was not served or left at the family home and thus the judge considered
    this part of  the  objective  material  which  was  favourable  to  the
    applicant.

22. However at [32] the judge made the finding that the arrest warrant,  if
    not left with the parents would  therefore  be  published.   The  judge
    found that the Appellant had failed to produce a copy of  the  document
    (that is any publication of the arrest warrant).  This  was  consistent
    with the objective material and consistent with the Appellant's account
    as he had not made any reference to the publication of any  letter  nor
    had he produced the same despite evidence from his mother ( in the form
    of a statement).

23. Furthermore the judge was entitled to reject the  lawyer's  letter  for
    the reasons given at [32].  The judge found that it was a  "handwritten
    six line letter".  It did not clarify whether there was  a  summons  or
    arrest warrant against the Appellant although the  suggestion  appeared
    to be a summons.  The date of the summons had not  been  disclosed  nor
    the particulars of the Appellant's claimed offence nor on what date  it
    was committed nor was it clear if the file remained open or closed.

24. Whilst the grounds at paragraph 10 asserted that  "properly  understood
    the evidence suggests that the warrant would not have been published as
    the Appellant's address is not unknown"  and  thus  the  reasoning  for
    rejecting his  account  is  fundamentally  flawed,  that  misreads  the
    objective material where it explicitly states that where the address is
    known (as on the factual account of this Appellant), and the  Appellant
    is not present or be found at the last known address, it is  published.



25. As to whether the document was an arrest  warrant  or  a  summons,  the
    lawyer's letter makes no distinction.  In  the  letter  sent  from  the
    Appellant's mother it makes reference to the police raiding  the  house
    and she was served with a court summons which she  had  to  sign.   The
    objective material sets out that a court summons may  be  issued  by  a
    judge from a variety of courts including the Revolutionary Courts  (see
    paragraph 2.8.10) and therefore paragraph 12  of  the  grounds  is  not
    correct.

26. The material also demonstrates at  paragraph  2.8.13  that  the  police
    delivered a summons to the address.  If the person  is  present  it  is
    handed over to the person in question.  He or she is given the original
    summons and must sign the copy which is given back to  the  court.   At
    paragraph 2.8.14, it is recorded that if the person is not  present,  a
    family member can receive the summons in his or her  place.   The  same
    procedures for receiving the summons apply in that  the  family  member
    signs the copy which is given back to the court and keeps the original.

27. Contrary to  the  grounds,  the  judge  at  [31]  correctly  cited  the
    objective material as to the delivery of a summons.  At [32] the  judge
    finds by reference to the objective material that it confirmed that  an
    original summons would have been left with  a  family  member  (as  the
    material set out, a signed copy  would  go  back  with  the  bailiffs).
    Therefore the judge's finding is consistent with the objective material
    and it was open for her to reach the conclusion that as  the  Appellant
    had failed to produce a copy of any document (i.e.  the  copy  summons)
    and his explanation, which was that his mother had been served with the
    court summons which he had to sign) was inconsistent with the objective
    material because she would not simply have signed  it  but  would  have
    been given a document and as the judge stated,  no  such  document  was
    ever produced although there was the opportunity to do so.

28. Consequently there has been no misapplication of the objective material
    for the reasons amply set out at [32].

29. There were sustainable and adequate reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
    rejecting the lawyer's letter which did not provide cogent  details  in
    support of his claim which the judge  identified  at  [32].   Thus  the
    judge was entitled to treat the document as an unreliable document  for
    the reasons that she gave.

30.  Dealing with Ground 4,  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the distinction between Alexa and blogfa.com.  It is submitted
    that Alexa is a subscription website.  It analyses  traffic  and  other
    websites and that whilst  a  subscription  is  required  for  Alexa  no
    subscription  is  necessary  for  blogfa.com.   However  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge from blogfa or Alexa as to  any  subscription
    (paid  or  unpaid).  Furthermore,  it  is   important   to   read   the
    determination as a whole and it is not the only  reason  given  by  the
    judge for rejecting his claim in this respect.   The  veracity  of  his
    blog was  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of  State  (see  [33]).   The
    Appellant had failed to mention that he was a blogger during his  first
    interview in 2010 and thus the judge considered the explanation for his
    failure to do so at [34] and [41].  At [34] the judge found that  there
    were "both major and minor discrepancies which go to the  core  of  the
    blogging claim".  Whilst he  stated  he  began  blogging  in  2008  and
    stopped shortly before his arrest and detention in 2011, the  Appellant
    never once mentioned having a blog during his first asylum claim or  at
    any time until several months after the 2014 deportation order was made
    against him.  The judge made reference  to  question  84  of  the  2010
    asylum interview in which he stated he had not  been  involved  in  any
    political activities in the UK other than sending emails to Iran.

31. The judge considered the explanation given by the  Appellant  for  this
    major discrepancy in which he had stated "I don't  know  why  I  didn't
    mention my blog in my asylum interview, but I really wasn't in  a  good
    place at the time and my  whole  life  was  falling  apart."   In  this
    respect the judge noted that one of the blogs was dated 22nd  September
    2010 which was seven days after his screening interview and  five  days
    before his substantive interview.  The judge  also  found  at  [41]  by
    reference to the medical evidence that she rejected his explanation  of
    failure to mention his blog in the 2010 asylum claim as attributable to
    his mental state or due to  any  interpreting  issues.   As  the  judge
    noted,  he  was  legally  represented  in  2010  and  she  reached  the
    conclusion that the reason for the failure to mention the blog was that
    there was no blog between 2008 and 2011 as he had claimed.

32. Also in respect of the issue of blogging, the judge  found  that  there
    was no explanation as to how he had produced blogs  on  19th  and  20th
    April 2011 when he was a patient in an  acute  psychiatric  ward  at  a
    mental health hospital between 6th April and 16th May 2011.  The  judge
    observed that there was no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  of  either
    having any internet access (either free or paid for)  for  patients  at
    that period of time.

33.  Whilst Ground 5 challenged the determination on  the  basis  that  the
    judge found it "implausible" that he would be blogging in  April  2011,
    the ground ignores the findings of the judge.  It was not just the case
    that the judge made a finding that it was implausible that he would  be
    blogging in  April  2011  having  self-harmed  but  because  the  judge
    expressly found that during the period when he said  he  was  blogging,
    there was no evidence provided of  there  being  any  internet  access,
    (either free or paid for) for patients between those dates.   Therefore
    it was not simply a matter of being either physically unable  to  blog.
    In fact the Appellant had produced no evidence as  to  whether  it  was
    even possible during that time to carry out any blogging,  irrespective
    of his state of health.  The burden is on the Appellant and  there  was
    objectively verifiable evidence identified by the judge that could have
    been produced in support of his claim but had not.  Thus the judge  was
    entitled to rely upon that.

34. As to Ground 6 it asserts at  [35]  the  judge  had  misunderstood  the
    nature of the blog by stating that "none of the claimed  blogs  contain
    any of the Appellant's own literary  work  but  are  a  compilation  of
    published articles by others." However, the judge was not  saying  that
    this could not constitute a blog as such but the judge went on to  make
    the point that his asserted conduct of blogging was in direct  contrast
    to his demonstrated conduct in the United Kingdom.  The judge  cites  a
    number of reasons.  Firstly by reference to his history in the UK which
    did  not  support  the  profile  of  a  political  activist  intent  on
    researching and disseminating this information and secondly, the  judge
    identified at [35] that there was no reasonable explanation as  to  why
    he would delete emails from his uncle yet make a  blog  with  his  name
    placed on it without any regard for his  family  in  Iran  or  his  own
    safety  between  2008  and  2011.   The  judge  also  found  that   the
    Appellant's uncle, although in the UK did not attend  the  hearing  and
    made reference to the inconsistent evidence given by the Appellant.  In
    his statement the Appellant had said  that  his  mother  did  not  know
    anything about his offence or that  he  had  claimed  asylum  and  just
    thought that there was a problem with his student visa. The judge found
    this to be inconsistent with his  mother's  letter  of  13th  September
    which stated that both she and the maternal uncle had been helping  him
    with an asylum claim.  Consequently I do not find  that  those  grounds
    are made out.

35. Dealing with Ground 7, the  grounds  challenge  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant's blog had been retrospectively  posted  and  that  this  was
    "conjecture".

36. In her assessment of the Appellant's  overall  credibility,  the  judge
    found  the  Appellant  to  be  what  she  described  as  "manipulative,
    habitually untruthful and not a credible witness."  The judge  set  out
    and highlighted a number of significant  discrepancies  (some  are  not
    challenged in the grounds) and having considered  the  account  in  the
    round did not accept that this claimed activity of blogging was genuine
    (see [38]).

37. The grounds seek to challenge paragraph[38] but  the  grounds  fail  to
    take into account the determination should be read as a whole  and  the
    judge gave a number of reasons, when taken cumulatively, that  led  the
    judge  to  the  overall  adverse  credibility  findings  made  at  [38]
    including earlier findings relating to events in Iran, and the analysis
    of the medical evidence at [40] and [41] which were taken into  account
    when she reached the conclusion that she rejected his  explanation  for
    not mentioning the blog in 2010 and found it not to be attributable  to
    his mental state or any interpreting issues and  that  the  failure  to
    mention the blog was because there was no blog between 2008 and 2011 as
    claimed. Therefore she was not satisfied that  it  was  posted  between
    those dates and that it was retrospectively posted and that it need not
    have been from the Appellant himself.

38. Therefore the findings at [38] should be read alongside the findings at
    [41] and that whilst it had been  submitted  that  he  could  not  have
    fabricated the blog as he was detained in 2011 those submissions ignore
    the possibilities of others acting on his behalf as identified at  [41]
    and that it could have been retrospectively posted in 2014.  In  either
    circumstance, this was not "conjecture"  as  the  grounds  assert,  but
    based on reasoning open to the  judge  were  viewed  cumulatively.   In
    particular, the evidence that the Appellant, notwithstanding his  claim
    to be blogging between 2008 and 2011, made no reference to this in  his
    factual claim in 2010.  The judge specifically identified at [34]  that
    one of the blogs was dated 22nd September 2010, seven  days  after  the
    screening interview and five days before the asylum interview, and that
    it was positively asserted on his behalf that he had not been  involved
    in any political activities in the UK other than sending emails to Iran
    (question 84 of the interview).  I am  therefore  satisfied  that  that
    ground is not made out either.

39. As to Ground 8, it is asserted that the  judge  similarly  misconstrued
    the evidence concerning the blogs accessibility.  At  paragraph  14  of
    the grounds and relied upon by Mr Schwenk, it is asserted that  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to make clear findings on the evidence as to how
    long the blog had been accessible on the internet and that the  judge's
    suggestion that it was accessible for one day had no rational basis.

40. The judge's findings on this particular issue are set out  at  [36]  to
    [37], [41], [44] and [45].  At [36] the judge records  that  the  first
    supporting evidence of a blog is a Google search printed on 8th  August
    2014 (A1).  However no posted blogs are downloaded on that date and the
    copy blogs were all dated 18th September 2014.  The judge also referred
    to the copy blogs which appear to have been printed on one day, that is
    21st October 2014.  The judge made reference to  a  photograph  of  the
    Appellant which he stated was taken when  he  was  19  which  had  been
    posted on the blogs.  However the Appellant turned 19 after blogs dated
    2008 - October 2009.  The judge also made further findings as to  which
    blogs had photographs on them.  As the  judge  observed,  although  the
    Appellant's claim was that the blog had been posted  between  2008  and
    2011 there was no expert evidence from either a computer expert or from
    the website administrators as to either  the  Appellant's  subscription
    history on blogfa.com (either paid or unpaid), or whether a blogger  on
    the website has the ability (tools) to edit dates on  blogs.   At  [37]
    the judge made further findings as to the vagueness of the  Appellant's
    evidence as to when the account was closed.

41. Whilst the grounds assert the judge should have taken into account  the
    Appellant's oral evidence as to when he first noticed the  account  was
    closed, it was open to the judge to find that the evidence as  to  when
    his account was closed was indeed vague and at [37] the judge  referred
    to a  screen  shot  which  was  not  dated.   The  judge  set  out  the
    Appellant's evidence that the account was closed a few months ago, that
    is April 2015 but the Appellant did not provide a clear explanation  as
    to why he had internet access whilst he was detained  (see  [37]).   At
    [44] the judge set out again that she was not satisfied  how  long  the
    blog was accessible on the internet and expressly found  at  [44]  that
    the Appellant's evidence on this issue was "inconsistent"  and  "vague"
    as to when the account was closed and had  not  clearly  explained  the
    extent of his ability  to  access  the  internet  whilst  incarcerated,
    serving a sentence or being detained under immigration powers.

42. The judge identified that  firstly  there  was  no  statement  from  an
    independent  source  (which  could  reasonably  have   been   obtained)
    confirming the number of posted blogs that were in  the  public  domain
    throughout a specific period of  time.   Secondly  that  there  was  no
    confirmation from blogfa as to  any  subscriptions  (paid  or  unpaid).
    Therefore it was open to the judge to find that the Appellant  had  not
    demonstrated the length  of  the  period  that  the  blog  was  online.
    Contrary to the grounds, the judge was not saying that  it  was  online
    for one day but that  because  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  produce
    evidence that reasonably could have been obtained that he had failed to
    demonstrate whether it was reasonably likely the actual length of  time
    that it was on the internet.  As [45] demonstrates, the judge  was  not
    simply stating that it was one day that made reference to "if the  blog
    was online between August 2004 and March 2015" she  was  not  satisfied
    that the contents of those entries were online whether  throughout  the
    period of time or a very short period.

43. Ground 9 makes  reference  to  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's claim that the blog was closed down for political reasons.

44. In this respect  the  findings  on  this  issue  cannot  be  viewed  in
    isolation from the findings generally or from those whereby  the  judge
    was not satisfied as to the evidence as to when the blog was closed for
    the reasons given at [36], [37] and [44].  At [37] the judge also  sets
    out the evidence concerning the closing down of the blog and the  judge
    gave clear and adequate reasons for reaching the  conclusion  that  she
    was not satisfied that the  blog  was  closed  either  by  the  Iranian
    authorities or due to "political reasons".

45.  The judge took  into  account  the  decision  of  AB  and  Others  (at
    paragraph 304) which gave  three  reasons  why  it  could  not  provide
    services.  Firstly a violation of the laws and agreements  in  relation
    to the use of site services, an order from  the  legal  authorities  to
    block the web blog and the publication of immoral  content  or  content
    deemed  to  be  unauthorised  based  on  the  laws  of   the   country.
    Furthermore the judge also provided  the  additional  reason  that  the
    Appellant  had  not  provided  any   detailed   explanation   for   the
    administration of the blogfa.com (who are contactable) as  to  why  the
    account was closed by them and highlights the point that in particular,
    blogfa had not been contacted as to why the account was closed and  why
    it occurred after a dormant period in terms of postings of three years.
     Thus the judge gave a number of reasons why she was not satisfied that
    the blog was not removed by the Iranian authorities.

46. Whilst the grounds seek to challenge particular findings of  fact  made
    by the judge, the determination  must  be  read  as  a  whole  and  the
    findings read together demonstrate that the  judge  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for her adverse findings of credibility which  were
    supported by the evidence.  Thus it was consequently open to the  judge
    to make those findings which concern not only his conduct in the UK but
    in relation to his lack of credibility relating to events occurring  in
    Iran.  The judge properly considered the relevant authorities  and  the
    country materials and it has not been demonstrated that the grounds are
    made out to undermine those findings of fact.  I also observe that  the
    grounds themselves do not challenge the conclusions reached as to  risk
    on return which were set out at [42] to [47] of the determination.

47. Consequently the grounds do not demonstrate any arguable error  of  law
    and the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


