
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00878/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7 January 2015                            |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan instructed by Veale Wasbrough Vizards
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. This is a resumed hearing of an appeal by the appellant, a  citizen  of
    Lithuania who was born on 2 September 1982, against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Y J Jones) dismissing his appeal  against  a
    decision to deport him to Lithuania in accordance with the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI  2006/1003  as  amended)
    (the "2006 EEA Regulations") made on 30 April 2013.

 3. Following the initial hearing of the appeal on 14  November  2013,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside by the Upper Tribunal
    (UTJ Grubb) in a decision dated 4 December 2013.  The UT concluded that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  in  assessing  whether  the
    appellant represented a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society"  under
    reg. 21(5)(c) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 4. The appeal was adjourned for a resumed hearing in order for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision both under the 2006 EEA Regulations and
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  Following a number of adjournments, principally  to
    obtain information in relation to the family proceedings begun  by  the
    appellant for contact with his two  children,  the  appeal  was  listed
    before us on 7 January 2015.

 5. At the hearing,  the  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  before  us.   In
    addition, Mr Nathan, on behalf of the appellant placed  reliance  on  a
    number of documents not before the First-tier  Tribunal,  including  an
    expert report by Dr Freda Gardner, a Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist
    dated 6 October 2014 (at pages 15-56 of the appellant's bundle),  court
    documents relating to the appellant's contact proceedings including  an
    agreement between the appellant, his ex-partner and CAFCASS;  a  letter
    from the appellant's Probation Officer dated 2 October 2014; a  CAFCASS
    report by Claire Lund dated 13 October 2014; an email dated  6  January
    2015 relating the views of the CAFCASS Guardian,  Claire  Lund;  and  a
    number of witness statements for example from  the  appellant  and  his
    employer at sections B and D of the  bundle.   Mr  Richards  raised  no
    objection to the admission of this additional evidence and we  admitted
    it in our discretion under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

The Background

 6. As we have indicated, the appellant is a citizen of Lithuania.  He came
    to the United Kingdom in 2008 together with his partner and  son  ("F")
    who was born on 12 July 2002.  On 7 November 2008,  the  appellant  and
    his partner ("KV") had a daughter ("K") who was born in the  UK.   Both
    the appellant's children and his partner are also Lithuanian nationals.

 7. On 2 November 2011, the  appellant  was  arrested  in  connection  with
    allegations of rape made by his partner, KV.  On 13 February 2012,  the
    appellant pleaded guilty at the Bristol Crown Court  to  two  offences,
    namely rape of a female over 16 and  attempted  rape.   The  victim  of
    those offences was the appellant's partner.   On  23  April  2013,  the
    appellant was sentenced  to  terms  of  three  years'  imprisonment  in
    relation to both counts to be served concurrently.  Two further  counts
    on the indictment were ordered to lie on the file and the appellant was
    ordered to sign the Sex Offenders Register indefinitely.  He  was  also
    made the subject of a restraining order preventing him from  contacting
    his (now) ex-partner.

 8. The appellant served his prison sentence and was  released  on  20  May
    2013.

 9. On 18 May 2012, the appellant was  notified  that  the  respondent  was
    considering whether to deport him on grounds  of  public  policy.   The
    appellant responded, setting out that he had lived and worked in the UK
    since 2008; that he had an ex-partner and two children in the UK;  that
    he was not guilty of the crimes of which he  had  been  convicted;  and
    that he was working until his arrest in November 2011.

10. On 30 April 2013, the Secretary of  State  made  a  decision  that  the
    appellant should be deported pursuant to the 2006  EEA  Regulations  on
    grounds of public policy.

11. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Y J Jones) was
    dismissed in a determination dated 23 July 2013.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Eshun) on 2 September 2013.   As
    we have already indicated, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  was  set
    aside by the Upper Tribunal in a decision dated 4 December 2013.

The Submissions

  12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Nathan submitted that the Secretary  of
      State had failed to establish, as required by  reg.  21(5)(c)  of  the
      2006 EEA Regulations that the appellant's personal conduct represented
      "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
      the fundamental interests of society".   He  submitted  that,  on  the
      basis of the evidence, we should find that the  appellant  represented
      at worst a "low" risk to his ex-partner and future  partners  and,  at
      best, no risk to them.  In those circumstances, he submitted that  the
      appellant's risk of re-offending did not fall within reg. 21(5)(c).

  13. Mr Nathan relied upon the sentencing remarks of Her Honour Judge Hagen
      in sentencing the appellant on 23  April  2012  that,  first  his  two
      offences were "entirely out of character" and secondly,  "I  am  quite
      satisfied that when  you  are  released  you  will  be  able  to  find
      employment and take up the threads of your life again and  I  am  also
      very confident that you will never appear in  any  court  again".   Mr
      Nathan prayed those comments in aid in submitting that we should  find
      that the appellant represented a low or no risk of re-offending

  14. Mr Nathan relied upon [32] of the Upper  Tribunal's  determination  in
      Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316  (IAC)  where
      Blake J (Chamber President) said:


         "We observe that for any deportation of an EEA national  or  family
         member of such national to be  justified  on  public  good  grounds
         (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been achieved) the
         claimant must represent a present threat to public policy. The fact
         of a criminal conviction is not enough. It is not permissible in an
         EEA case to deport a claimant on the basis  of  criminal  offending
         simply to deter others. This tends to mean,  in  case  of  criminal
         conduct short of the most serious threats to the public  safety  of
         the state, that a candidate for EEA deportation  must  represent  a
         present threat by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  re-offend  or  an
         unacceptably high risk of re-offending. In such a case, if there is
         acceptable evidence of  rehabilitation,  the  prospects  of  future
         rehabilitation do not enter the balance, save  possibly  as  future
         protective  factors  to  ensure  that  the  rehabilitation  remains
         durable."


15. Mr Nathan submitted that the risk posed by the appellant, if  any,  did
    not establish a "propensity to re-offend" or "an unacceptably high risk
    of re-offending".

16. Secondly, Mr Nathan submitted that even  if  the  requirement  in  reg.
    21(5)(c)  was  met,  the   appellant's   deportation   would   not   be
    proportionate for the purposes of EU law or under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.
    He relied upon the expert report of Dr Gardner and  the  views  of  the
    CAFCASS Guardian that it was in the best interests of  the  appellant's
    children, F and K, to maintain direct contact with him in the  UK.   Mr
    Nathan relied on the fact that the appellant has, pursuant to  a  court
    order, begun  first,  indirect  contact  with  the  children  and  more
    recently supervised direct contact.  He  submitted  that  it  would  be
    "potentially devastating" for F and K to  now  lose  the  contact  with
    their father that had so recently begun.  .

17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the appellant's
    personal conduct did represent a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society".
    He accepted that it was necessary to take into account  the  sentencing
    judge's remarks but he relied upon Dr Gardner's report  that  expressed
    concerns about the appellant's attitude and his continued denial of his
    guilt:  his lack of awareness that when under threat he was  not  aware
    or in control of his behaviour and that he should attend  a  number  of
    programmes to develop insight.  Mr Richards relied upon the appellant's
    own evidence that he had not yet attended any courses and  despite  his
    own evidence that he did not believe he  needed  to,  the  professional
    view was that he did.

18. Mr Richards invited us to find that the appellant did pose  a  risk  to
    his former  and  future  partners.   He  accepted  that  he  could  not
    establish that there was a "high" risk but, consistently with what  was
    said in [32] of Essa, Mr Richards invited us to find  that,  given  the
    seriousness of any harm caused by  the  appellant's  future  offending,
    that risk was "unacceptable".

19. In relation to proportionality, Mr Richards invited us  to  find  that,
    even though deportation would put an  end  to  any  supervised  contact
    between the appellant and his two  children,  the  seriousness  of  his
    offending was such that even taking into account the best interests  of
    his children, the appellant's deportation was proportionate both  under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.



The Legal Framework

20. The appellant is an EU citizen and so his deportation  is  governed  by
    the provisions of the 2006 EEA Regulations giving effect  to  Directive
    2004/38/EC.

21. The basis for the appellant's deportation is found in reg. 19(3)(b)  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations which provides as follows:

         "An EEA national who has entered the  United  Kingdom  ...  may  be
             removed if -

         ...

         (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
             is justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 21; ..."

22. Where a decision is taken to remove an individual under reg.  19(3)(b),
    reg. 24(3) states that:

         "The person is to be treated as if he were a person to whom section
         3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act (liability  to  deportation)  applied,  and
         section 5 of that Act (procedure for deportation) and Schedule 3 to
         that Act (supplementary provision as to deportation) are  to  apply
         accordingly."

23. Hence, once a lawful decision under the 2006 EEA Regulations  is  taken
    to remove an individual, then the power to deport found in the 1971 Act
    can be applied as it was in this case.

24. Regulation 21 is central to  this  appeal  and,  so  far  as  relevant,
    provides as follows:

         "21(1)   In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

          (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

             ....

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin.

              ......"

25. We have omitted the provisions dealing with EU  nationals  who  have  a
    "permanent right of residence" who may  only  be  removed  on  "serious
    grounds of public policy or public security" and those who may only  be
    removed on "imperative grounds of public  security"  (see  respectively
    reg. 21(3) and (4)).  It is accepted in this appeal that the  appellant
    does not have a permanent right of residence or cannot only be  removed
    on  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security".    His   removal   and
    deportation has to be justified on the lowest threshold, namely that of
    "public policy".

26. In BF (Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 923, the Court of Appeal at [3]
    identified the four questions that must be addressed  in  applying  the
    2006 EEA Regulations to an individual's removal or deportation:

         (1)  What was the relevant personal conduct of the appellant?

         (2)  Having determined that question, does that conduct represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat?

         (3)  If  so,  does  that  threat  affect  one  of  the  fundamental
             interests of society?

         (4)  Will the appellant's deportation be proportionate in  all  the
             circumstances?

27. As will shortly become clear, we consider that this appeal is  resolved
    by answering questions (1)-(3).

Discussion and Findings

28.  It  was  common  ground  between  the  parties  that  the  appellant's
    deportation could not be justified simply on the basis of his  previous
    criminal conviction even of such a serious nature as rape and attempted
    rape.  In order to  represent  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society",
    it was at least necessary to establish a future risk  of  re-offending.
    Only then could the individual present a "present" threat.  Of  course,
    past offending may be relevant in assessing  future  risk  but,  unlike
    deportation of a non-EU national, the  seriousness  of  past  offending
    cannot in itself justify the deportation of an EU national.

29. We begin with the evidence of  the  appellant's  conduct  (BF  Question
    (1)).

30. We are in no doubt that the appellant's offending is very serious.  The
    convictions for rape and attempted rape, in themselves, justify such  a
    characterisation which  is  not  diminished  by  consideration  of  the
    particular circumstances described by the complainant in  the  criminal
    proceedings involving forced vaginal  penetration  and  attempted  oral
    penetration and which led to the appellant's conviction.

31. We turn now to consider the evidence relating to whether the  appellant
    represents  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society"  (BF  Questions
    (2) and (3)).

32. In sentencing the appellant, Her Honour Judge Hagen said this:

         "It is clear to me that these two  offences  are  entirely  out  of
         character.  You were living with the  complainant,  the  mother  of
         your children, in very  difficult  circumstances.   You  were  both
         working very hard and working very long hours and  it  was  in  the
         summer and autumn of last year that the  relationship  between  you
         broke down; and it is plain from everything I have read  you  found
         that very difficult to come to terms with.

         These two offences were committed within a  very  short  time  span
         which mitigates, in my view, their seriousness.  Important, not  to
         say crucial, forensic evidence only came to light this morning  and
         I have no doubt that that had some  bearing  on  your  decision  to
         plead guilty to Count 3, and since it was such  important  evidence
         and came so very late in the day, I take the unusual step of saying
         that you should receive the maximum  discount  for  your  pleas  of
         guilty today.  It has had the undoubted benefit of meaning that the
         complainant does not have to give evidence and for that you deserve
         credit.

         I have read much about you, both from  employers,  from  the  rugby
         club of which you were obviously a valued member and  from  friends
         who have known you a long time.  All  those  factors  I  take  into
         account, but of course I  cannot  forget  that  these  are  serious
         offences.

         Reconciling all those conflicting factors as best I can,  I  impose
         the least sentence which in my view is appropriate.  That  will  be
         one of three years imprisonment on each of  the  two  counts.   166
         days that you have served so far  on  remand  will  be  taken  into
         account when serving that sentence and I am  quite  satisfied  that
         when you are released you will be able to find employment and  take
         up the threads of your life again and I am also very confident that
         you will never appear in any court again."

33. As we have said, Mr Nathan placed some weight upon  these  comments  in
    making his submission that the appellant at worst presented a low  risk
    of future offending and at best presented no risk at all.

34. It is established law that we should take into account the  remarks  of
    the sentencing judge concerning the circumstances of  the  individual's
    offending and the view taken as to its seriousness and in  relation  to
    any future risk of offending, not least because  the  sentencing  judge
    will have directly addressed his or her mind to those  issues,  on  the
    basis of the best evidence available at the time, in reaching  what  he
    or she considers to be the appropriate sentence.

35. Leaving aside the discount given for the appellant's guilty pleas,  the
    judge's sentencing remarks do not, in our judgment, indicate  that  she
    thought that the appellant would present no risk in  the  future.   Her
    comment that his two offences were "entirely out of  character"  is  no
    more than a description that these offences are the first for which  he
    had appeared before the courts.  It is a statement which could be  made
    in relation to any  first  time  offender.   That  said,  however,  her
    comment that she was "very confident" that the  appellant  "will  never
    appear in any court again" is a strong comment,  albeit  one  which  we
    consider to be a statement of hope or aspiration by the judge.  It  is,
    nevertheless, a matter which we must take into  account  as  reflecting
    the judge's opinion on the evidence before her.

36. There is, of course, further evidence before us which we must also take
    into account.

37. First, there is the NOMS Report which appears  undated  but  which  was
    requested on 4 April 2013.  That report appears to have been based upon
    the OASys Report dated 6 September 2012.  The report  states  that  the
    likelihood of the appellant being reconvicted  is  "low"  on  an  OASys
    score of between 0-40 (section  4).   The  report  concludes  that  the
    reconviction score is "13 per cent" (see section 6).  The risk  of  re-
    offending  relates  to  the  appellant's  ex-partner  and  "potentially
    females  in  future  intimate  relationships"  (see  section  3).   Not
    surprisingly, given to what the risk of re-offending relates, the  risk
    of "serious harm" is stated to be "high".  That is, of course,  not  an
    assessment of the likelihood that the appellant will re-offend but that
    if he did the level of harm that may result.

38. It was on the basis of that report that Judge Jones concluded that  the
    appellant presented a "low" risk of re-offending and was the  basis  of
    her finding that he presented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat" within reg. 21(5)(c).

39. We have, in addition, a number of further expert views  concerning  the
    appellant's  behaviour,  including  the  potential  impact   upon   his
    behaviour of his desire to seek, and maintain, access to  his  children
    through the court proceedings.

40. It is not a matter of dispute that the appellant has since the  end  of
    2014 obtained a court order granting him first, indirect  contact  with
    his children and now subsequently  direct  conduct  supervised  by  the
    CAFCASS Guardian, Ms Lund.  We consider these developments significant.

41. Secondly, we turn first to the expert report of Dr Gardner at pages 15-
    56 of the appellant's bundle.  Dr  Gardner  is  a  Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist and her expertise is not challenged.  We  have  considered
    it carefully and take the view that it is a balanced report based  upon
    interviews with the appellant, his ex-partner and the CAFCASS Guardian.



42. It recognises shortcomings in the appellant's behaviour.  At para 4.7.5
    it states that the appellant:

         "has no real insight into the  behaviour,  which  resulted  in  his
         conviction for rape/attempted rape against [KV].  He  continues  to
         say that he never raped or attempted to rape [KV] and that  he  was
         forced to plead guilty to one offence to reduce his  sentence.   He
         asserted with evidence of a significant emotional  change  that  he
         had never done anything to her."

43. We should add that the appellant also maintained his innocence  of  the
    offences in his oral evidence before us although he  accepted  that  he
    had to recognise his conviction for the purposes of the appeal.

44. Likewise at para 4.7.8, Dr Gardner states that:

         "It is my view that when he  is  under  threat  and  is  expressing
         strong feelings he is not  consistently  consciously  aware  or  in
         control of his behaviour and aware of the effect that his behaviour
         has on others.  This is consistent with [the appellant] having very
         little insight."

45. Nevertheless, Dr Gardner  comments  very  positively  indeed  upon  the
    appellant's commitment to, and love for, his two children, F and K.  At
    para 1.1.13,  she  comments  both  on  that  attachment  and  also  the
    appellant's future behaviour as follows:

         "I have provided the view that a very significant protective factor
         with regard to any risks/potential risks posed by  [the  appellant]
         is his profound love  and  commitment  to  his  children.   It  was
         evident during this assessment that [the appellant] has a  profound
         affection for his children and very much wants to re-establish  his
         relationship with  [F]  and  develop  his  relationship  with  both
         children.  It is also important to note that  [the  appellant]  has
         applied to the court for contact with the children in  an  entirely
         appropriate manner, which  indicates  his  ability  to  manage  his
         tendency to inappropriately take  control.   This  compliance  with
         authority and procedure is in  my  view  a  significant  protective
         factor and a  positive  indicator  with  regard  to  prognosis  for
         compliance in arrangements for contact."

46. Dr Gardner's  view  is  that  continued  supervised  contact  with  the
    appellant's children  is  in  their  best  interests  and  that  it  is
    desirable for  the  appellant  to  undergo  programmes  concerned  with
    parenting  and  also  in  relation  to  domestic  physical  and  sexual
    violence.  At para 4.5.4 she says:

         "It is my view that it would be very much in the interests  of  the
         children and  also  of  [the  appellant]  if  he  would  engage  in
         intervention  designed  for  sexual  offenders.   There  are   also
         programmes associated with the Power to Change Programme  aimed  at
         facilitating the development of insight in perpetrators of domestic
         physical and sexual violence."

47. She then continues to comment:

         "If [the appellant] were to engage in  such  intervention  that  is
         available ... it is my  view  that  he  has  the  intelligence  and
         potential sensitivity to develop a significant level of insight."

48. Dr Gardner's view concerning  the  importance  of  maintaining  contact
    between the appellant  and  his  children  and  the  "very  significant
    protective factor" of his  love  and  commitment  to  his  children  is
    repeated at para 4.5.6 even after Dr Gardner notes at para  4.5.4  that
    it is

         "unlikely that [the appellant] would  have  fully  engaged  in  any
         intervention that would have enabled  him  to  develop  appropriate
         insight into the offences."

49. That is a reference to the fact that the appellant was unable,  through
    unavailability, to engage in any programmes whilst in custody.

50. The point nevertheless remains that Dr  Gardner  recommends  supervised
    contact and emphasises the importance that the programme will  have  in
    allowing the appellant to address and understand issues concerning  his
    behaviour.

51. Mr Richards put to the appellant in cross-examination that, in  effect,
    his  denial  of  his  guilt  made  any  such  courses  pointless.   The
    appellant's response, which  we  found  persuasive,  was  that  he  was
    prepared to attend these courses and indeed would be seeking to  do  so
    shortly because it was important to him to maintain  contact  with  his
    children and he could only do  so  if  he  attended  these  programmes.
    That, we  note,  is  part  of  the  agreement  appended  to  the  court
    proceedings between the appellant, his ex-partner and CAFCASS.

52. Thirdly, the report of the CAFCASS Guardian, Ms Lund dated  13  October
    2014 also supports supervised contact between the appellant and his two
    children.  She notes that that is the wish of the elder child,  F,  who
    is 12 years old and the younger child, K is curious to know  about  her
    father.  The CAFCASS Guardian also recommends that the appellant attend
    a parenting skills course and programmes for perpetrators  of  domestic
    violence and states that:   "I  will  undertake  enquiries  as  to  the
    availability of both programmes."

53. In cross-examination, Mr Richards explored with the  appellant  whether
    he was serious about attending such courses.  He had not done so before
    Christmas.  The appellant's explanation was that he was  working  as  a
    lorry driver and that was a busy work period when he could earn  enough
    money to pay his solicitor's bills which he said  were  high.   He  had
    every intention of attending courses.

54. We entirely accept the appellant's explanation.  There is no doubt that
    the appellant has been faced with solicitor's bills which have to paid,
    we were told, on the basis that he is paid something in the order of �8
    per hour.  His explanation has an undoubted 'ring of truth'  about  it.
    Equally, the availability of courses seems to be a matter which Ms Lund
    has undertaken to make enquiries about and provide the  appellant  with
    an opportunity to  attend.   We  accept  that  it  is  the  appellant's
    intention to  attend  these  courses.   In  response  to  Mr  Richards'
    submission,  we  do  not  accept  that  simply  because  the  appellant
    continues  to  deny  his  offending  that  these  courses  will   prove
    valueless.  Certainly, Dr Gardner, who is an expert, did not  think  so
    since she recommended these courses despite being well aware  that  the
    appellant continued  to  deny  his  offences.   When  he  attends,  the
    appellant will necessarily have to engage with the programmes in  order
    to complete them successfully.  That very engagement may well,  in  our
    view, consistently with Dr Gardner's opinion, enable the  appellant  to
    gain the relevant "insight" which Dr  Gardner  concludes  he  currently
    lacks.  The programmes may well provide the key to the currently closed
    doors in the appellant's mind.   We  had  no  doubt  of  his  sincerity
    because, like Dr Gardner, we are satisfied that  he  is  determined  to
    maintain his contact with F and K  with  whom  he  has  a  very  strong
    paternal attachment.

55. The appellant's resolve to maintain contact and conduct himself  so  as
    to maintain it is supported  by  the  CAFCASS  Guardian,  Ms  Lund,  as
    reported in the email of 6 January 2015.  She reports favourably on the
    contact, initially with F and subsequently with F and K.  She comments:



         "[The appellant] was very  appropriate  with  both  children,  very
         sensitive and interacted with them both well.  Both  children  want
         contact to continue and whereas mother does not want  to  see  [the
         appellant] she knows that the children want to see their father."

56. Referring to a further contact hearing scheduled for 2 March  2015,  Ms
    Lund's view is reported that:

         "If things stay the same, she will  be  recommending  that  contact
         should continue.  It is very beneficial for both  children  to  see
         and have contact with their father.  She is very supportive of [the
         appellant] staying in the UK to have contact and agrees that if  he
         was deported [the appellant] would be unlikely to see his  children
         for many years as their mother would not take the children  to  see
         [the appellant] as she does not want to have any contact with  him.
         It is likely, particularly in  K's  case  that  the  children  will
         forget their father if he is deported.  The children need  to  have
         regular contact with their father."

57. Whilst the issue of the  children's  best  interests  is  not  directly
    relevant in determining the issue under reg. 21(5)(c),  this  evidence,
    which we accept and which is entirely consistently  with  all  that  we
    were shown, demonstrates the importance of  continued  contact  between
    the appellant and his children and that he is endeavouring to  maintain
    that contact which, in our view, is entirely contingent upon his future
    good behaviour including attending the required courses.

58. Finally, the appellant's Probation Officer, Ms Fisher in her letter  of
    2 October 2014 directed to the family court dealing  with  the  contact
    proceedings, concludes that the appellant has given no indication  that
    he poses "a risk to  his  children".   Having  noted  the  NOMS  Report
    assessment shortly  after  the  appellant  was  imprisoned,  Ms  Fisher
    comments:

         "[The appellant] pleaded not guilty to this  offence  and  has  not
         shifted on this position, however this does not imply he  poses  an
         ongoing risk to female partners."

59. She then continues that the risk of "medium harm" relates  not  to  any
    lack of "progress" or because  of  "any  risk  associated  thoughts  or
    behaviour" but "due to the seriousness of the charge made against him."

60. We were also told by the appellant in his evidence that he has been  in
    a new relationship for one year and twelve days.  His new  partner  was
    present at the hearing.  He was not cross-examined in relation to  that
    relationship and we have no reason to doubt  the  appellant's  evidence
    which we accept.

61. It follows, therefore, that since the appellant's release  from  prison
    in May 2013 he has not re-offended including within the  specific  risk
    category that he was considered to  fall  within,  namely  to  his  ex-
    partner or future partners.

62. In assessing what risk, if any, the appellant poses in  the  future  we
    must take into account all the evidence as at the date of this hearing.
     We see no reason to doubt that his behaviour has been exemplary  since
    his release from prison.

63. We now turn to the four question posed in BF (Portugal) set  out  above
    at para 26.

64. First, the "relevant personal conduct" of the appellant is his criminal
    offending, namely his conviction for rape and attempted rape of his ex-
    partner in April 2012 for which he received a prison sentence of  three
    years.  The appellant has no previous convictions and no offences  have
    been committed subsequently (BF Question (1)).

65. Secondly, as required by EU law, we must consider whether the appellant
    represents  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society"  (BF  questions
    (2) and (3)).

66. In itself, the appellant's previous criminal conviction cannot  justify
    a decision to deport him as an EU national on "public policy"  grounds.
    That is because a "present" threat looks  to  the  future  rather  than
    merely to the past.  In that respect, there is a divergence between the
    approach in an EU deportation case, as we have already noted above, and
    a  deportation  concerning  a  non-EU  national  where  past   criminal
    convictions may, in themselves, be sufficiently serious to  justify  an
    individual's deportation in the public interest (see OH (Serbia) v SSHD
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694).

67. There can be no doubt that the nature of any potential re-offending  by
    the appellant, given the seriousness of those  offences,  would  affect
    "one of the fundamental interests of society", namely the protection of
    the public.  The issue in this appeal is whether  or  not  there  is  a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat", in effect, of  that
    offending re-occurring.

68. The NOMS Report classified the appellant's risk as "low"  and  went  so
    far as to place the risk at "13 per cent".  We have taken into account,
    as a significant and important factor,  the  views  of  the  sentencing
    judge.  As we have already noted, we do not  understand  her  views  to
    exclude the possibility of future offending.  The Judge  was,  however,
    plainly of the view that the appellant posed  no  real  threat  in  the
    future.

69. We do consider that the subsequent  expert  and  professional  evidence
    taken together with the conduct of the appellant since his release from
    prison does, in our judgment, diminish that "low"  risk  identified  in
    the NOMS Report.  We are particularly impressed and  persuaded  by  the
    evidence of the appellant and the experts concerning his commitment  to
    his children and to maintain contact with them which  provides  a  very
    strong incentive indeed, in our view, for the appellant both to  attend
    what professionals consider to be helpful programmes  and  to  maintain
    future good behaviour, including future offending or  face  the  almost
    inevitable  consequence  that  contact  with  his  children   will   be
    significantly reduced or taken away.   We  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant's continued denial of the offence is inconsistent  with  that
    view, indeed, that was the point being made by his  probation  officer,
    Ms Fisher, in her letter of 2 October 2014 with which we agree.

70. The expert and other evidence in this appeal is of a  singular  quality
    pointing  in  the  appellant's  favour.   Whilst  we   cannot   exclude
    altogether a risk of re-offending, the evidence before us  establishes,
    in our  judgment,  that  that  risk  is  speculative,  remote  and  not
    concrete.

71. There is no suggestion that the appellant has a "propensity" to  commit
    sexual offences and, in our judgment, applying Blake J's view in  Essa,
    we do not  consider  there  is  an  "unacceptably  high"  risk  of  the
    appellant re-offending such that he would present a  "genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat" as required by reg. 21(5)(c).  We make
    that finding bearing  well  in  mind  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
    offending and the degree of condemnation that will be rightly  directed
    against his behaviour.  However,  the  legal  regime  for  removing  or
    deporting EU criminals  is  more  restrictive  than  it  is  for  other
    "foreign national"  criminals  and  the  public  interest  required  to
    justify deportation in EU  cases  is  significantly  narrower  than  in
    cases involving the deportation of non-EU nationals..

72. On the basis of  our  finding,  the  appellant  cannot  be  removed  or
    deported as an EU national.  The issue  of  proportionality,  does  not
    arise (BF question 4).  The foundation requirement in reg. 21(5)(c) has
    not been established by the respondent.

73. As a result of that decision, no purpose is served by  considering  the
    appellant's deportation under Art 8.

74. For the above reasons, the appellant's appeal is allowed under the  EEA
    Regulations.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             28 January 2015
