
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      DG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon
Solicitors


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   We shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as he was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He is a citizen of South Africa and his  date  of
    birth is 18 March 1987.

2.   The appellant came to the UK aged 12 with his mother.  He  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 24 July 2000.  On 30 November 2004 he was
    convicted of two counts  of  aggravated  burglary  and  he  received  a
    custodial sentence of 42 months.  At the same time he was made  subject
    to an anti-social behaviour order  the  duration  of  which  was  seven
    years.  As a result of the conviction the Secretary of  State  made  an
    order to deport the appellant.  He appealed this  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed on 29 January 2008.  On 12  March  2008  he  was  convicted  of
    possession of a class B drug.  On 12 August 2009 he  was  convicted  of
    two counts of possession with intent to supply a class A  drug  and  he
    was sentenced to an eighteen month community order.   On  10  September
    2010 he was convicted of possession  of  an  offensive  weapon  and  he
    received a twelve month custodial sentence.  A three  month  concurrent
    sentence was imposed for  having  breached  the  anti-social  behaviour
    order.

3.   On 1 April 2011  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  deportation  order
    pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007  Act").
    The appellant's appeal against this decision was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal in 2008.  Following further submissions as  a  result  of
    his relationship with H, a British citizen, the Secretary of State made
    a further appealable decision refusing the application.  The  appellant
    appealed and his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on  23
    May 2013.

4.   The appellant made further representations to the  Secretary  of  State
    on the basis that  he  was  in  a  relationship  with  another  British
    citizen, P, and that she was pregnant with their child.  The child,  Z,
    was  born  on  2  May  2014.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused   the
    application.  Another appealable decision was generated maintaining the
    deportation order made on 1 April 2011.  The appellant appealed and his
    appeal was allowed under Article 8, by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Sethi.  The Secretary of State was granted permission by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Coker on 11 August 2015.

The Legal Framework

5.   The Immigration Rules ("the Rules"):

         "A398.   These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive  to  the  public  good  [and  in  the   public
                    interest] because they have been convicted of an offence
                    for which they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                    imprisonment of at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive  to  the  public  good  [and  in  the   public
                    interest] because they have been convicted of an offence
                    for which they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                    imprisonment of less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
                    months;

                or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive  to  the  public  good  [and  in  the   public
                    interest] because, in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of
                    State, their offending has caused serious harm  or  they
                    are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a   particular
                    disregard for the law,

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,
                [the public interest in deportation will only be  outweighed
                by  other  factors   where   there   are   very   compelling
                circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
                399 and 399A].

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
                if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    [it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported]; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

                        (b)    the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                             relationship with a partner who is  in  the  UK
                             and is a [British Citizen  or  settled  in  the
                             UK], and

                             (i)    [the relationship was formed at  a  time
                                 when the person (deportee) was in  the  UK
                                 lawfully and their immigration status  was
                                 not precarious; and]

                             (ii)   [it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  that
                                 partner to live in the  country  to  which
                                 the person is to be deported,  because  of
                                 compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                                 those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                                 Appendix FM; and]

                             (iii)  [it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  that
                                 partner to remain in the  UK  without  the
                                 person who is to be deported.]"

6.   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"):

         "117B.   Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
                all cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English -

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons -

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a person at a time when the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C.    Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving
                foreign criminals

                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who  has  not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
                    years, the public interest requires  deportation  unless
                    there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above
                    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                (7)    The considerations in subSections (1) to (6)  are  to
                    be taken into account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision  was  the
                    offence or offences for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                    convicted."

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant,  P,
    the appellant's mother and his stepfather.  She considered the evidence
    contained in the witness statements of the wider family and friends and
    that of Ms A from SBS.

8.   The decision of the Secretary of  State  was  made  with  reference  to
    paragraph 398(b) of the Rules.  The appellant claimed that  deportation
    would breach his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR with  reference  to
    paragraph 399 of the Rules.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal found at [30]  that  paragraph  399(b)  of  the
    Rules could not apply because the appellant and P had reconciled  at  a
    time when he was subject to a deportation order.  Paragraph 399(a)  did
    not apply because Z, who is a British citizen, could remain  living  in
    the UK with his British citizen mother.  For this reason only the judge
    concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for him to remain in the UK
    without the appellant (see [31]).

10.  At [36] the judge found that the  appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and that this was a significant consideration
    in the overall assessment of  proportionality.   She  stated  that  she
    recognised that states were entitled to decide that there is  generally
    a compelling public interest in deporting foreign  criminals  and  that
    this is reflected through the provisions of Section 117C(1).

11.  At [37] the judge found that there could be no doubt that  the  trigger
    offence was serious, noting that the offensive weapon  was  a  baseball
    bat and that the appellant had presented the threat of violence against
    the public.  The judge went on to direct herself in relation to Section
    117C (2) (the more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
    the greater is the public interest in deportation).  She found that the
    appellant has an appalling history as a persistent young  offender  and
    that the offending behaviour appeared to be associated  with  childhood
    difficulties and gang and drug-related associations.

12.  The judge noted that the appellant had not re-offended for almost  five
    years (see [39]) and she found this to be strongly  indicative  of  his
    desire and intention  to  lead  a  law-abiding  life  which  she  found
    corroborated his evidence and that of his witnesses that  he  has  made
    progress in removing himself from a life of crime.  The judge took into
    account that in 2011 the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant's
    risk of re-offending was medium, but she noted that the assessment  had
    been based on the appellant having been  released  from  prison  for  a
    short period of time.  She noted that he had continued to offend  after
    his successful appeal in January 2008.  The judge found  that  although
    the appellant had in the  past  claimed  to  have  left  his  offending
    lifestyle behind, and that this had been shown not to be the case,  she
    was satisfied at the date of the hearing before her that "there is  now
    persuasive and reliable evidence of the appellant's genuine and durable
    rehabilitation."  The judge referred to the findings of  the  panel  in
    2011.  They found that the appellant had an exceptionally difficult and
    uncompromising background.  The judge attached weight to  the  evidence
    of Ms A (from  SBS),  who  has  worked  with  the  appellant  providing
    educational and pastoral support to him up until he was aged  18.   Her
    evidence was that the appellant has worked for  the  organisation  over
    the past three years teaching young people. In relation to the risk  of
    re-offending the judge directed herself that she was required to attach
    considerable  weight  to  the  wider  objective  of  deportation  as  a
    deterrent and as an expression of society's revulsion.

13.  The judge went on to consider  Section  117C  in  the  context  of  the
    impact of deportation on P and Z.  The judge found P to  be  insightful
    and that she was a credible witness.  She had resided  in  the  UK  her
    entire life and was intending to qualify  as  a  chartered  accountant.
    She concluded that it was not reasonable to require her or Z  to  leave
    the UK.  P's evidence was that she would  leave  the  UK  to  join  the
    appellant in South Africa if she had to.  The judge found that she  had
    no practical family or cultural affiliation with South Africa and  that
    she has a strong private life in the UK.  She has never been  to  South
    Africa and neither had she desired to  visit.   The  judge  found  that
    should she relocate she would "struggle immensely in attempting to  re-
    establish herself and her work  in  a  country  in  which  she  has  no
    practical, family or cultural support".

14.  The judge referred to the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  2011
    that the relationship will  almost  certainly  break  down  should  the
    appellant be deported.  The judge found that the difficulties would  be
    compounded now because P is a mother with a young child who is  reliant
    on her parents in the UK and a support network here.   The  judge  took
    into account that the appellant left South Africa at the age of 12  and
    he has not returned since then.  She found that  return  would  involve
    obvious hardship for him.  She found that there would be real obstacles
    against relocating to South Africa in order to  continue  family  life.
    The judge considered the impact on P should she remain here  and  found
    as follows:

         "... would result in harsh consequences  for  her  practically  and
         emotionally and so adversely impact upon not only her  family  life
         but the progression of enjoyment of her private  life,  to  include
         her career ambitions to qualify as an accountant  and  establish  a
         stable family environment for her son."

15.  The judge took into account Z's best  interests  and  uncontroversially
    found that it would be in his best  interests  to  be  raised  by  both
    parents.   The  judge  found  that  fatherhood  had  strengthened   the
    appellant's resolve to stay out of trouble.  She found at [44]

         "... that where the appellant's deportation will have unduly  harsh
         consequences on  [P]  as  the  relationship  between  her  and  the
         appellant will be at least seriously thwarted, if not brought to an
         end, then the same will impact adversely on the couple's child  who
         will be denied the opportunity of being brought up in the stability
         of a shared family home with both parents."

16.  The judge went on to find that relocation as a family would  deprive  Z
    of any opportunity to build a close and  meaningful  relationship  with
    both sides of his grandparents, uncles, aunts and cousins all of  which
    live in the UK and are British citizens.  The judge concluded that  the
    appellant's deportation would have unduly harsh consequences for P  and
    Z.

17.  The judge considered Section 117B (4), but concluded that although  the
    relationship between the appellant and P was formed at a time when  the
    appellant's status was precarious there was nothing within Section 117B
    or Section 117C or the  Rules  that  would  indicate  that  this  would
    disqualify the appellant from qualifying or meeting the requirements of
    the Rules.

18.  The judge concluded that the appellant had made real  progress  in  his
    rehabilitation since 2009 when he last committed a criminal offence and
    that deportation was not in the public interest because this was a case
    in which Section 117C(5) applied.  The judge concluded by finding that:

         "Where the appellant has demonstrated that the public  interest  is
         deemed not to require his deportation by reference to the  criteria
         laid down in primary legislation any decision by the respondent  to
         pursue his deportation must then itself be disproportionate."



Error of Law

19.  The First-tier Tribunal misunderstood the legal framework  relating  to
    deportation.  This was a deportation pursuant to Section 32 of the 2007
    Act and it is conducive to the public interest to deport the appellant.
     The Secretary of State was  compelled  to  make  a  deportation  order
    unless that would involve a breach of the appellant's rights under  the
    ECHR.  The Rules are a complete code (see MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.   The  judge
    considered the appeal under the Rules, finding that the appellant could
    not meet the Rules.   She  then  considered  Section  117C  (5),  as  a
    distinct and less onerous test, finding that the impact of  deportation
    would be unduly harsh on P and Z.  Section 117  is  not  an  additional
    test to be applied but simply provides a statutory framework  codifying
    considerations to which  the  Tribunal  must  have  particular  regard.
    Section 117C subsections (4) and (5) simply reflect paragraphs 399  and
    paragraph 399A of the Rules.  It cannot be the case that the Rules  are
    a stricter version of Section 117C because the  Rules  are  a  complete
    code.

20.  The judge did not find that the appellant  satisfied  the  requirements
    of 399 Rules and there was no counter challenge to  these  findings  by
    the appellant.  The thrust of Mr Miah's submissions  was  that  it  was
    open to the judge to allow the appeal with reference  to  Section  117C
    (5) notwithstanding the decision under the Rules.   We  do  not  accept
    this for the reasons that we have given above.  We  gave  Mr  Miah  the
    opportunity to address us on compelling  circumstances.   He  indicated
    that he relied on the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was
    no further evidence produced by the appellant.

21.   The  judge  fell  into  error  because  she  misunderstood  the  legal
    framework and proceeded to allow the appeal  under  Article  8  on  the
    basis that the appellant had established that the impact of deportation
    would be unduly harsh (in the context  of  Section  117C  (5))  on  his
    partner and their child, but this finding was not open to  her  as  she
    had found that the appellant would  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399 and it follows he  could  not  come  within  Exception  2
    (Section 117C (5)).

22.  We set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 and remake the decision.  The  primary  findings
    of fact relating to the appellant's history and criminality, the impact
    of  deportation  generally  and  the  family  relationships  were   not
    challenged.  There is no reason for us to go behind these.   The  judge
    erred in her Article 8 assessment specifically in  relation  to  unduly
    harsh in the context of that legal framework and the  wider  Article  8
    assessment.

Conclusions

23.  There is a statutory presumption and  a  presumption  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules that deportation is in the  public  interest.   There
    was no firm evidence which would indicate that  the  appellant  was  at
    risk of committing further offences and he had no convictions for  five
    years.  However, risk of re-offending is  only  one  aspect  of  public
    interest (N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA).  We have  attached  weight  to
    the other facets of public interest, particularly in this case that  of
    deterrence.

24.  We have attached weight to the fact that the appellant has been out  of
    trouble for some time and the  positive  findings  made  by  the  judge
    relating to his intentions supported by the evidence of Ms A.  However,
    the appellant's history in this case is of much concern to us.  He  has
    committed a number of serious offences and it is  significant  that  he
    continued to offend time and time again despite the First-tier Tribunal
    in 2008 allowing his appeal against a deportation order and effectively
    giving him a second chance to start afresh.  However, he decided,  well
    into adulthood to continue to re-offend.

25.  We  have  considered  the  sentencing  comments.   The  judge  said  as
    follows:

         "I have seen something of  the  DVD  which  demonstrates  that  the
         explanation that you gave to the police is not the case,  this  was
         not defensive action whilst surrounded by  traffic  at  I  think  6
         o'clock in the morning, it was  clearly  offensive  in  nature,  it
         occurred while you were on bail  for  a  drugs  offence,  there  is
         clearly a drugs background to you, whether  this  offence  had  its
         part in your drug-related background I know not but I am  bound  to
         say that there are suspicions raised when people are driving around
         in cars armed with weapons and confronting each other at 6  o'clock
         in the morning, the inference must be of a  gang-related  event  of
         some kind involving  the  public  carrying  by  you  and  your  co-
         defendant of a hammer and a baseball bat, the  public  carrying  of
         weapons in cars in that way simply cannot be tolerated and I  would
         be failing in my duty if I did not take a serious view of it."

26.  On any account the offence was serious and this  is  reflected  in  the
    sentence.

27.  Whilst the appellant was subject to a deportation  order  he  chose  to
    start a family here having reconciled with P at a time when his  status
    here was precarious.  Despite this they started a family together.

28.  We have taken into account the sustainable findings made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal relating to the impact of deportation  on  P  and  Z.   Z
    would effectively grow up in the UK  without  his  father.   It  is  of
    significance  that  Z  is  a  British  citizen.   We  accept  that  the
    separation of the family would not be in the best interests  of  Z.   P
    and Z would face difficulties and upset  as  identified  by  the  judge
    should they decide to remain in the UK or should they decide to  follow
    the appellant to South Africa.  It is in Z's best interests  to  remain
    here.  The judge made findings which established that it would be  very
    difficult for P and Z to relocate to South Africa with the appellant.

29.  It is of significance that the appellant came to the  UK  as  a  child.
    This is a significant factor in favour of the appellant, but it has  to
    be weighed against the strong public interest in deportation.  We  have
    taken into account the impact of the judgment of the Grand  Chamber  of
    the Court of Human Rights in Maslov v Austria [2008] EHRR 546. We adopt
    the interpretation  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Akinpar,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Upper Tribunal [2014] EWCA 937.   In  this  case  the
    appellant has not simply committed acts of  juvenile  delinquency.   He
    has continued to commit crimes well into adulthood.

30.  There is some ambiguity in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    conflation of the Rules and Section 117, but it is clear that the judge
    dismissed the appeal under the Rules.   In remaking the decision  under
    the Rules we adopt the approach of the Upper Tribunal in  KMO  (section
    117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 and consider unduly harsh
    in the context of the public interest.  From our  assessment,  on  this
    basis, the appellant is unable to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    399 of the Rules.  A child centred approach, as conducted by the  Upper
    Tribunal in the earlier decision of MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh")  USA
    [2015] UKUT 00435 would have a different result in relation to Z.   KMO
    was decided after the grounds of appeal were prepared by the  Secretary
    of State, but they make the position of the  Secretary  of  State  very
    clear; namely, that an assessment of unduly harsh should be  considered
    of context of the public interest and a balancing exercise is required.
     Mr Miah did not address us  specifically  on  the  issue  or  seek  to
    advance a different position.

31.  We arrive at  the  same  conclusion  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    dismiss the appeal under the Rules.  The appeal turns  on  whether  the
    appellant has established that the public interest  in  deportation  is
    outweighed by compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
    in the Rules.  Paragraph 397 of the Rules reminds us  that  should  the
    Rules not be met it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
    public interest in deportation is outweighed. Deportation will  have  a
    distressing impact on the family who will now have  to  make  difficult
    and life changing decisions. However, compelling circumstances, outside
    of matters considered within the Rules, have not been identified by the
    First-tier Tribunal or by Mr Miah in submissions.  The strength of  the
    appellant's case depended very much on his child and partner which  has
    been considered  in  the  context  of  the  Rules.   It  is  a  weighty
    consideration in favour of the Secretary of State that the  appellant's
    family life has been formed at a time when his immigration  status  was
    precarious.  We have attached weight to the period of time that he  has
    been here and the fact he came here as  a  child,  but  ultimately  the
    balance of the scales tips in favour of the Secretary of State and  the
    appeal is dismissed.

32.  We were not addressed in relation to anonymity, but  in  the  light  of
    the child in this case we have decided to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 29 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

