
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: DA/00474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                      GURMIT SINGH DARSHAN SINGH TARMET
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr  N Jones, of counsel, instructed by Cameron
Clarke Law firm
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1 May  1975.  He  appeals
       the determination of a First-tier Judge promulgated on  25  September
       2014 dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent  to
       make a deportation order against him as a foreign criminal under  the
       UK Borders Act 2007 on 5 December 2011.

    2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal. Permission to  appeal
       was refused by the First-tier Tribunal. The application was  renewed.
       Reference was made to YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 which had been promulgated after  the
       decision of the First-tier Judge.

    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted permission  to  appeal  on  12
       February 2015 on the basis that the judge had arguably made  mistakes
       of fact in his determination and he had  failed  to  have  regard  to
       Exception 2 to s 117C inserted by the Immigration Act 2014.

    4. The appellant's wife is a British  Citizen  and  the  couple  have  a
       daughter, also a British Citizen, born in 2010. The First-tier  Judge
       had  found  that  the  couple  were  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
       relationship and that the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with his daughter.

    5. There are two main disputed findings of fact. The first is  that  the
       judge found the appellant's parents continue to live in India and the
       second is that the appellant's  wife  could  continue  to  visit  the
       appellant in India were he to be deported "as she  had  done  in  the
       past."

    6. The issue of law raised is that the judge applied the rules prior  to
       their amendment following the changes made  by  the  Immigration  Act
       2014.

    7. The parties were in agreement that the matter should be remitted  for
       hearing afresh apart from the issue of the  appellant's  relationship
       with his wife and daughter being genuine and  subsisting  which  were
       not affected by the errors of law.

    8. I agree that the appeal must be remitted. The judge of course did not
       have the benefit of the decision in YM (Uganda) and the question  was
       not free from difficulty although it has to be said that  counsel  in
       submissions did refer to the correct test.

    9. The factual errors are more puzzling. It was not apparently suggested
       that the appellant's parents were alive. The wife's evidence was that
       her parents lived in India and  that  the  appellant  had  no  family
       there. In the response the Secretary of State referred  to  paragraph
       23 of the determination where the appellant's evidence was  that  the
       reason he could not return to India to live with his parents  because
       of the tradition that a married woman, her husband  and  family  live
       with the in-laws.

   10. In the manuscript record of proceedings it was the  appellant's  wife
       who is recorded as giving the evidence of this  tradition.  Paragraph
       23 of  the  determination  purports  to  be  a  record  of  counsel's
       submissions although I cannot identify the particular submissions  on
       this point in the manuscript record of proceedings. It  is  possible,
       and I put it no higher, that the evidence of the parties may have got
       confused in the writing up process.

   11. As the parties are agreed that the matter be remitted I need not take
       this any further but in so far as it is relevant there  would  appear
       to have been some confusion in the assessment of the facts and as the
       case concerns a British Citizen child and a British  Citizen  partner
       with both of whom it is accepted the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship it is right that the decision should be  made
       on a sound factual and legal footing.

   12. The determination is affected by a  material  error  of  law  and  is
       remitted  to  be  heard  afresh  apart  from  the  finding  that  the
       appellant's relationships with his wife and daughter were genuine and
       subsisting.

       The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.


Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               17 December 2015


