
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00725 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Victoria Law Courts Birmingham       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 May 2014                                 |On 23rd May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Oluwatosin David Ifanse

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent in this case, hereinafter "the claimant", is  a  citizen
    of Nigeria who was born on 25 August 1992.   He  is  therefore  now  21
    years old.  He appealed against the decision of the respondent to  make
    him the subject of a deportation order pursuant to Section 32(5) of the
    United Kingdom's Borders Act 2007 following his conviction of  offences
    of conspiracy to kidnap, conspiracy to commit  false  imprisonment  and
    conspiracy to blackmail.

 2. The offences were committed when the claimant was aged 18 years and  he
    was sentenced almost a year later when he was aged 19 years to a  total
    of five years' detention in a young offender institution.  Before these
    convictions he was of  good  character.   Nevertheless  the  sentencing
    judge referred to the offences as "a very carefully planned conspiracy"
    and described the claimant as the "main perpetrator and organiser".  In
    general terms the claimant bore a grudge against a 15 year old boy  who
    owed him about �200.  The claimant was satisfied that  his  victim  had
    gained financially from a series of  scams  on  a  well-known  internet
    auction site and the claimant led a conspiracy to kidnap the victim.  A
    ransom demand was made in the sum of �50,000 and threats were made that
    the victim would be killed or his toes and fingers cut off if money was
    not forthcoming.  Although no actual harm was inflicted on  the  victim
    the incident was particularly frightening for the victim's family  who,
    for a time, genuinely feared they would not see their son  again.   The
    claimant was given some credit for pleading guilty, belatedly,  on  the
    first day of the trial.

 3. The decision to make the deportation order is dated 2  April  2013  and
    the claimant appealed that  decision  successfully  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is not necessary for me  to  form  any  view  about  that
    determination because it has been  found  to  be  unsatisfactory  at  a
    hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Southern and Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coates on 30 January  2014.   Their  decision  has  already  been
    served on the parties but it must form part of  this  decision  because
    this hearing is a continuation of  the  hearing  before  them.   It  is
    therefore set out as an Appendix.

 4. Although there are  many  matters  to  consider  in  this  case  it  is
    reasonably clear that the real  issue  here  is  whether  removing  the
    claimant pursuant to a deportation order is proportionate to the public
    interest served by his deportation bearing in mind the severity of  the
    offences for which he was convicted and the fact that he has  lived  in
    the United Kingdom since arriving as a 10 year old boy in May 2003.

 5. I have a bundle of papers prepared for the hearing and there are papers
    in the respondent's bundle.  I  confirm  that  I  have  considered  the
    papers as a whole before reaching any decision on the case.

 6. The bundle includes a statement from the claimant.

 7. In that statement the claimant said that he lived in the United Kingdom
    for ten years which was over half of his life, that all of  his  family
    including his mother and siblings lived in the United Kingdom, that  he
    had no ties to his country of birth, that  he  had  never  returned  to
    Nigeria since arriving in the United Kingdom and that  "England  is  my
    home".

 8. He said he was born in Lagos in Nigeria and grew up  with  his  parents
    and three sisters and two brothers.  He was the youngest member of  the
    family.  He claimed not to remember much of his early years in  Nigeria
    and that when he thought of Nigeria he felt "disconnected".

 9. His early memories of life in Nigeria are largely overshadowed  by  his
    father's illness.  His father died when the claimant was aged 7  years.
    The claimant's mother was very protective towards him.  For example she
    tried to hide the fact that his father was terminally ill.  He referred
    to an unhappy memory of his older brother  Samuel  physically  carrying
    their father to  the  car  on  his  trips  to  hospital  and  how  this
    disquieted him.  His father had been a fit, strong man who  had  served
    in the armed forces.

10. The claimant's education was interrupted  when  his  parents  could  no
    longer pay his school fees because they  were  spending  money  on  his
    father's medical treatment.

11. After his father's death his father's  relatives  began  to  taunt  his
    mother blaming her for her husband's death.

12.  On  one  particular  occasion  his  father's  relatives  said  to  the
    claimant's mother "what you have done to our son, we will do to yours".

13. With his mother, he arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 May  2003.   He
    was then reunited with  his  siblings.   He  found  it  a  strange  and
    stressful time.  His mother advised him to make a new  life  away  from
    Nigeria.

14. He adapted quickly to life in the United Kingdom.

15. He did well at school gaining eleven passes as GCSE including some at A
    and two BTEC additional qualifications.   He  did  AS  levels  in  law,
    business studies, philosophy and media.

16. He was a very promising  young  footballer  and  had  been  scouted  by
    Crystal Palace FC but offered  a  scholarship  with  the  option  of  a
    professional contract with Brentford FC.

17. He said that he regretted his criminal acts and accepted responsibility
    for what he had done, pointing out that he had pleaded guilty.

18. He claimed that he had no real intention of harming anyone and  he  had
    not appreciated the seriousness of the offences he  had  committed.  He
    insisted that he now realised just how serious the crimes were and they
    were deeply regretted.

19. Additionally he regretted very much the additional pain  that  his  bad
    behaviour had caused his mother.

20. He was given enhanced prisoner status in May 2012 at  HMYOI  Aylesbury.
    He completed courses to enhance his skills and  understanding  and  the
    restorative justice course had particularly made an impact  because  it
    had made him think about the harm his misconduct did to other people.

21. He also explained that whilst he was in custody, with the encouragement
    of  prison  staff,  he  had  helped   establish   a   business   making
    sophisticated personalised greetings cards.

22. He said that if he was given bail he would live with his  mother  which
    was at an address well away from his victim.

23. He claimed that he had long wanted to be an aeronautical engineer or an
    IT engineer and he had completed a number of IT courses to prepare  him
    to take an A level in IT when he was away from prison.  He also claimed
    that Brentford FC had offered to give him another chance "subject to my
    immigration issues being resolved".

24. He talked  about  his  extended  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    confirmed that all of his siblings were settled in the  United  Kingdom
    and all had children.  He was closest to his older brother  Samuel  but
    was very close to his sister Esther.

25. He insisted that he had "absolutely no ties to my country of birth" and
    that the idea of being sent to Nigeria "absolutely petrifies  me".   He
    explained that he knew nothing about Nigeria and had no one to turn  to
    for support.

26. He also said he was scared to go back because of the  resentment  shown
    to his mother.  He believed that his father's family would try to  harm
    him.

27. Additionally he described himself  as  a  Christian  from  a  Christian
    family and was afraid of the problems between Christians and Muslims in
    Nigeria.

28. The claimant gave evidence before me and adopted his statement.

29. In answer to additional questions he confirmed that  the  OASys  Report
    was critical of him but he said that it was prepared a  year  into  his
    sentence when he was ignorant  and  did  challenge  authority  and  was
    immature. Since then he had grown up.  He learnt  where  bad  behaviour
    could lead.

30. He also said that his mother had told him that Brentford FC had offered
    him another chance.

31. He was cross-examined.  He was shown his statement of  9  October  2013
    where he said:

         "I am aware that I had been  convicted  for  kidnapping  and  false
         imprisonment.  I have protested my sincere innocence but in the end
         I had been suffering the consequences of an  association  with  bad
         company and friends."

32. It was suggested that this indicated that he had not faced  up  to  his
    responsibilities.  He  replied  that  he  had  pleaded  guilty  but  he
    insisted that the threats of violence were not made  by  him.   It  was
    pointed out that the sentencing judge did not  accept  the  explanation
    that he had given to the Crown Court. The claimant insisted that he had
    started something that he could not stop and it "snowballed".

33. There is a suggestion on the papers that he  had  been  disciplined  in
    prison for striking another prisoner with a pool cue but he  said,  and
    it was  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  he  denied  the
    allegation and it was not proved against  him.  For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt I accept this assertion and I mention it only to confirm that  it
    has been discounted.

34. It was suggested that the entrepreneurial skills that he had  shown  in
    prison could be used in Nigeria.  This  suggestion  was  based  on  the
    greeting card making project set out  in  considerable  detail  in  the
    documentary  evidence.   The  claimant  said  he  had  been   supported
    significantly in prison and could not have founded the business without
    that support.

35. He said he had not been to Nigeria since he was child he had no  family
    there.  He had two brothers and two sisters who were all in the  United
    Kingdom.

36. It was put to the appellant that he came to the United Kingdom in  2003
    and had not returned and he was asked to explain when  his  mother  had
    returned.  He claimed not to be able to remember.

37. He was then asked for how long his mother had left him  after  bringing
    him to the United Kingdom. He said that could  not  remember.   He  was
    pressed to say if it was a month or  a  year.   He  replied  "I  really
    honestly cannot say".

38. He assumed she had stayed in Lagos but he did not actually know.

39. He knew little about the problems his immediate family claimed to  have
    experienced in Nigeria.  He could not  say  anything  about  his  half-
    brother being killed other than it had happened.  He said the dead  man
    was his father's son by a woman other than the claimant's mother.

40. He was not re-examined.

41. There is a statement from the claimant's mother dated 29 April 2014.

42. There she explained that she had been in the United Kingdom since  2007
    and was given indefinite leave  to  remain  in  2011.   She  was  self-
    employed running a business in property development  in  Croydon.   She
    and the claimant's father had lived in Colchester between 1981 and 1983
    and their son Samuel was born in the United Kingdom.

43. She returned to Nigeria where her husband completed his studies and the
    claimant was born in Lagos.

44. She explained how her husband became sick in 1998  and  died  in  2000.
    She was vague about the nature of the illness  and  said  the  Nigerian
    hospitals could not assist and the church they  attended  raised  money
    for her husband  to  go  to  Germany  for  treatment  but  it  was  not
    successful.

45. She explained that her husband's family had never accepted her  because
    she was from the  wrong  part  of  Nigeria  and  did  not  speak  their
    language.  The family almost killed one of her sons before her  husband
    died in a vicious attack so that he had to  have  his  intestines  sewn
    back and he fled to the United Kingdom after that incident.

46. She said her husband's family asserted ownership of the home where  she
    lived with her husband.

47. She said the claimant was particularly close to his father.

48. She came to the United Kingdom in May 2003 because she saw  it  as  the
    only way to get away from her husband's family members.

49. She explained that her eldest daughter was in the United  Kingdom  from
    2001 with her husband and she was  given  a  visitor's  visa  with  the
    claimant and my other children to see them.  The visit was to  coincide
    with the birth of a grandchild.

50. She explained how she had settled  the  claimant  into  school  in  the
    United Kingdom and then returned to Nigeria.  She used connections with
    the church to keep away from her husband's family.  Her return  to  the
    United Kingdom was delayed by reason of the theft of her  passport  and
    other possessions and then  an  application  for  entry  clearance  was
    refused but allowed on appeal.

51. She lived with the claimant and her son Samuel from her arrival in 2007
    until the claimant was detained in 2011.

52. She described his conviction as a "huge shock" but said he had accepted
    responsibility for what he had done and was remorseful and  had  learnt
    his lesson.

53. She explained that she had missed him very much whilst he was in prison
    and that she was desperate for him to return home.  Her home in Croydon
    was well away from Catford where the claimant had got into trouble.

54. She believed that members of her late husband's family would  hurt  the
    claimant if they found him in Nigeria.  She believed  they  would  kill
    him like they had killed his half-brother.

55. She adopted her witness statement and was cross-examined.

56. She was shown a copy of her husband's death certificate.  She  did  not
    know what had happened to the original.   She  accepted  that  although
    imperfectly copied the document showed that when her husband died on 28
    May 2000 at the age of 60 he lived at and  address  beginning  "3  Debo
    Aina Crescent". This was the address the claimant's mother gave as  her
    "local address" when she applied for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in April 2006.

57. It was the claimant's mother's case that she had  last  lived  at  that
    address in 2002.  She claimed not to know  what  had  happened  to  the
    property after she left but there were problems.  She explained that it
    was the only permanent address she had in Nigeria but she  was  not  in
    fact living there when she made her application.  She  said  that  mail
    sent there would find its way to her because it would be intercepted by
    a gatekeeper who would keep it until she collected it.

58. She was asked directly if she went to Debo Crescent to collect the post
    and said that she did not go back. She also used the church address.

59. Her attention was drawn to a statement she signed on 19 March 2014.  At
    paragraph 2 of that statement began "I have been in the UK since  2003,
    for eleven years now.  I never returned to Nigeria."  She accepted that
    that was just not right.  She said she had been in Nigeria from 2004 to
    2007.  She travelled to Bangkok to buy items to sell in Nigeria.

60. It was put to her that records  showed  that  she  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006.  She claimed not to remember.  When prompted she  said
    that an application made in 2006 was refused and she appealed and  came
    in 2007.

61. She said that her son Abiola was now in the United Kingdom having  been
    attacked.  She confirmed that the  appellant's  half-brother  had  been
    killed in Nigeria

62. There is also a statement from Samuel  Kayode  Ifanse  dated  30  April
    2014.

63. He said that he was the claimant's brother and nine years his senior.

64. Mr Ifanse had two jobs.  He was a "freelance  accountant"  and  a  lift
    supervisor in the construction industry.

65. He had lived in the United Kingdom since 1996.

66. He knew little about the problems with his father's family in  Nigeria.
    He only knew what his mother had told him.   He  thought  he  knew  the
    claimant better than anyone else in the family  and  the  claimant  had
    lived with him since 2003.  They all missed their father's guidance.

67. He was shocked when he heard of the claimant's offences.  He  confirmed
    the claimant would have no one to support him in Nigeria.

68. Mr Ifanse gave evidence and adopted his statement.

69. He was cross-examined.

70. He was asked if it was really right that he did not know anything about
    the circumstances of his brother Abiola being attacked and left with  a
    scar on his stomach.  He said he had seen no need to ask.  His  brother
    was now safe.

71. He claimed not to be aware that the claimant's permission to be in  the
    United Kingdom had expired.  He was just concerned  about  his  welfare
    and his going to school.  He only found out that he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully when he was arrested.

72. The witness said he had been to Nigeria in 2013 for the  wedding  of  a
    friend and had stayed with the friend.  He had no knowledge about  what
    had happened to the family home which he had left in 1996.

73. There is a supportive letter dated 23 March 2014  from  the  claimant's
    older  sister,  Modupe  Veronica  Yusuf  in  which  she  expresses  her
    confidence that the claimant will not pose a threat to  anyone  in  the
    event of his release.

74. There are letters from the claimant's nieces. Whilst they may well have
    been encouraged to write the content suggests strongly that  they  have
    chosen their own words.  They clearly want the claimant to return.

75. There is a character reference dated 24 March  2014  from  one  of  the
    claimant's brothers-in-law Babatunde Yusef.  He said that "in  all  the
    time I have known [the claimant], he has never given me any  reason  to
    question his personality and character." This is a decidedly  enigmatic
    comment about a person  who  has  been  to  custody  for  very  serious
    offences and I am not sure what Mr Yusef meant.

76. There is another character reference from  Pastor  Femi  James  Matthew
    described as the regional overseer with  Mount  of  Fire  and  Miracles
    Ministries Ilderton Region 3.  Pastor Matthew did not  think  that  the
    claimant would not be in trouble again.

77. There was also examination results showing that the  claimant  had  six
    GCSE passes at grades A to C of which only two were grade A.

78. There is a certificate to show he was a  regional  semi-finalist  in  a
    public speaking competition.

79. I have read the pre-sentence report prepared for the Crown Court.  This
    does not particularly assist the claimant.  There it asserts  that  the
    claimant tried to distance himself from what had happened by saying how
    the offences had escalated into something in which he wanted  no  part.
    This view was emphatically rejected by the sentencing judge, His Honour
    Judge Stow QC who said:

         "I do not accept for one moment that it was a case of  you  setting
         wheels in motion only to find that the machinery got completely out
         of control as a result of the intervention of others over whom  you
         had no control."

80. Nevertheless I have the NOMS1 report and an OASys Report dated 11 March
    2014 in the additional bundle.  This shows the claimant had been placed
    in the "low" banding under the heading  risk  of  reconviction  (49  of
    bundle) although the risk to other people in the community was  put  at
    "medium" (59 in bundle).

81. The bundle also  includes  various  certificates  relating  to  courses
    undertaken in custody and includes  a  certificate  from  the  Sycamore
    Trust awarded for "actively  participating"  in  a  programme  entitled
    victim awareness restorative justice.  Similar certificates were issued
    by the Open College Network.

82. On the morning of the hearing I was given an additional bundle from  Mr
    Mills relating to the appellant's mother's immigration history and also
    a note from the probation officer at HMP Bullingdon  showing  that  the
    appellant had been in trouble in custody on 10 May 2011 when he  kicked
    another prisoner in the exercise yard.

83. The papers include a frustratingly incomplete note apparently from  the
    offender management unit  at  HMYOI  Aylesbury.   It  is  unsigned  and
    undated but purports to come from the claimant's  personal  officer  in
    prison.  It is dated after May 2013 when the claimant joined the  wing.
    It refers to the claimant liking to be busy and  being  given  enhanced
    prisoner status as  a  result.  It  also  comments  favourably  on  his
    maturity and respectful  attitude  to  others.   Although  an  unsigned
    document of that kind  is  of  very  limited  evidential  value  it  is
    consistent with the general picture before me and I  do  give  it  some
    weight.

84. There is also a letter from the claimant's  mother  dated  22  November
    2012 addressed to the Secretary of State.   Having  introduced  herself
    the appellant's mother says:

         "I am writing to say that  the  reason  the  [claimant]  cannot  be
         deported is that, I his mother and his other brothers are here,  we
         lost their father twelve years ago and after a short while  my  in-
         laws rose up against me and the children they wanted  to  kill  us,
         and I ran here for security and protection of me and  my  children,
         we have ever since been here ...".

85. There is a letter from Macartan & Co Solicitors dated 6 April  2011  to
    the Border Agency saying amongst other things:

         "We are further instructed that our client's brother Samuel  Ifanse
         erroneously applied for British  citizenship  on  [the  claimant's]
         behalf in 2009 and that this application was refused.   Our  client
         has continued to reside in the UK ever since and upon seeking legal
         advice now wishes to regularise his status."

86. I found none of the witnesses to  be  particularly  satisfactory.   The
    claimant was clearly not telling the truth when he said he did not know
    if his mother had been out of the United Kingdom for a month or a  year
    after he had arrived.  I can understand his not knowing a precise  time
    but his refusal to do better than that indicates to me somebody who  is
    avoiding answering the question because he  does  not  know  where  the
    answers will lead.  More  importantly,  the  claimant  was  seeking  to
    minimise his involvement in precisely the way  the  Crown  Court  Judge
    rejected. This I find to be much more  significant  and,  in  a  sense,
    disappointing.

87. I accept the claimant does have a better education than many prisoners.
     I accept that he is more than ordinarily articulate as is shown by his
    success  in  the  public  speaking  competition  and   he   does   have
    entrepreneurial skills which are reflected in  the  very  detailed  and
    apparently successful work done to create the greeting  cards  business
    within prison.

88. I do not read too much in his slightly blemished prison record.  He  is
    a sport loving fit young man in  a  very  pressurised  environment  and
    although it would have been better if  he  had  not  given  in  to  the
    temptation to be violent towards another prisoner the fact that he  did
    on one occasion is not especially revealing.

89. I do not believe I have been told  the  truth  about  his  foot-balling
    career with Brentford FC.  I  do  not  believe  that  a  club  of  that
    standing would want to take on a person with  the  claimant's  criminal
    record  without  first  looking  very  carefully  at  his  conduct  and
    prospects of rehabilitation.  It may be that some loose remark was made
    to his mother but it is unsupported by anything from the club and I  do
    not regard that as a serious option.  Rather, in advancing  this  point
    the claimant was clutching at straws and he did himself no good.

90. He did say favourable things in his evidence to the Tribunal and it  is
    right to record that he was very respectful towards me and helpful when
    I had to ask him to give evidence from the dock in the  secure  hearing
    room that I had to use at Birmingham.

91. Although it is extremely easy to be cynical I have no  good  reason  to
    think he will get into trouble again.  I am wary about putting  it  any
    higher than that because his very serious  introduction  into  criminal
    life was apparently out of character and a surprise to  everyone.   The
    best that I can say is that he probably will not reoffend.

92. He plainly came to the United Kingdom  when  he  was  quite  young  and
    really can have no knowledge of what led to his leaving or what  family
    or other support there is available to him in Nigeria.

93. The claimant's mother was an unsatisfactory witness.  That she  claimed
    earlier to have been in the United Kingdom since  2003  may  well  have
    been a mistake but at the best indicates a carelessness on  her  behalf
    that is discreditable.

94. I cannot regard her claim to have been forced out  of  the  matrimonial
    home but to have then used the matrimonial home address  as  her  local
    address when she made an application to visit  the  United  Kingdom  as
    anything other than in indication of unreliability on her part.  She is
    not a woman who is anxious to tell the truth but a woman who  will  say
    what she thinks is expedient without too much  regard  to  facts.  This
    finding must impact adversely on her evidence generally.

95. I do not believe her claims that the appellant would be attacked by his
    late father's family or that he would otherwise be at risk in the event
    of return to Nigeria.  I just do not know if there is anyone  there  to
    help him.

96. The claimant's brother was similarly unsatisfactory.  If he was telling
    the truth when he said he  did  not  know  that  the  claimant  had  an
    uncertain immigration status in the United Kingdom at a  time  when  he
    claimed to be responsible  for  his  welfare  including  arranging  his
    education then he, like his mother, was being remarkably casual.

97. A letter from solicitors suggests, but does not prove because  it  does
    not give the source of the information, that the claimant's brother did
    know that he had an uncertain immigration history before his arrest and
    was involved in an unsuccessful attempt to resolve his position.

98. I also find it beyond belief that he had  never  troubled  to  ask  his
    brother what had happened that caused his brother to be involved  in  a
    life threatening attack that left him with a scarred stomach.

99. Overall he was a less than frank witness and I attach little weight  to
    what he says.

100. I have worked my way through Mr Azmi's skeleton argument.

101.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  claimant  has  shown  that   he   needs
    international protection.  I do  not  believe  the  evidence  that  the
    claimant's father's family would seek to do the claimant harm.  Clearly
    there is something to think about here because there is  evidence  that
    the claimant's brother and half-brother have  had  severe  difficulties
    but the evidence about the reasons for those difficulties is  all  from
    unreliable sources mainly the claimant's mother.

102. However I see no reason whatsoever to  find  that  the  claimant  would
    have to go anywhere near his father's family if  there  was  a  genuine
    concern for his safety (which I do not believe).

103. Neither is there any reason to think that a  person  who  is  nominally
    Christian cannot live safely in Nigeria in the  event  of  his  return.
    Although there are troubling reports about violence between Muslims and
    Christians the suggestion that no Christian Nigerian  is  safe  in  the
    country is groundless.

104. If there is any truth in the claimant's case (which I  do  no  believe)
    there is no risk established throughout the country and  the  case  for
    international protection really does not  begin  to  run  even  when  I
    remind myself of the low standard of proof applicable to  international
    protection cases.

105. With that finding the  claimant's  case  becomes  very  difficult.   Mr
    Azmi, correctly, reminds me of the decision of this Tribunal  in  Kabia
    (FM: paragraph 398 - "exceptional  circumstances")  [2013]  UKUT  00569
    (IAC) where this Tribunal confirmed that in cases  of  deportation  the
    Immigration Rules provide a complete  code.   There  the  Tribunal  was
    following the decision of the Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

106. According to paragraph 398(a) of HC 395 where, as is the case  here,  a
    person's deportation is conducive to the public  good  because  he  has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years  it
    will only be in "exceptional circumstances" that the public interest in
    deportation will be outweighed by other factors".  For  these  purposes
    "imprisonment" includes detention at a Young Offenders Institution. The
    meaning  of  "exceptional  circumstances"  must,  necessarily,   remain
    undefined but they must exist in every case  of  this  kind  before  an
    appeal can be allowed.

107. The claimant has not lived in the United Kingdom for  at  least  twenty
    years and, although he is under 25 years old  he  had  not  immediately
    prior the immigration decision quite spent at least half  of  his  life
    continuously in the United Kingdom. It follows that even  if  paragraph
    399A applied in this case the claimant does not come within it, but  it
    does not apply because it  does  not  apply  when  a  person  has  been
    sentenced to more than 4 years in custody.

108. I do remind myself of what removal will mean for this  young  man.   He
    will be required to leave the country where he has lived since he was a
    boy and establish himself Nigeria where he has not been shown  to  have
    any contacts.

109. Clearly he would find it difficult to adjust to a country in  which  he
    has never lived as an adult. However he has some knowledge of the local
    language and English is widely spoken in Nigeria.  He is  apparently  a
    healthy young man with more than  the  ordinary  wit.   He  could  live
    safely in the country and does not have any  of  the  exceptional  ties
    such as a life partner or child who cannot reasonably  be  expected  to
    remove.

110. There are no "exceptional circumstances" in this case.

111. Mr Azmi invites me to  look  at  the  claim  on  human  rights  grounds
    jurisprudentially as well as with reference to the Rules  and  properly
    reminds me of the approach to be adopted in the well-known case of R v.
    SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

112. Notwithstanding the contrary view expressed in the Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter it is plain that removing the appellant would interfere with his
    private and family life and it is frankly startling that the  Secretary
    of State would suggest otherwise.  I also find the Secretary of State's
    reasons slightly misleading because the OASys Report did not assess the
    appellant to be at medium risk of reoffending. Rather it found that  if
    he offends then there is a medium risk of  his  causing  serious  harm.
    Neither do I accept  the  Secretary  of  State's  contention  that  the
    appellant has ties with Nigeria and a strong foundation built upon  the
    culture and customs of Nigeria in view of the fact that he lived  there
    for the first ten years of his life.

113. A better way of looking at it is to say that there is no evidence  that
    the claimant has any knowledge of life in  Nigeria  having  only  lived
    there as a child.  However the evidence that he no  contacts  there  is
    all from discredited sources and I just do not know if  he  would  have
    anyone to help him there.

114. I do agree that the  claimant's  brother  and  mother  and  anxious  to
    support him which is why they gave evidence.  I  am  unsure  about  the
    claimant's mother's financial circumstances but I find that his brother
    could  offer  some  limited  financial  support  if   he   thought   it
    appropriate.

115. The public interest here  is  in  discouraging  others  and  expressing
    revulsion.  The offences that took this young man before  the  criminal
    court are  extremely  serious  and  must  attract  condign  disapproval
    extending beyond the punishment that  he  has  received  from  criminal
    courts.

116. The only counterbalancing factor is his unfamiliarity with Nigeria  and
    his lack of known ties there.

117. Mr Azmi helpfully and properly reminded  me  of  the  guidance  in  the
    European Court of Human Rights in the case of Maslov v  Austria  [2009]
    INLR 47.  This directs me to look at the nature and seriousness of  the
    offence, the length of the claimant's stay in the United  Kingdom,  the
    period of time that has elapsed since the offence was committed and his
    conduct during that period, the nationalities of the person  concerned,
    the claimant's family situation, and then matters about his family life
    that do not apply here, concluding with the  strength  of  the  social,
    cultural and family ties with the host country and the country to which
    removal is to be made.

118. The claimant has no known ties with Nigeria and  only  has  adult  life
    experience in the United Kingdom.  The offences are extremely  serious.
    He has been in the United Kingdom for about half of his life.  Although
    the offences were now committed some  time  ago  he  has  not  been  at
    liberty since they were committed so that it is of  little  consequence
    in guiding me.  He is not a British national.   He  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria and ordinarily can be expected to live in that country.

119. I do not  agree  that  he  showed  considerable  remorse  except  about
    getting caught but I do find however that he has made some  efforts  to
    use his time in custody usefully.

120. Really there is only  one  point  in  this  case  and  it  is  the  one
    identified at the start of the determination.  It is whether the public
    interest in his removal is outbalanced by the blow to him of having  to
    establish himself in the country with which he  is  unfamiliar  but  of
    which he happens to be a national.  I find the offence is  so  shocking
    that the problems to the claimant  and  his  family  inherent  on  this
    removal do not amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    private and family life.

121. It follows therefore that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having been set aside I substitute it with the decision dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal again the Secretary of State's decision.

Decision

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 May 2014                    |






APPENDIX
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00725/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court                        |                             |
|On 30 January 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           OLUWATOSIN DAVID IFANSE

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Mills,   Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Balroup, instructed by Macarten & Co,
solicitors

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. Mr Ifanse, to whom for convenience we shall refer  as  the  appellant,
      although strictly he is the respondent before the Upper Tribunal, is a
      citizen of Nigeria, who was born on 25 August 1992. He arrived in  the
      United Kingdom in May 2003, as  an  11  year  old  child,  with  entry
      clearance as a visitor. Plainly, in view of his age, others would have
      made the arrangements that secured the grant of entry clearance but it
      is clear that a brief family visit was not  what  was  intended.  When
      asked, as part of the process leading to the immigration decision that
      is now under challenge in these proceedings, what was the  reason  for
      him coming to the United Kingdom, the appellant said (see  F4  of  the
      initial bundle):


           "The death of my father meant my mother could not care for me so
           she brought me to the UK for my brother to act as my guardian."


      In line with that intention, the appellant and his  mother  overstayed
      their leave, living together in the home of  the  appellant's  brother
      who had settled  here  previously.  The  appellant  did  not  make  an
      application to regularise his immigration status until May 2011,  when
      he applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds, given that  he
      had lived here with relatives since his  arrival  in  2003,  had  been
      educated here and had not during  that  period  returned  to  Nigeria.
      However, that application  was  not  made  until  after  he  had  been
      arrested for the serious criminal offences in respect of which he  was
      subsequently convicted and sentenced to detention in a Young Offenders
      Institution for a period of 5 years.


   2. The details of those offences and the view  taken  by  the  sentencing
      judge as set out in his sentencing  remarks  are  well  known  to  the
      parties and the nature and seriousness of those offences of conspiracy
      to blackmail,  kidnapping  and  false  imprisonment  are,  of  course,
      reflected in the imposition  of  what  was,  in  the  context  of  the
      appellant's age, a lengthy period of detention. The  sentencing  judge
      said "these are very serious conspiracies"  involving  subjecting  the
      victim to "a terrifying experience" and leading the  victim's  parents
      to be "frightened that they may  never  see  their  15  year  old  son
      again". The judge found that the appellant was "the  main  perpetrator
      and organiser"


   3. The appellant's  appeal  against  the  deportation  order  made  as  a
      consequence came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan sitting  with
      a non-legal member, Ms Endersby, on 9 October 2013. By a determination
      promulgated on 22  October  2013  the  panel,  having  had  regard  to
      paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the  immigration  rules,  allowed  the
      appeal, explaining at paragraph 29 of the determination that, although
      they regarded this as a "borderline case":

           "Having considered the oral and documentary evidence  before  us
           we find that there are compelling reasons,  as  outlined  above,
           which tip the balance in favour of  the  appellant's  interests.
           Accordingly we find that there  are  exceptional  reasons  which
           outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deporting  the   appellant.
           Following from that,  we  find  that  any  interference  in  the
           appellant's family and private life is not in the interests  for
           any reason in article 8(2) of the ECHR."

   4. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
      said:


           "The grounds seeking permission assert that the  Tribunal  erred
           in law by failing to engage with his  criminality  when  weighed
           against the Respondent's  public  interest  policies,  that  the
           panel's  conclusions  on  family  life  are  flawed,  and   that
           inadequate consideration was given  to  the  aim  of  preventing
           crime and disorder.


           It  is  arguable  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the
           legitimate public interest in deterring other foreign  nationals
           in a similar position, and in preserving  public  confidence  in
           the system of  controlling  crime  and  disorder.  Although  the
           appellant will have established private life in the  UK,  having
           arrived in 2003 at the age of 10 years, it is arguable that  the
           Tribunal's conclusion that he has a strong family life with  his
           mother is lacking in adequate reasoning.


           Accordingly, permission to appeal is granted.  All  grounds  are
           arguable."


   5. Mr  Mills,  for  the  respondent,  adopted  his  grounds  for  seeking
      permission to appeal and responded to submissions  by  Mr  Balroup  on
      behalf of the appellant which were to the effect that the  panel  made
      no error of law and reached a conclusion that was open to them on  the
      evidence. However, for the reasons that follow, we are in no doubt  at
      all that the determination discloses a number of serious errors of law
      such that the decision of the panel cannot stand.


   6. As Mr Balroup commenced his submissions we invited him to take  us  to
      anything said in the determination from which it could be deduced that
      the panel had had  any  regard  at  all  to  the  public  interest  in
      deterring others, or indeed to anything said in the determination from
      which it could be drawn that  the  panel  had  carried  out  a  proper
      assessment of the level of criminality  involved  in  the  appellant's
      offending. He was unable to do so,  which  reinforces  our  conclusion
      that  these  were  matters  that  were  simply  left  out  of  account
      altogether by the panel. The most that can be said that  at  paragraph
      19 of the determination the panel said:

           "The strongest reason for deporting the appellant is the  nature
           and seriousness of his offences. The gravity of the offenses  is
           reflected in the five year prison sentence..."


      However, that paragraph appears to  be  concerned  with  the  risk  of
      reoffending by that particular appellant rather with any assessment of
      the significance of deterrence achieved by enforcing the  deportation.
      Similarly,  the  reference  in  the   following   paragraph   of   the
      determination does not amount to an  adequate  engagement  with  these
      essential parts of the respondent's  case,  the  particularly  serious
      level of violent offending and the legitimate aim in deterring others.



   7. That is of considerable importance because, as  the  panel  considered
      this to be a borderline case, the effect of leaving out of  account  a
      material consideration meant that we cannot be sure that  the  outcome
      would have been the same had the panel adopted a proper approach.

   8. There can be no doubt either that this was  a  material  consideration
      that the panel were bound to factor  into  their  assessment  as  they
      struck a balance between the competing interests  in  play.  That  has
      been made clear, consistently,  in  guidance  given  by  the  superior
      courts. In N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ Judge LJ (as he then  was)
      said at para 83:
           "83. The "public  good"  and  the  "public  interest"  are  wide
           ranging  but  undefined  concepts.  In  my   judgment   (whether
           expressly referred to in any  decision  letter  or  not),  broad
           issues  of  social  cohesion  and  public  confidence   in   the
           administration of the system by which control is exercised  over
           non-British citizens who enter and remain in the United  Kingdom
           are engaged. They include an  element  of  deterrence,  to  non-
           British citizens who are already here, even if they are  genuine
           refugees and to those minded to come, so as to ensure that  they
           clearly understand that whatever the circumstances, one  of  the
           consequences of serious crime may well be deportation ..."
      At paragraph 64 May LJ said:


           "Where a person who is not a British citizen commits a number of
           very serious crimes, the public interest  side  of  the  balance
           will include importantly, although not exclusively,  the  public
           policy need to deter and to express society's revulsion  at  the
           seriousness of the criminality."

      So that, in the case under consideration:

           "...I consider that a proper reading of the determination  as  a
           whole does not support the submission that the adjudicator  took
           properly into account the public interest considerations. If  he
           had, it is, in my view, plain that he would  not  have  reversed
           the Secretary of State's decision as to deportation.".


   9. More recently, in AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, as  is  specifically
      relied upon in the grounds for seeking permission to appeal, Pitchford
      LJ, having referred to this dicta said at paragraph 24:
           "Deportation in pursuit of  the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing
           crime and disorder  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  seen  as  one-
           dimensional in its  effect.  It  has  the  effect  not  only  of
           removing the risk of re-offending by the deportee  himself,  but
           also of deterring other foreign nationals in a similar position.
           Furthermore, deportation of foreign criminals  preserves  public
           confidence in a system of control whose loss would  itself  tend
           towards crime and disorder."
  10. The importance of these  considerations  was  emphasised  also  in  JO
      (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10, per Richards LJ at paragraph 29:


           "...the factors in favour of expulsion are, in my view,  capable
           of carrying greater weight in a deportation case than in a  case
           of ordinary removal. The maintenance  of  effective  immigration
           control is an important matter, but the  protection  of  society
           against serious crime is even more important and can properly be
           given corresponding greater weight in the balancing exercise..."


  11. The same approach was taken by  a  Presidential  panel  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal  in  the  reported  decision  of  Masih   (deportation-public
      interest-basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC). The guidance
      is summarised in the head note as follows:


          "The following basic principles can be derived from the present
          case law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation
          to the deportation of foreign criminals:


          (a)       In a case of automatic deportation, full account must be
              taken of the  strong  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
              citizens  convicted of serious offences, which lies not  only
              in the prevention of further offences  on  the  part  of  the
              individual concerned, but in deterring others from committing
              them in the first place.

          (b)       Deportation of  foreign  criminals  expresses  society's
              condemnation of serious criminal activity and promotes public
              confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
              committed them.

          (c)        The starting-point  for  assessing  the  facts  of  the
              offence of which an individual has been committed, and  their
              effect on others, and on the public as a whole, must  be  the
              view taken by the sentencing judge. .."

  12. If anything more were required to establish the significance  if  this
      issue, it may perhaps be found in the judgment of the House  of  Lords
      in Huang . Having made the point, at paragraph 16, that:


           "...  There  will,  in  almost  any  case,  be  certain  general
           considerations to bear in mind..."


      The Committee set out some key considerations which included:


           "...the need to discourage non-nationals admitted to the country
           temporarily from believing that they can commit  serious  crimes
           and yet be allowed to remain;


  13. As we have observed, there is nothing in the determination to indicate
      that any regard was had to this issue and so  the  balancing  exercise
      carried out was legally  flawed.  That  is  sufficient  in  itself  to
      establish that the panel of the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of
      law such as to require their decision to be set  aside.  However,  the
      determination discloses other legal  errors  which  we  can  summarise
      briefly as follows.


  14. Although the panel had before them  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,
      from which it is unambiguously clear that  he  regarded  the  offences
      committed by the appellant to be particular grave, there is nothing to
      indicate that any regard was had to those  remarks,  the  focus  being
      mainly upon the case advanced by the appellant in support of his claim
      to have established a significant private and family life. Thus, there
      was no real or sufficient analysis of the criminality involved,  which
      was an essential ingredient in any proper balancing exercise.

  15.  It was made unambiguously clear by the respondent  that  it  was  not
      accepted that this now adult appellant enjoyed a relationship with his
      adult relatives that demonstrated elements of special dependency  such
      as to properly be considered to be family life. Yet the  panel  appear
      to accept the claimed family life relationship  without  offering  any
      reasoning to support doing so. As this was a matter in  issue  between
      the parties to be resolved, a failure to  give  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting the case advanced by one party while accepting that advanced
      by another also constitutes an error of law.

  16. At paragraph 8 of the determination the panel  misdirected  themselves
      as to the requirements of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules. This
      being a case where paragraphs 399 and 399A did not  apply,  the  focus
      was on the concluding sentence of paragraph 398:

           "The Secretary of State in assessing that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,  it
           will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in deportation would be outweighed by other factors."


      In respect of this the panel said:


           "Hence, it can be seen that "exceptional  circumstances"  simply
           means compelling reasons..."


      This is incorrect. As was made clear by the Court of Appeal  in  MF  v
      SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  those  circumstances  have  to  be  (with
      emphasis added):


           "..  sufficiently  compelling  (and  therefore  exceptional)  to
           outweigh the public interest in deportation..."


      Thus, the assessment of the circumstances is to be carried out in  the
      context of the countervailing public interests arguments  and  not  in
      isolation considered by themselves. One plank of the  public  interest
      argument had, in any event, been left out of account.

  17. Thus the Panel made errors of  law  such  as  to  require  that  their
      determination be set aside. The decision must be re-made by the  Upper
      Tribunal. Having heard from the parties we accepted  that,  since  the
      appellant had himself not been produced from detention, given that  he
      had  been  successful  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   it   was
      inappropriate to remake the decision in his  absence.  Therefore,  the
      appeal is adjourned to a resumed hearing for that purpose. We  do  not
      reserve the appeal to ourselves and so it may  be  listed  before  any
      constitution of the Upper Tribunal.

   Directions

      Not later than 21 days from the date upon which these  directions  are
sent out:

        a.  Mr Ifanse's representatives are to file with the  Tribunal  and
           serve upon  the  respondent  an  indexed  and  paginated  bundle
           containing all documentary evidence relied upon. If reliance  is
           placed upon documentary evidence already served, there is to  be
           a single composite index including reference to that material as
           well as any additional documentary material.


        b. In respect of any witness who is  to  be  called  to  give  oral
           evidence there must be a witness statement drawn  in  sufficient
           detail to stand as evidence in chief filed with the Tribunal and
           served upon the respondent. The  respondent  will  be  asked  to
           indicate, at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  whether  any
           assertion of fact contained in any such statement is challenged.

        c. Mr Ifanse's representatives are to file with  the  Tribunal  and
           serve upon the other party a skeleton argument setting  out  all
           lines of argument to be pursued at the hearing.

                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 5 February 2014
