


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 11 November 2013                         |On : 13 November 2013        |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           muhammad marcel thomasi
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Collins, instructed by R.O.C.K Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Thomasi's  appeal
against a decision to deport him from the United Kingdom. For  the  purposes
of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary of State as the  respondent
and Mr Thomasi as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they were  in
the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Gambia, born on 15  August  1978.  He  entered
the United Kingdom lawfully on 10  September  1992,  aged  14  years,  on  a
settlement visa which conferred indefinite leave to remain. On  9  September
1996, aged 18, he received his first convictions for which he was given  six
18 month probation orders and six community  service  orders  to  be  served
concurrently. Up until his last  convictions  on  26  January  2012  he  was
convicted of a further 46  offences.  He  received  custodial  sentences  on
separate occasions, in regard to these offences, of eight weeks  for  theft,
eight weeks for possession of class B drugs, three months for possession  of
a blade and, on 4 April 2003, of 42 months' imprisonment for robbery.

On  26  January  2012  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  Highbury   Corner
Magistrates  Court  of  burglary,  theft  from  a  vehicle  and  failure  to
surrender to custody  at  the  appointed  time.  On  2  March  2012  he  was
sentenced at Blackfriars Crown Court to respective terms of imprisonment  of
20 months, two months (consecutive) and  seven  days  (concurrent).  He  was
also sentenced that day for breach of community  orders  which  were  handed
down on 1 November 2011 in respect of possession of  a  class  A  controlled
drug - heroin, possession of  a  class  A  controlled  drug  -  cocaine  and
possession of a class C controlled drug - cannabis, for  which  he  received
respective  prison  sentences  of  two  months  (consecutive),  two   months
(concurrent) and two months (concurrent), making a total prison sentence  of
24 months.

As a result of those convictions the appellant was considered for  automatic
deportation under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and on  27  March
2012 he was served with a notice of liability for deportation. He  responded
to that notice on 30 March  2012  and  in  that  response  referred  to  his
daughter, born on 14 February 2007 to a British mother with whom he  was  no
longer in a relationship. In response to further enquiries  he  advised  the
respondent, in a letter dated 14 November 2012, that he  did  not  know  his
daughter's  whereabouts  and  had  not  seen  her  since  December  2011.  A
deportation order was signed on 3 January 2013 and a  decision  subsequently
made that section 32(5) applied.

The  respondent,  in  making  that  decision,  gave  consideration  to   the
immigration rules with respect to Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  concluding  that
the appellant fell within paragraph 398(b), applicable to  offences  leading
to a sentence of imprisonment of less than four years but  at  least  twelve
months. The respondent did not accept that paragraph 399(a) applied  to  the
appellant since it was not accepted that he  was  in  a  genuine  subsisting
relationship with his daughter and it was considered in any event  that  her
mother would continue to care for her in the United Kingdom. Neither was  it
accepted that paragraph 339(b) applied,  since  his  relationship  with  the
mother of his daughter had ended, or that paragraph 399A applied, since  his
continuous residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of  that
provision was 17 years and three months and thus below 20 years and  he  had
failed to establish that he had no ties to Gambia. The  respondent  did  not
accept that there were exceptional circumstances such that  the  appellant's
right to family and/or private life outweighed the public  interest  in  his
deportation. It was accordingly concluded that  his  deportation  would  not
breach Article 8.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 6 June 2013, before a panel consisting  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Flynn and Mrs M Padfield JP. The panel heard from  the  appellant  and
his mother. They recorded the appellant's evidence that he had not seen  his
daughter since November 2011 and was no longer in a  relationship  with  her
mother, that he had not started any  contact  proceedings  and  had  had  no
response to the letters he had written; that he had left home at the age  of
16 and had returned there when he was 18 or 19; that he had never  seen  his
biological father but had lived with his mother and  his  step-father;  that
he used to see his daughter from the time she was born and  would  take  her
to see his mother, but that her mother had terminated contact  when  he  was
arrested. They also recorded the evidence of the appellant's mother.

The panel found the appellant and his mother to be credible witnesses.  They
accepted the appellant's evidence that he  had  not  communicated  with  his
daughter or her  mother  since  his  imprisonment  in  November  2011.  They
accepted that he wanted to continue the relationship with his  daughter  and
had tried unsuccessfully to make contact and that until  late  2011  he  had
seen her regularly. They accepted that the gap in contact was due to  events
beyond the appellant's control and considered that  the  relationship  would
be resumed as soon as he was able to re-establish contact. The  panel  noted
that  the  respondent  considered  the  appellant   unable   to   meet   the
requirements of the immigration rules for the  purposes  of  Article  8  and
accordingly went on to consider Article  8  under  the  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
(2004) UKHL 27 principles. They accepted that he had  established  a  family
and  private  life  with  his  daughter   and   mother.   With   regard   to
proportionality, they considered the matter as  "finely  balanced",  but  on
the basis that the appellant had no ties to Gambia and no family or  support
network there and that he had had a  change  of  heart  and  should  now  be
regarded as presenting a low risk of re-offending, they considered that  his
removal  would  be  disproportionate  and  in  breach  of  Article  8.  They
accordingly allowed the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
following grounds: that  the  panel  had  erred  by  following  a  two-stage
approach to Article 8; that they had erred by  finding  that  the  appellant
had an established family life with his mother;  that  they  had  speculated
about future contact between the appellant and his  daughter  and  that,  on
the facts at the date of the hearing, and in line with the principles in  SS
(Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  550,
his deportation  would  not  interfere  with  any  family  or  private  life
established with his daughter; that the panel had erred in their  assessment
of risk of re-offending; and that they had failed  to  give  weight  to  the
Secretary of State's public interest policies.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  on
a renewed application on 28 August 2013, on the  grounds  that  the  panel's
family life findings were inadequately reasoned and  that  it  had  arguably
misdirected itself in failing to give adequate consideration to  the  public
interest when assessing proportionality.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before me on  11  November  2013.  The  appellant  was  not
brought from prison, but in any event it was, at that point,  unlikely  that
he would be required to give any oral evidence.

Mr Collins requested an adjournment of the  proceedings  on  other  grounds,
however, namely that instructing solicitors had sent the paperwork  only  at
5pm on Friday, that he had picked up the paperwork during  the  weekend  and
that that paperwork did not include the First-tier Tribunal's decision,  the
grounds of appeal or the grant of permission which he  had  only  seen  that
morning. Further, he was not aware of some of the  authorities  referred  to
by the respondent in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  including  MF  (Nigeria)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  Mr  Melvin
objected to an adjournment on that basis, as the appellant's solicitors  had
had plenty of time to prepare the case and instruct counsel.

I considered there to be no reason why  Mr  Collins,  if  given  some  time,
could not prepare his case, as he now had all the papers and  there  was  no
excuse for him not being aware of  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgement  in  MF
(Nigeria). I offered him as much time as he needed and also  suggested  that
he may wish to take instructions from the appellant's family members  as  to
any developments since  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in
particular with respect to the appellant's contact with his daughter, so  as
to inform any later decision on re-making the appeal, in the event  that  an
error of law was found. After breaking for over one and  a  half  hours,  Mr
Collins agreed that he was ready to proceed.

Error of Law

 Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds of appeal, although he had little to  say
about the first ground. He submitted that the  panel's  findings  about  the
resumption  of  contact  between  the  appellant  and  his   daughter   were
speculative and that the panel had erred by failing to  make  an  assessment
of her best interests. Their views, with regard  to  family  life  with  his
daughter, as well as with his mother, showed perversity  and  irrationality.
Inadequate  reasons  were  given  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  was
dependent upon his mother, particularly as there were long periods  when  he
was not living at home and since it was clear that his mother was unable  to
exert  any  influence  over  him.  The  panel  had  materially   misdirected
themselves in law. Their  consideration  of  Maslov  v.  Austria  -  1638/03
[2008] ECHR 546 and RG (Automatic deport Section 33(2) (a) exception)  Nepal
[2010] UKUT 273 was erroneous: Maslov applied to juvenile  offenders,  which
the appellant was not, and RG (Nepal) had been overturned by  the  Court  of
Appeal and re-heard and dismissed by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  panel  had
failed to consider the principles in SS (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria).

Mr Collins opposed the appeal, submitting that the panel had considered  the
case  in  the  round  and  had  considered  all  the  circumstances.   Their
credibility findings had not been challenged and it was  therefore  accepted
that there was a strong bond between the appellant and his mother  and  that
he intended to maintain a role  in  his  daughter's  life.  The  panel  were
entitled to assess the risk of re-offending as they did. With regard to  the
principles in SS (Nigeria), Mr Collins submitted  that  that  case  required
there to be a balancing exercise, which is what the panel  did.  As  for  MF
(Nigeria), Mr Collins submitted that paragraph 46  was  crucial  and,  after
some deliberation, said that it was for the Upper Tribunal  to  consider  if
the panel had erred in law.

I advised the parties that, in my view, the panel had  materially  erred  in
law. I  considered  their  findings  on  family  life  with  regard  to  the
appellant's relationship with his daughter and  mother  to  be  inadequately
reasoned and  their  findings  on  Article  8  "outside  the  rules"  to  be
inconsistent with the principles  in  SS  (Nigeria)  and  MF  (Nigeria),  as
failing to take proper account of the strength of  the  public  interest  in
the deportation of foreign criminals.

Re-making the Decision

It was agreed by the parties that the  decision  could  be  re-made  on  the
basis of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, as had been  envisaged
in the grant  of  permission.  No  further  documentary  evidence  had  been
produced by the appellant's  representatives.  Mr  Collins  confirmed  that,
having had an opportunity to speak to the  appellant's  family  members  who
were present at the hearing, there was no further  information  or  evidence
to be considered and neither were there  any  further  submissions  that  he
could make, other  than  rehearsing  the  arguments  already  made.  He  was
therefore content for me to proceed to re-make the decision.

Mr Melvin had no further submissions to make, other than to  state  that  he
was relying upon his written submissions and to reiterate that, with  regard
to the lack of any support network for  the  appellant  in  Gambia,  it  was
relevant to consider that he was a healthy 35-year-old man who  had  managed
to establish an independent life.

Consideration and findings

The appellant relies upon his family and private life pursuant to Article  8
of the ECHR as giving rise to an exception from automatic deportation  under
section 33 of the 2007 Act.

The facts in this case are, on the whole, not in issue: the  appellant  came
to the United Kingdom as a child of 14 years of age in 1992 and was  granted
indefinite leave to remain to settle with his mother who  had  arrived  some
seven years earlier in 1985; he lived with his  mother  and  step-father  on
and off until his arrest, although that precise period is  undetermined;  he
had a relationship with a British woman  and  as  a  result  has  a  British
daughter born on 14 February 2007 with whom he  has  had  no  contact  since
being sent to prison in November/December 2011; and he is  no  longer  in  a
relationship with his daughter's mother who has now  withdrawn  all  contact
with his family.

It was the finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  was
dependent upon his mother and that the ties between  them  went  beyond  the
normal family ties, such that family life was established between  them.  As
already stated, I have found that finding to be  inadequately  reasoned  and
thus an error of law. One of the reasons given  by  the  Tribunal  for  that
finding, at paragraph 43, was that the appellant had been abandoned  by  his
father and had no close family remaining in Gambia,  but  that  ignored  the
appellant's own evidence that, whilst he never knew his  biological  father,
he had grown  up  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his  step-father  whom  he
considered as his own father and was very close to him. The panel  otherwise
failed to give any explanation as to why it considered the appellant, a  34-
year-old man who  had  spent  substantial  periods  living  apart  from  his
mother, was nevertheless dependent upon her. Its acceptance of  family  life
being established between the appellant and his mother, as  based  upon  the
fact that he had lived with her for the majority of his life in  the  United
Kingdom and intended to return to her home if allowed to  do  so  (paragraph
38), failed to take account of the considerable  number  of  inconsistencies
in the evidence in that regard.

According to the OASys report, at page 11,  the  appellant  lived  with  his
parents from the age of 14 to 16, but  then  ran  away  from  home  and  was
sleeping rough from that time  until  his  arrest,  with  only  intermittent
returns to their house or to his sister's or ex-partner's  house  (see  also
page 8, paragraph 3.3). As an aside, and as  Mr  Collins  himself  observed,
the references in the OASys report to the appellant's sister  appear  to  be
inconsistent  with  his  description  of  himself  as  an  only  child.  The
appellant's mother's evidence in her statement was that he had  never  lived
away from her in the United Kingdom, but her oral evidence before the First-
tier Tribunal was that he left home when he was 16, returned when  aged  19,
and then remained there for two years, with no information as  to  where  he
lived  thereafter  (paragraph  17).  Moreover,   the   appellant's   claimed
intention to return to live with his mother  and  step-father  was  at  odds
with the information he had provided to the probation officer,  as  recorded
in the OASys report at pages 8 and 12, namely that he wanted  to  return  to
live in the area where his sister resided, in Enfield, and  that  he  wanted
to stay away from the Islington area and remain permanently in  the  Enfield
area.

The evidence of the periods of time in which the appellant  lived  with  his
mother was and is therefore  extremely  vague  and  inconsistent  and,  when
taken together with the fact that she had left him behind in Gambia  at  the
age of seven and remained apart from him until he joined her in  the  United
Kingdom seven years later, that  she  was  thereafter  evidently  unable  to
exert any influence over him as regards his offending, that he entered  into
a relationship and had a child, and that he  spent  substantial  periods  of
time either sleeping rough or with his sister or friends  or  ex-girlfriend,
there are simply no reasonable or proper grounds for concluding  that  their
relationship fell within the principles in Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31. I find no basis upon  which  the
Tribunal could properly have concluded  that  the  appellant's  relationship
with his mother consisted of  anything  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties
between an adult child and their parents and, in re-making the  decision  in
that respect, whilst I accept that the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
mother (and step-father) forms part  of  his  private  life  in  the  United
Kingdom, I do not accept that he has established family life in  the  United
Kingdom on the basis of that relationship.

I turn next to the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  daughter  and  the
panel's finding in that regard and  I  find  myself  in  agreement  with  Mr
Melvin, that the finding that the relationship would  be  resumed  once  the
appellant  re-established  contact,  was  based  upon  nothing   more   than
speculation. The panel found the appellant to  be  a  credible  witness  and
accepted that he was telling the truth about the gap  in  his  contact  with
his daughter. In so doing, they did not appear to note that the  appellant's
evidence, as recorded in the OASys report at page 11, that he had  telephone
contact at that time (the report was completed on 23 August 2012)  with  his
daughter,  was  inconsistent  with  his  oral  evidence  that  he  had   not
communicated with her since going to prison in November  2011.  Neither  did
they appear to note that the appellant's evidence in his  witness  statement
before  them,  that  his  mother  was  in  touch  with  his  daughter,   was
inconsistent with her evidence at the hearing that  she  had  not  seen  her
granddaughter for the past year. Nevertheless, even on the  basis  of  their
acceptance of his evidence, there  was  nothing  further,  other  than  pure
speculation, to support a finding that contact would be  re-established  and
that the relationship would be resumed. It was the appellant's own  evidence
that his relationship with his daughter's mother had ended and that  he  had
neither seen nor communicated with her or his daughter for eighteen  months,
that he had no idea of their whereabouts and that he  had  not  started  any
contact  proceedings  and  it   was   his   mother's   evidence   that   her
granddaughter's  mother  had  ceased  all   contact   with   her.   In   the
circumstances, the panel's  findings  in  regard  to  the  relationship  are
simply not sustainable.

In re-making the decision in that regard, I accept that  the  appellant  has
family life in the United Kingdom to the very limited extent that he  has  a
British daughter who lives here. However  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is
little, if any, substance to that family life and that  it  cannot  be  said
that the relationship is currently a subsisting one. I note that it  is  now
almost two years since the appellant has had any contact with  his  daughter
- Mr Collins advised me that there  was  no  development  in  the  situation
since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. On that  basis  it  cannot
realistically be concluded that his daughter's best  interests  lie  in  him
remaining in the United Kingdom. However, even if they did,  that  would  be
only  one  consideration,  albeit  a  primary  one,  in  the  assessment  of
proportionality, and would in  this  case  be  significantly  outweighed  by
other circumstances.

The panel did  not  give  any  detailed  consideration  to  the  appellant's
ability to meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  relating  to
private and family life, but at paragraph 35 proceeded on the basis  of  the
respondent's assessment that the requirements were not  met.  The  appellant
was plainly not able to meet the requirements of paragraphs  399(a)  or  (b)
or 399A. With regard to paragraph 398, the panel did not go on to  undertake
any independent assessment of whether exceptional circumstances existed  but
proceeded to  consider  Article  8  in  its  wider  context,  following  the
relevant guidance at  the  time  as  to  the  two-stage  approach,  although
without proper regard to recent authorities as to the significant weight  to
be given to the  public  interest.  The  two-stage  approach  has  now  been
refined by the Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  and  the  assessment  of
proportionality in the "wider context" has been explained  as  forming  part
of the consideration of  "exceptional  circumstances"  and  "other  factors"
within the terms of the rules themselves.

In re-making the decision, I therefore consider whether  such  circumstances
or factors exist. The panel, in concluding that the appellant's  deportation
would be disproportionate, regarded the  matter  as  "finely  balanced"  and
relied upon the existence of family  life  between  the  appellant  and  his
mother and daughter; the appellant's own  evidence  as  to  his  "change  of
heart" and "real change in his mindset"; his behaviour in prison;  his  lack
of ties in Gambia; and, crucially, their re-assessment of the  risk  of  re-
offending as being a low risk. However I consider  those  findings,  on  the
whole, to be unsustainable.

For the reasons given above, I have not found family life to be  established
between the appellant and his mother and consider any  family  life  between
him and  his  daughter  to  be  minimal.  With  regard  to  the  appellant's
remaining ties to Gambia,  the  panel  did  not  appear  to  note  that  the
evidence in that regard was inconsistent: the  appellant's  account  in  his
statement was that his last remaining relative was his grandfather who  died
some weeks after  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  yet  his  mother's
evidence was that she had left him in Gambia  with  her  mother  who  passed
away three years ago (or alternatively was alive when she  recently  visited
Gambia, as stated at paragraph 15). Clearly, therefore, the evidence  as  to
subsisting ties is not entirely reliable  and,  in  any  event,  has  to  be
considered in the context of the appellant now being a 35-year-old  man  who
could reasonably be expected to establish a private life for himself in  the
country in which he spent his first 14 years, whether or not he  had  family
remaining there.

With regard to the risk of re-offending, it seems to  me  that  no  adequate
reasons were given by the panel for substituting their  own  assessment  for
that of the author of the OASys report. Aside  from  two  brief  letters  of
support from a prison officer and an art teacher (who  had  only  known  the
appellant in the confines and security of the prison),  the  panel,  in  re-
assessing the  level  of  risk,  simply  relied  upon  the  appellant's  own
assurances of having changed. Yet in so doing  they  failed  to  acknowledge
that similar assurances were made to the  probation  officer  prior  to  the
risk assessment, as seen at paragraph 12.1 of the OASys  report.  The  panel
did not  appear  to  give  any  proper  consideration  to  the  pro-criminal
attitude described in the OASys  report  at  page  17;  to  the  appellant's
resumption of  criminal  activity  following  a  previous  lengthy  term  of
imprisonment, including offences committed whilst  still  serving  community
orders and whilst on police bail; to the fact that he had previously  failed
to surrender to police bail and had breached community orders  imposed  upon
him; to the concerns about breach of trust referred to in the  OASys  report
at R9.3.2 at page 29; or to the comments of the sentencing judge as  to  the
lack of deterrent effect of previous sentences and  the  number  of  chances
previously given to, but not taken by him. The author of  the  OASys  report
considered that the risk  of  re-offending  would  be  tested  only  on  the
appellant's release and that, of course, has not yet occurred.  Accordingly,
I rely on the conclusions in the OASys report as to the level  of  risk,  of
re-offending and of harm to the public, being medium.

The appellant's circumstances are thus that he is a repeat offender who  has
been involved in criminal activity since the age of  18,  four  years  after
arriving in the United Kingdom, and that he  poses  a  medium  risk  to  the
public and medium risk of re-offending. The Judge, when sentencing him on  2
March 2012, referred to him having committed 27 theft and  similar  offences
between 1996 and 2012 and  five  drugs  offences  and,  aside  from  matters
relating to  community  orders,  had  been  convicted  of  two  other  drugs
matters.  He  commented  that  the  appellant   had   received   42   months
imprisonment in 2003 for a robbery but had continued to offend and that  the
community services imposed on  him  had  not  "had  the  desired  effect  of
stopping you committing further offences". He noted that the  appellant  had
been given many chances over the years and  had  failed  to  take  up  those
chances, that he had  committed  offences  whilst  on  bail,  and  that  his
current offences were serious.

The redeeming features in the appellant's case are his length  of  residence
in the United Kingdom and the  early  age  at  which  he  first  came  here,
together with his family ties. However, contrary  to  the  circumstances  in
Maslov, albeit having regard to the requirement to show very strong  reasons
for expulsion of a settled minor who has lawfully spent  all  or  the  major
part of his or her childhood and youth in the host  country,  the  appellant
did not commit the offences as a juvenile,  but  as  an  adult  and  is,  of
course, now a 35-year-old man. He has a British daughter but has no  current
contact with her or means by which to make contact and  has  not  sought  to
commence legal proceedings for contact.  His  mother  and  step-father  have
clearly failed to have any influence over him in the past 17 years since  he
commenced his criminal activities. The evidence as to his remaining ties  to
Gambia is inconsistent, but in any event  he  is  now  an  adult  who  could
reasonably re-establish himself in that country.

Current case law has established that the weight to be given to  the  public
interest in removing foreign criminals is significant. That  was  emphasised
by the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria), where Lord Justice  Laws  stated  at
paragraph 54:

    "I said at paragraph 46 that while  the  authorities  demonstrate  that
    there is no rule of exceptionality for Article  8,  they  also  clearly
    show  that  the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
    deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is to
    prevail. The pressing nature of the public  interest  here  is  vividly
    informed by the fact  that  by  Parliament's  express  declaration  the
    public interest  is  injured  if  the  criminal's  deportation  is  not
    effected. Such a result could in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a
    very strong claim indeed."

In the very recent case of MF, the Master of the Rolls stated  at  paragraph
42:


    "in approaching the question of  whether  removal  is  a  proportionate
    interference with an individual's article  8  rights,  the  scales  are
    heavily weighted in favour of deportation and something very compelling
    (which will be  "exceptional")  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in removal. In our view, it is no coincidence that the  phrase
    "exceptional circumstances" is used in the new rules in the context  of
    weighing the competing factors for and against deportation  of  foreign
    criminals."


He went on, at paragraph 43 to state:

    "The general rule in the present context is that,  in  the  case  of  a
    foreign prisoner to  whom  paras  399  and  399A  do  not  apply,  very
    compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public interest  in
    deportation.   These   compelling   reasons   are   the    "exceptional
    circumstances".


It is the appellant's case that he has demonstrated very compelling  reasons
that  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation,  by  reason  in
particular of his family ties and the fact that he has  spent  the  majority
of his life, including his formative years, in the United Kingdom.  However,
in the light of what I have said above, I do not accept that  those  reasons
are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   the
prevention of disorder and  crime.  He  has  not  demonstrated  "exceptional
circumstances" or "other factors" for the purposes of the immigration  rules
or on any possible wider interpretation of Article 8.

In the circumstances the appellant's deportation is justified in the  public
interest and would not amount to a breach of Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  Any
interference caused to his family and private life in  the  United  Kingdom,
and  to  that  of  his  daughter,  as  a  result  of  his  deportation,   is
proportionate. The appellant has failed to establish that  he  falls  within
the exceptions set out at section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set
aside. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I see no reason
    to continue that order and accordingly I lift  the  order  pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.









                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
