
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00361/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of       |               Decision & Reasons       |
|Justice                            |Promulgated                             |
|On 5th  June 2017                  |               On 6th  June 2017        |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                             MALGORZATA ROZYCKA
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by ILAS LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Juss (FtJ), promulgated on 14  February  2017,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 07 July
        2016 to deport the appellant pursuant to  regulation  19(3)(b)  and
        regulation  21  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
        Regulations 2006.


   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Poland,  date  of  birth  17  August
        1991. According to her statements  she  first  entered  the  United
        Kingdom sometime around June 2015  and  remained  in  Scotland  for
        around a month before returning to Poland  around  July  2015.  She
        next entered the United Kingdom on  8  June  2016.  Her  father  is
        resident in the UK as a qualified person and her  brother  is  also
        present in the United Kingdom, although no details were provided as
        to his circumstances. On 9 June  2016  she  was  taken  to  Croydon
        University  Hospital  because  she  was  vomiting   following   the
        ingestion of balloons full of amphetamine. A  CT  scan  revealed  2
        balloons in  her  gastric  area.  The  appellant  was  subsequently
        arrested and charged in respect  of  an  offence  relating  to  the
        Importation of a Controlled Class B drug.


     3. On 4 July 2016 the appellant was convicted at a  Magistrates  Court
        of the drugs importation offence and received a sentence of 9 weeks
        imprisonment. In her decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  the
        respondent considered that the appellant posed a  genuine,  present
        and sufficiently serious threat to the interests of  public  policy
        if she were allowed  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  As  she
        committed a serious criminal offence the respondent took  the  view
        that there was a real risk that she may reoffend in the future.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4.  The  appellant  was  previously  represented   by   Duncan   Lewis
        solicitors. She was however unable, "because of costs", to continue
        instructing the firm. Duncan Lewis did however provide to the First-
        tier Tribunal and the respondent a  bundle  of  documents  for  the
        purposes of her appeal including two statements from the  appellant
        (one dated either 18 October 2016 or  18  August  2016;  the  other
        dated 22  September  2016),  photocopies  of  her  brother's  death
        certificate dated 25  October  2011  with  certified  translations,
        photocopies of a  Change  of  Name  Deed  dated  26  February  2016
        accompanied with a certified  translation,  a  medical  certificate
        from  the  Mental  Health  Centre  dated  23  December   2015   and
        accompanying certified translation, medical  records  from  Yarls's
        Wood Immigration Removal Centre, a Rule 35 report  dated  5  August
        2016, disclosure from  the  Subject  Access  Request  made  to  the
        National  Police  Chief's  Council,  details  of  the   appellant's
        criminal   conviction,   and   photocopied   ID    documents    and
        correspondence relating to the appellant's father.

     5. At the hearing the appellant made  an  application  to  adjourn  to
        enable  her  to  obtain  alternative  legal  representation.   This
        application was refused by the  FtJ  as  there  was  no  reasonable
        prospect that the  appellant  would  be  in  receipt  of  funds  to
        instruct  legal  representatives  in  the  future.  The   appellant
        confirmed the contents of her witness statement  (the  judge  notes
        only one statement that  dated  18  October  2016).  She  initially
        claimed that she had been wrongly convicted of importing drugs  but
        then accepted under cross examination that she had swallowed drugs,
        that she did so because she was depressed  on  account  of  a  very
        difficult relationship with her boyfriend in Poland, and  that  she
        had brought drugs into the United Kingdom. The FtJ  summarised  the
        respondent's closing submissions and  the  appellant's  submissions
        that she had not committed any other  offences.  The  FtJ  was  not
        satisfied that the appellant had discharged  the  burden  of  proof
        upon her. At [10] the FtJ records that the appellant initially said
        she was not  guilty  but  then  immediately  accepted  under  cross
        examination that she was guilty of bringing drugs into the country.
        At [11] the FtJ records the respondent's "clear  view"  that  there
        was a real risk that the appellant  would  reoffend  again  in  the
        future. Nothing that the appellant said at the  hearing  distracted
        from that view. At [12] the FtJ notes that the appellant failed  to
        raise any grounds against deportation  and,  given  the  threat  of
        serious harm that  she  posed  to  the  public,  and  her  personal
        circumstances, there was nothing that precluded her deportation  to
        Poland. This is because although her father and brother were in the
        UK they did not attend the hearing to support her. Given  that  her
        mother and aunt remained in Poland deportation  could  properly  be
        pursued as it was in accordance with the principles  of  regulation
        21(5). The appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

     6. The grounds of appeal, settled by  the  appellant's  current  legal
        representatives, were discursive and focused on arguments that  the
        FtJ  failed  to  adequately  consider  the   seriousness   of   the
        appellant's offending when assessing  the  relevant  public  policy
        considerations. The grounds concentrated on whether  the  appellant
        posed a risk of serious harm to  the  public,  as  disclosed  in  a
        National Probation Service Circular, although this has no relevance
        to the test for exclusion under the EEA regulations.


     7. Permission was however granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        Gillespie in the following terms:


             The grounds of appeal are somewhat incoherent and consist in
             large part of an attack upon the decision to make a
             deportation order rather than upon identifying errors in the
             decision of the learner judge. What is identifiable in the
             proposed grounds, however, is the averment the learned to
             judge did not engage with the provisions of regulation 21 of
             the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, in
             any meaningful way, or at all.


             The decision by the judge is extremely scant. It is badly
             affected by apparent errors of typography and expression. This
             unfortunately gives an impression of inadequate consideration.
             More importantly, the decision makes no reference whatever to
             regulation 21, consideration of which is an essential part of
             any determination of an appeal against a decision to deport an
             EEA national. It does not engage with the principle upon which
             an EEA national may be removed and makes no finding concerning
             necessary considerations relating to the principal.


             Permission to appeal is granted.

Submissions at the error of law hearing


     8. Ms Nnamani drew my attention to the bundle of documents provided by
        Duncan Lewis solicitors which was before the FtJ. It was  submitted
        that  the  decision  lacked  any  satisfactory   consideration   of
        regulation 21(5). There were said to be  no  consideration  of  the
        fact that this was a  "one  off"  offence,  no  assessment  of  the
        material provided on the appellant's  behalf.  Nor  was  there  any
        consideration of the rule 35 report which referred to  a  harrowing
        history of sexual abuse and supporting  evidence  relating  to  the
        appellant  psychological   state,   including   her   reliance   on
        antidepressant medication since  2012.  In  assessing  whether  the
        appellant posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
        to the fundamental interests  of  society  the  judge  should  have
        considered all of her personal circumstances, the  absence  of  any
        previous criminal convictions, the relatively  short  sentence  and
        her medical history.  It  was  further  submitted  that  the  judge
        misdirected himself at [10] by stating that  the  burden  of  proof
        rested on the appellant.


     9. Mr Melvin provided an expanded rule 24 reply which  also  acted  as
        written submissions. Mr Melvin accepted that the decision was scant
        on factual findings but that there was little evidence  before  the
        FtJ upon which he could make lengthy findings on proportionality or
        propensity to reoffend. Given the appellant's lack of apparent ties
        with the UK, and given that her offence was on entry to the UK, the
        decision was sustainable. The FtJ  found  that  the  appellant  was
        prepared to be untruthful in her evidence and admitted that she had
        actually been guilty of  smuggling  drugs  into  the  UK.  The  FtJ
        properly adopted the respondent's position,  as  disclosed  in  the
        deportation decision, that there was a real risk that the appellant
        would reoffend. Given that the appellant had no ties with the UK no
        Tribunal properly directing itself would be entitled to find in the
        appellant's favour when considering proportionality.

    10. I reserved my decision.


      Discussion

    11. The grant of permission to appeal  referred  to  the  FtJ  decision
        being "extremely scant"  and  being  "badly  affected  by  apparent
        errors of  typography  and  expression."  The  decision  itself  is
        extremely short consisting of just  4  pages.  There  are  a  large
        number of typographical errors and some of the FtJ's sentences lack
        clarity, with a few bordering on the incoherent. It is likely  that
        the FtJ dictated his decision and either failed to proof read it or
        dispatched  a  draft  copy  for  promulgation.   Either   way   the
        typographical  errors  and  the  errors  of  expression  give   the
        impression that inadequate consideration has been given by the  FtJ
        to the appeal. These mistakes however are not  of  such  a  serious
        degree as to render the decision  incoherent  or  to  amount  to  a
        material legal error.


    12. More concerning is the failure by the FtJ to structure his decision
        in such a way as to clearly engage with the principles  established
        in regulation 21(5) of the EEA Regulations. This reads,


         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
         justify the decision.


    13. Although the FtJ does refer to regulation 21(5) at [1] and [13]  he
        does not engage in any meaningful way with each of the 5 principles
        and does not consider the appellant's  offending  or  her  personal
        circumstances within the framework of those principles. At [11] the
        FtJ refers to the "clear view" taken by  the  respondent  that  the
        appellant poses a real risk of reoffending in the future  and  that
        she failed to mention anything at the hearing detecting  from  that
        view. It is of course for a  judge  to  determine  for  himself  or
        herself, in a statutory appeal, whether an appellant  does  pose  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
        the fundamental interests of society. The FtJ  makes  no  reference
        whatsoever to the medical notes or  the  rule  35  report,  and  no
        reference is made to the appellant's account of events that  caused
        her to leave Poland, as disclosed in her 2 statements (only one  of
        which was considered by the FtJ) and the supporting evidence placed
        before the First-tier Tribunal. It was  incumbent  on  the  FtJ  to
        engage with this evidence and to provide a reasoned explanation for
        concluding that the appellant,  given  her  circumstances  and  her
        asserted vulnerability, was likely to reoffend. I  am  additionally
        satisfied that the FtJ has misdirected himself by  approaching  the
        appeal on the basis that it is for the appellant to  discharge  the
        burden of proof in respect of the deportation/exclusion decision.


    14. I do not accept  Mr  Melvin's  submission  that  the  appeal  would
        inevitably  have  been  dismissed  and  that  no  judge,   properly
        directing him or herself, would be entitled to  allow  the  appeal.
        Whilst the appellant has very tenuous associations with the  United
        Kingdom her claim,  considered  in  the  context  of  her  asserted
        vulnerability and the relatively short  sentence  received  (albeit
        for an  offence  of  a  serious  nature)  is  not  one  that  would
        necessarily be bound to fail.


    15. In the circumstances it is appropriate to remit the matter  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal for a full de novo hearing before a judge other
        than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Juss.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is vitiated by a material error of law

The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Juss

I make no anonymity direction.

[pic]                               05 June 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

