
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00594/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |                      Decision & Reasons |
|                                    |Promulgation                             |
|On 4 October 2018                              |On 16 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mr Mantas Svetlauskas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Sowerby, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State has appealed against the determination made by the
First-tier Tribunal in the case of Mr Mantas Svetlauskas, DA/00594/2017.  I
shall refer to Mr Svetlauskas as 'the appellant', as he was before the
First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall, whose
determination was promulgated on 19 July 2018.  The Appellant, a Lithuanian
national, was born on 31 October 1990.  The relevant decision, made by the
Secretary of State on 25 February 2017, was to make a deportation order
against him under the 2016 EEA Regulations.  The judge determined the
appeal by allowing it under the 2016 Regulations, finding that the
appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence and consequently his
case fell to be considered under the second level of the three-level scheme
set out in the Regulations when dealing with European citizens who have
been in the United Kingdom for varying periods of time. In such cases,
removal is permitted only on 'serious grounds of public policy'.

The background to the case is that the Appellant's mother and father
arrived in the United Kingdom in 2000.  It does not appear to be
controversial that the father worked as a lorry driver and then from 2002
onwards as a carpenter.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in
2002.  He was then aged 12.  The decision letter, which was made on 25
September 2017, appears to acknowledge that when the appellant arrived in
the United Kingdom he was doing so as the dependant of his father, who was
self-employed in the United Kingdom.  The fact that the appellant's father
as a non-European national had been granted leave to remain prior to 24
January 2004 clearly suggests that the father was working lawfully in the
United Kingdom and so, in due course on 24 January 2004, the appellant
himself was granted leave as a dependant of a Lithuanian citizen who was
working in the United Kingdom in a self-employed capacity.  He was given
leave to remain until 25 January 2007.

The judge accepted that the starting-point for the consideration of the
claim was May 2004 but, for our purposes, we do not see how it could have
been then.  The accession of Lithuania into the European Union took place
in May 2004 but, importantly, paragraph 8, Schedule 6 to the 2016 EEA
Regulations, which itself reflected conventional European and United
Kingdom law, contained retrospective provisions in relation to those who
had prior leave during the period leading up to the accession.  It was
retrospectively acknowledged that such prior leave could count towards the
critical periods necessary to establish a permanent right of residence.
Paragraph 8 was conditional but there is no suggestion that the conditions
were not met.

The consequence, it seems to us, is that when the Appellant arrived in the
United Kingdom as a dependant of a working father he himself began to
accumulate the time necessary in order to acquire a permanent right of
residence.  Consequently, by 2007, and it is not clear to us whether it was
either before accession or after accession, he had spent five years in the
United Kingdom lawfully and the accession provisions permitted that time to
count towards the relevant five-year period.

It follows from this that he acquired a permanent right of residence
sometime in 2007.  That would have been consolidated after a further five
years by reason of his continued presence in the United Kingdom until 2012,
at which point he would have been just over the age of 21.

The events relevant for our purposes all post-dated his acquisition of a
permanent right of residence and indeed his having spent 10 ten years in
the United Kingdom.  The relevant events were that, on 13 October 2016 at
Bexley Magistrates' Court, he made his first appearance and was
subsequently sentenced to a period of 21 months' imprisonment but it
appears that he was already in custody on that occasion.  Consequently, the
offending took place at a time when he had been entitled to the protection
of the EEA Regulations and in particular the ultimate, as it were, level of
protection which is afforded by ten years' residence, namely, that removal
is limited to 'imperative grounds of public policy'.

The Secretary of State does not suggest that the sentence that was imposed,
the 21 months' imprisonment, represents the serious grounds, far less the
imperative grounds, which arise in the case of somebody who has lawfully
been in the United Kingdom for ten years.  In these circumstances, the
decision made by the Secretary of State to deport him on the basis of his
not having acquired a permanent right of residence was wrong. Further, the
judge in the First-tier making a finding that he had acquired a permanent
right of residence, whilst he may have been wrong as to the date, was not
wrong in the substance of his decision.

Accordingly, the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the
determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of   Mr
Svetlauskas against the Secretary of State's decision to make a  deportation
order shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                           10th October 2018

