
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00219/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th November 2017                    |  On 21st November 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     efb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwyncz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Miss Khan of Counsel instructed by Parker
Rhodes
     Hickmotts


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bagral made following a hearing at Bradford on 26th May 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Romania  born  on  27th  July  1954.   He
    appealed against a decision to make a deportation order in  respect  of
    him on account of his offending  in  Romania  on  the  basis  that  his
    deportation was justified on the grounds of public  policy  and  public
    security by virtue of Regulation 23(6)(b)  and  Regulation  27  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 3. The judge allowed the appeal on the basis that, if returned to Romania,
    there was a real risk that, as a convicted criminal sentenced to a term
    of imprisonment, the claimant  would  be  exposed  to  Article  3  ill-
    treatment.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in  relying  on  ECHR  extradition  authorities  in
    finding that there would be a real risk of Article  3  mistreatment  if
    the claimant were imprisoned in  Romania.   The  authorities  were  not
    referred to in the appeal hearing and  therefore  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had not had the opportunity to respond.

 5. Furthermore, reliance on the recent authority of Rezmives and Others  v
    Romania [2017] ECHR 378 failed to take into account that  the  Romanian
    authorities had six months from the date of  decision  to  address  the
    matters in the decision primarily to reduce overcrowding.  During  this
    period all similar applications to the Court of European  Human  Rights
    on the issue had been adjourned.  Given that Romania is a signatory  to
    the Convention it is likely that it will  comply  with  its  Convention
    obligations and in these circumstances  the  judge  made  an  error  in
    finding that there would be a breach of Article 3.

 6. At the hearing Mr Diwyncz relied on his grounds.  He said that  he  had
    no further information to offer.

 7. Miss Khan defended the decision, stating that all  of  the  authorities
    referred to by the judge were within the claimant's bundle and  arguing
    that the judge had made a decision open to her.

Findings and Submissions

 8. The grounds are quite wrong to argue that the  Presenting  Officer  had
    been deprived of an opportunity to make submissions on  the  case  law.
    As Miss Khan pointed out, the  relevant  cases  cited  in  the  judge's
    decision are all within the Appellant's bundle and were all served upon
    the claimant.

 9. No application was made at the hearing before the judge for the case to
    be adjourned so that Romania would have an opportunity to  comply  with
    its obligations.  It cannot be an error for the judge to  proceed  when
    no adjournment application was made.

10. The judge concluded as follows:-

         "93. I do recognise, however, that I  am  dealing  with  a  country
             which has been a Convention state since 1993 and a  member  of
             the European Union  since  2006,  and  that  the  courts  have
             recognised that there is a strong presumption that Romania  is
             both willing and able to fulfil its human  rights  obligations
             relating to extraditees from the UK in the absence  of  clear,
             cogent and compelling evidence to  the  contrary  -  Krolik  v
             Poland [2012] EWHC 2357 (Admin).  Thus, the  Appellant's  case
             may well turn on the reliance  which  can  be  placed  on  the
             assurances, given the consensus in  the  authorities  that  UK
             extraditions  are  permissible  if  there  is   an   assurance
             sufficient to dispel the risk in the individual case.

         94.  However, the test in extradition cases to establish  a  breach
             of Article 3 is a stringent one - Elashmawy  v  The  Court  of
             Brescia, Italy [2015] EWHC 28 - and I must remind myself  that
             I am dealing with a case concerning  international  protection
             which is to  be  established  on  the  basis  that  there  are
             substantial grounds to believe or a real risk.   Nevertheless,
             while  such  a  claim  could  still  be  defeated  by  way  of
             guarantees by the Romanian authorities that a person  will  be
             accommodated in circumstances which would not breach Article 3
             of the ECHR, the difficulty in this case is that there  is  no
             evidence that in a case of  deportation  there  has  been  any
             assurances by the Romanian authorities that a  person  in  the
             Appellant's  position  would  be  accommodated  and  held   in
             circumstances which would not breach Article 3."

11. In Florea v Romania [2014] EWHC 2528 the Divisional  Court  found  that
    prison conditions in Romania  were  so  overcrowded  that  it  was  not
    possible to extradite people to Romania without it providing guarantees
    about the conditions that accused and convicted persons would  be  held
    in, or there would be a breach of Article 3  of  the  ECHR.   Following
    that case the Romanian Ministry of Justice, in February 2015,  made  an
    assurance that guaranteed every  person  surrendered  from  the  UK  to
    Romania, pursuant to an extradition order,  would  occupy  the  minimum
    space requirements laid down in both domestic and Strasbourg case  law.
    The assurance was repeated in  Romania  v  Zagrean  [2016]  EWHC  2786.
    However, in the most recent case of Rezmives, cited in the grounds, the
    court held unanimously that there had been a violation of Article 3  of
    the ECHR in a case which  concerned  the  conditions  of  detention  in
    Romanian  prisons  and  in  detention  facilities  attached  to  police
    stations.

12. In a careful and detailed decision, the judge applied the  decision  in
    Mursic v Croatia [2016] ECHR 927, finding that the  claimant  would  be
    detained for a not insignificant  period  in  conditions  which  remain
    harsh and do not meet international standards.  She set out all of  the
    background evidence which she was referred  to  in  respect  of  prison
    conditions in Romania.  She then cited the relevant case  law,  relying
    in particular on the case of Penduic v Romania [2017]  ECHR  153  which
    found that there was a strong presumption of a violation of  Article  3
    of the Convention where an applicant had been detained  in  a  cell  in
    which she disposed of less than 3 sq m of floor surface.

13. This particular claimant suffers from Crohn's disease  and  from  PTSD.
    The medical evidence was unchallenged.

14. The judge reached a conclusion plainly open to her.  The  Secretary  of
    State has been unable to substantiate the claim  in  the  grounds  that
    there should be  an  assumption  that  Romania  will  comply  with  its
    Convention obligations.  In the absence of evidence that  it  has,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude  that,  for  this  particular  claimant,
    bearing in mind his age, psychological and physical symptoms, there was
    a real risk that he will be exposed to Article 3 ill-treatment.

15. The original judge did not err in law.  Her  decision  stands  and  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





[pic]
Signed                              Date 20 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



