
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00903/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2019 and 14 November 2019          |On 24 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Itthisak [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Ash Norton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This case has an unfortunate history.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
Thailand. He was born in December 1990 and was given  indefinite  leave  to
remain in the United Kingdom when he arrived to join his  mother  in  March
2000. He committed criminal offences and on 15 May 2014 the respondent made
him the subject of  a  Decision  to  Make  a  Deportation  Order  which  he
appealed. He had been advised in a letter dated 1  October  2013  that  the
respondent deemed his deportation to be in the public  good  following  his
being convicted of offences in August 2013 that led to his imprisonment and
invited him to give  reasons  why  he  should  not  be  deported.  He  made
submissions but the respondent made the decision indicated. The appeal  was
dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
January 2015. That decision was upheld by the Upper Tribunal but the  Upper
Tribunal erred.  The Court of Appeal remitted  this  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal with the  consent  of  the  parties  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
determine. The important part of the Court of Appeal's  order  for  present
purposes is at paragraph 4 of the Statement of Reasons which provides  that
"the parties agree that  this  matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
Tribunal for a substantive determination of the  matters  set  out  in  the
grounds of appeal". That must mean the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

2. The appeal then came before a division of this Tribunal  (The  Honourable
Lord Uist, sitting as a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Perkins) on 24 May 2018. On that occasion the appeal was listed  with
the appeal of this appellant's brother but his circumstances had changed by
reason of further and apparently serious  offending.  The  appellants  were
represented by Mr Malik and the Respondent by  Mr  I  Jarvis,  Senior  Home
Office Presenting Officer. By agreed directions made in October 2018  (they
happen to be made by me) the two appeals were no longer linked.   This  was
done at the initiative of the parties.

3. It was also agreed that the decisions be set  aside  because  the  First-
tier Tribunal has applied the rules wrongly and had not considered part  5A
of the 2002 Act properly. A particular difficulty is at paragraph 20 of the
judge's decision where the judge was considering the  significance  of  the
appellant's relationship with  his  claimed  partner,  Ms  [H].  The  judge
referred to the appellant not having achieved 15  years  residence  in  the
United Kingdom and so the relationship was irrelevant for the  purposes  of
paragraph 399 of the Rules. I agree  with  Mr  Malik  that  the  judge  was
applying paragraph 399 in a version no  longer  in  force  where  15  years
residence was a requirement. The judge clearly applied the wrong rules.  It
followed that her findings were not safe.

4.  Regrettably  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  was   delayed   because   of
administrative error. I did not hear the appeal until 14 June 2019. However
I could not finally determine the appeal because I was concerned that I was
at cross-purposes with the parties about the reasons for deciding to deport
the appellant and I gave directions and ordered a further hearing that took
place on 14 November 2019. I return to his point below.

5. On 16 August 2013 the appellant appeared before the Crown  Court  sitting
at Guildford and was sentenced to a total of 80 weeks imprisonment by  H.H.
Judge Critchlow DL, the Honorary Recorder of Guildford. I  have  considered
the sentencing remarks. It is clear that the appellant was sentenced to  40
weeks imprisonment for an offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm
on 3 September 2012 and 12 weeks concurrent  for  a  public  order  offence
committed on the same occasion, and to 20 weeks imprisonment for an offence
of possessing cannabis with intent to supply on 21 September 2012 and to 20
weeks imprisonment for a further offence of possessing cannabis with intent
to supply committed on 13 November 2012. The sentences for the offences  of
possession with intent to supply were to  be  served  "consecutive  to  one
another, consecutive to the assault" making 80 weeks in all. If I  may  say
so respectfully, this is entirely unsurprising. Save for the  public  order
matter, the offences were committed on different occasions and although the
"drugs" offences are similar the second offence was  committed  whilst  the
appellant was on bail.

6. By letter dated 1 October 2013  the  respondent  notified  the  appellant
that he would be the subject of a deportation order unless he  showed  that
he should not be deported. Given the offending set out above the letter  is
puzzling. It states:
  "The Secretary of State has noted your conviction on 16  August  2013  at
  Guildford Crown Court for Drugs- with intent  to  supply,  Violent  Crime
  (inc ABH/GBH), Behaviour (Including bomb hoaxes/threats to kill etc)  and
  for which you were sentenced to 1 years, 6 months, 11 days  and  takes  a
  very serious view of your offence.  In  light  of  your  conviction,  the
  Secretary of State deems that your deportation would be conducive to  the
  public good, pursuant to section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and you
  are therefore liable to deportation in accordance with  section  3(5)  of
  the Immigration Act 1971. Pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
  2007, the Secretary of State will make a deportation  order  against  you
  unless you fall within one of the following exceptions set out in Section
  33 of the UK Border Act 2007:"

7. The difficulty with this is that section 32(5) obliges the  Secretary  of
State to make a deportation order in the case of a "foreign  criminal"  but
the appellant is clearly not a  "foreign  criminal"  for  the  purposes  of
section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007. The term "foreign criminal" for  the
purposes of that section  is  defined  with  reference  to  the  length  of
sentence (s32(2)) and, for the purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention  only
(section 32(3)) by reference to the categorisation of  the  crime.  Section
32(3) is not relevant here; the appellant does not claim to be  a  refugee.
Section 38(1)(b) shows that the critical term  of  12  months  imprisonment
necessary to be a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of  section  32  does
not apply where the 12 months term is achieved or  exceeded  by  reason  of
sentences being served consecutively. It  follows  that  the  reference  to
"Pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007,  the  Secretary  of
State will make a deportation order against you unless you fall within  one
of the following exceptions..." makes no sense. Further  the  reference  to
"Behaviour (Including bomb hoaxes/threats to kill etc)" seem excessive. The
appellant committed the offence of assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm
in a street fight outside a night club. The threatening  behaviour  was  (I
think, the respondent is not clear) contrary to section  4  of  the  Public
Order Act 1986 which is only triable summarily. Be  that  as  it  may,  the
disorder was part of  the  assault  and  attracted  a  concurrent  term  of
imprisonment that was significantly shorter than the term imposed  for  the
assault. Unattractive as it was, it was bad behaviour a very long way  from
"bomb hoaxes/threat to kill etc".

8. The appellant's then solicitors (not  Ash  Norton)  made  representations
based on  article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and
particularly the appellant's youth and  his  having  lived  in  the  United
Kingdom for over half his life, because he arrived in the United Kingdom in
2000 when he was 9 years old. The letter sought to raise an exception under
section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and relied on  paragraph  399A(b)  of
the HC 395. Paragraph 399A(b)  identifies  being  socially  and  culturally
integrated in the UK as one  of  three  factors  including  being  lawfully
resident in the UK for most of his life and there being  "very  significant
obstacles to his integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
deported" that are necessary under the rules  to  avoid  deportation.  They
letter did not contend that section 32(4) and (5) do not apply.

9. The respondent was not impressed. On 20 May 2014 the respondent issued  a
Notice of a  Decision  to  Make  a  Deportation  Order.  That  decision  is
explained in a letter dated 15 May 2014. It is plain from both the Decision
dated 20 May 2014 and the supporting letter dated  15  May  2014  that  the
Secretary  of  State  had  decided  that  the  appellant's  deportation  is
conductive to the public good but, although the details of the  appellant's
criminal behaviour are outlined, as far as I can ascertain the Secretary of
State has not explained why deportation is in the public interest  in  this
case except perhaps in the most general terms.

10.  The  letter  dated  15  May  2014  outlines  the  Appellant's  criminal
behaviour. It draws heavily on the sentencing remarks although  it  states,
wrongly, that the sentences were "to run concurrently making a total of  80
weeks imprisonment" when the  80  weeks  was  achieved  by  reason  of  the
sentences running consecutively. This is a fundamental and troubling error.

11. The letter then sets out the terms of paragraph  398  of  HC  395  which
provides that where a person claims that deportation would be  contrary  to
United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human  Rights
and certain preconditions exist then "the Secretary of State  in  assessing
that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it
does not, the public interest in deportation will  only  be  outweighed  by
other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and  above
those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

12. According to the explanatory letter dated 15 May 2014 (at page 4 of 7):
  "The Immigration Rules states that where a person has been sentenced to a
  period of imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than  4  years,  in
  assessing a claim that deportation would be contrary to Article  8  ECHR,
  the Secretary of State  will  consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
  apply".

13. There is no such provision in the rules.  The  phrase  "sentenced  to  a
period of imprisonment of at least 12 months" can be found at section 32(2)
of the UK Borders Act 2007 but it applies  only  to  a  "foreign  criminal"
which, as indicated above, has a precise meaning defined in  the  Act  that
does not include a person sentenced to at least 12 months imprisonment made
up of consecutive terms (see section 38(1)).

14. The obligation to consider if paragraph 399 or 399A apply is created  by
Paragraph 398. It arises under paragraph 398 in one of three  circumstance.
It arises under paragraph 398(a) where the person has been sentenced  to  a
period of imprisonment of at least 4 years and it clearly  does  not  apply
here. It also arises  under  paragraph  398(b)  where  a  person  has  been
"convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12  months.  It  is  equally
clear that this does not apply. The appellant has not been sentenced to  12
months imprisonment for "an offence" but for  a  series  of  offences.  The
phrase "period of imprisonment" is defined in the rules (paragraph 6 of  HC
395) and "has the same meaning as set  out  in  section  38(2)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007", that is it does not include  a  term  made  up  only  by
consecutive sentences. Finally the obligation arises under 398(c) where "in
the view of the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  "caused  serious
harm, or they are a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard
for the law". It has never been the respondent's case  that  the  appellant
was a "persistent offender" which is unsurprising given that the respondent
relies on only four offences committed within a  short  space  of  time  so
years ago, or that he has shown particular disregard for the law. Belatedly
the respondent argued that the appellant's crimes had caused serious  harm.
I have concluded that one of them did but I am not satisfied that this  was
the reason the decision to deport the appellant was made.

15. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal rely on  article  8  of
the European Convention on Human Rights  and  contend  that  the  appellant
benefits from the exceptions created by paragraph 399A. They do not rely on
the then permissible ground that the decision was not  in  accordance  with
the law. It may have been interesting if they had but the lawfulness of the
decision to deport was not in issue before me.

16. The First-tier Tribunal decided that the rules  were  relevant  and  the
rules required the appellant's deportation. It dismissed the appeal.

17. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  dated  6  February  2015,
contended broadly that the  Judge  should  have  allowed  the  appeal  with
reference to paragraph 399A(b) of HC 395 and should have applied part 5A of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  should  have  allowed
the appeal.

18. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  granted
by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum who said, inter alia:

  "5 The Judge found that most of the appellants' immediate family lived in
  the UK, that they left Thailand as seven and nines year  olds,  that  the
  bulk of their education  occurred in the UK, that the  appellant's  would
  struggle to read and write Thai although they did speak Thai,  that  they
  were unlikely to have  any  contact  with  their  father,  and  that  the
  appellants and their  family  would  regularly  return  to  Thailand  for
  holidays. The Judge found  that  through  their  mother,  the  appellants
  retained cultural ties to Thailand. It is not clear  on  what  evidential
  basis that  particular  finding  was  made.  The  Judge  found  that  the
  appellants were left by their mother in the overall care  of  friends  or
  relatives before they entered the UK but  this  related  to  a  situation
  almost 15 years prior to the date the appeals were  heard.  The  evidence
  before the Judge, which he did not dispute, was that the  appellants  had
  not family left in Thailand and that when  returning  for  holidays  they
  stayed in cheap hotels.

  6  Given this factual matrix, it is arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in
  concluding that the appellants had more than merely  remote  or  abstract
  links to Thailand, ..."

19. As indicated  above,  the  appeal  was  unsuccessful  before  the  Upper
Tribunal but its decision was set aside by  Court  of  Appeal  by  consent.
Although it was agreed that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had  to
be set aside the agreement was based on the application of an old  form  of
the rules Judge Blum was clearly  concerned  about  the  finding  that  the
Appellant had a support network in Thailand. I share his concern and  I  am
satisfied that that finding was unreliable too because it rejected contrary
evidence without explanation.

20. It was only after the hearing that I  realised  that,  contrary  to  the
parties' apparent position, it was not clear to me that the appellant was a
"foreign criminal" for the purposes of the Act or the rules.

21. I gave directions. The relevant part stated:

22. Whereas:

  On 14 June 2019 this appeal was argued before me and evidence was  called
  and it appears to me from reading the papers that the appellant has  been
  sent to prison for consecutive terms totalling 80 weeks but  he  has  not
  been sentenced to more than 40 weeks for any one offence, and there is no
  finding by the Respondent that he has caused serious or is  a  persistent
  offender:
                                 DIRECTIONS
  Each party is directed to state in writing to the Upper Tribunal no later
  than 7 days after receiving these directions:
  If the party agrees with the premises set out under the heading "Whereas"
  above, and if not, the reasons for disagreeing
  If the appellant is to  be  treated  as  a  "foreign  criminal"  for  the
  purposes of part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;
  If the party requires the appeal to be listed for further oral argument.

23. Mr Bramble replied with the "SSHD'S RESPONSE TO DIRECTIONS" and  I  gave
Further Directions stating that:

  The Tribunal wishes to hear argument directed to whether the Appellant is
  a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of  part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and, if he is not, how the appeal  should
  be determined.

24.  The  respondent's  Response  to  Directions  is  not   persuasive.   It
identifies the Reasons for  Deportation  Letter  of  15  May  2014  as  the
"initial justification for the act of deportation". I have criticised  that
letter above.

25. The Response asserts that the "new rules" and Part 5A of  the  2002  Act
apply but this misses the point. Clearly they apply in the sense that  they
are binding provisions if the appellant's circumstances come  within  them;
my concern was that he may not.

26. The Response then relied on the appellant having caused "serious  harm".
As far as I can see this is the first time that  the  that  contention  was
made. However, according to paragraph 8 of the Response, for  the  purposes
of section 117D(2)(c) the appellant has been  convicted  of  offences  that
have caused serious harm.

27. It is much more  difficult  to  decide  if  the  offending  has  "caused
serious harm" because the respondent has not identified that harm and  then
relied upon it. Indeed the respondent did not assert  in  the  decision  or
explanatory letter that the appellant had caused serious harm and  I  doubt
that the harm done was the reason for making the decision complained of.  I
am satisfied where "serious harm" is  a  precondition  for  exercising  her
powers the respondent must prove that the harm was done.

28.  Whilst  recognising  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  of  regarding
offences concerning the misuse of drugs as inherently serious the terms  of
the Act required that "the offence has caused serious harm"  which  is  not
necessarily the same as having been convicted of  a  serious  offence.  The
appellant's offending may well have contributed to an illegal industry that
has caused serious harm to society but,  in  complete  agreement  with  the
submission of Mr Malik, I find that the terms of the Act require harm  that
is traceable to the offender and no such harm is evident here. It  will  be
unusual that a "drugs" offence that is punished with something less than 12
months imprisonment can be said to  have  "caused  serious  harm".  If  the
respondent wishes to assert that such an offence has  caused  serious  harm
then  she  should  say  so  unequivocally  and  explain   her   view.   The
interpretation of statute must be a  matter  for  a  judge  rather  than  a
ministerial policy but a case specific explanation is likely to be entitled
to considerable weight. There is no such explanation here. The test set  by
Parliament does not relate to the seriousness  with  which  the  respondent
regards the offence but the harm that an offender has done.

29. No actual harm can be attributed  to  the  offence  of  possessing  with
intent to supply. Clearly there is good reason to find that misuse of drugs
does great harm to society but it does not  follow  that  this  appellant's
tiny contribution to that harm by possessing with intent to  supply  caused
serious harm to anyone and I find that it did not.

30. Little is known about the assault except that  the  conviction  was  for
assault causing actual bodily harm so it follows that  although  some  harm
was done it did not have be serious harm to justify the  conviction.  I  do
not regard the fact of conviction as  evidence  of  serious  harm.  In  the
explanatory letter of 15 May 2014 the respondent refers to the  seriousness
of the offence and quotes extensively from the sentencing  remarks  without
identifying their significance.

31. According to the sentencing remarks the victim was kicked  in  the  head
so that he became unconscious and there was "damage to an eye". H.H.  Judge
Critchlow also referred to "the ongoing effect on the  victim,  because  of
his eye injury". The judge referred to the  sentencing  council  guidelines
and described the assault as a "category 1  offence".   Neither  party  has
provided information about  that  but  the  guidelines  are  public  domain
documents which I have consulted.  According to the guidelines, in order to
be a category 1 offence there must be "greater harm  (serious  injury  must
normally be present) and higher culpability".  Without in any  way  wishing
to diminish the appellant's culpability  for  his  criminal  behaviour  the
judge was sympathetic to the provocative effect  of  remarks  made  by  the
victim and found them a reason, with others including the guilty  plea,  to
justify the sentence. However the judge said that the  starting  point  for
the offence was 18 months imprisonment.  I will of course assume  that  the
sentencing judge in Crown Court categorised the  offence  correctly  and  I
conclude that he was satisfied for the purpose of sentence that  there  was
serious injury. Whilst recognising that the sentencing judge had no  reason
to consider the immigration rules I am satisfied that the sentencing remark
show that the appellant's assault had done serious harm for the purposes of
the rules and for that reason paragraph 398(c) is satisfied and  paragraphs
399 and 399A had to be considered by the respondent.

32. Even so it is troubling that I have to reach this conclusion in  such  a
convoluted way. It is not hard to say "I  find  that  the  appellant  is  a
foreign criminal because, although only sentenced to 40 weeks imprisonment,
he did serious harm when he kicked  someone  unconscious  and  did  lasting
damage to his eye" if that is what is meant. If the  respondent  wanted  to
assert that the appellant is a  foreign  criminal  because  he  has  caused
serious harm then  she  should  have  said  as  much  and  she  could  have
identified that harm that that the  appellant  did  and,  if  it  were  not
obvious, she could have explained why it was serious. If she was not  in  a
position to do that then, without deciding the point, I incline to the view
that she should not have relied on his having caused serious harm. I fact I
am satisfied that she did not rely on that point until I asked for  further
submission and only obliquely then.

33. I anticipate that the appellant will complain that I have made no  clear
findings about the nature of the injury to the eye and that  I  should  not
have been satisfied in the  evidence  that  the  harm  was  serious.  After
considerable  thought  I  disagree  with  that  for  the   reasons   given,
particularly because of the finding that the  assault  was  a  "category  1
offence" but reaching that conclusion has involved a decree of analysis and
conjecture and assumptions about what was probable  that  should  not  have
been necessary. There was no evidence from the appellant that  he  had  not
caused serious harm.

34. It is therefore my finding that the  appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal
within the rules and part 5A but that is because he committed an offence of
assault that caused serious harm and for no other reason.

35. At the hearing on 14 June 2019 Mr Malik essentially contended  that  the
Upper Tribunal's approach was wrong and that the case needed to be reheard.
 The core point is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  confined  itself  to  a
consideration of the relevant Rules without entertaining the possibility of
an appeal being allowed on human rights grounds outside the Rules and  this
skewed its approach and compounded that error by considering the rules in a
version that no longer applied.  The Tribunal  also  erred  by  failing  to
consider in any detail Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002.

36. I appreciate that this is a gloss on seven distinct grounds  of  appeal.
I have considered them.  They  are  explained  very  fully  in  a  skeleton
argument prepared for the Court of Appeal by  Mr  Malik  but  I  regard  my
introduction as a suitable precis to explain what this appeal is about.

37. It follows that although  it  is  clear  to  me  that  the  respondent's
reasons for making a deportation order are misconceived an order  was  made
and, for the purposes of determining the human rights of the appellant  and
those close him I should have regard to both the requirements of the  rules
and to part 5A of the Act.

38. As already indicated, I found Mr Malik's criticisms  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision justified.

39. At the hearing before me on 14 June 2019 I heard evidence  and  argument
based on the rules.

40. The rules are relevant because they illuminate the public interest.

41. The term "partner" is not defined in  the  rules  for  the  purposes  of
"Part 13 Deportation". It is defined for the purposes of  Appendix  FM  and
that definition requires, in the case of people  who  are  not  married  of
affianced, living together (see GEN.1.2.(iv)) and  that  has  not  occurred
here. Not without hesitation I have concluded that this  definition  should
be used for  the  purposes  of  the  word  "partner"  in  part  13  of  the
Immigration Rules.

42. I have reached this conclusion because the  rule  following  D-ILRDR.1.4
headed "Deportation and Removal" provides for the Secretary of State or  an
Immigration Officer considering deportation  or  removal  in  the  case  of
someone who claims that their deportation or removal from the UK would be a
breach of the right to respect for private and family life under Article  8
of the Human Rights Convention to require the person to make an application
under "this Appendix or paragraph 276ADR(1), but if they are  not  required
to make an application Part 13 of these Rules will apply."

43. It would be extraordinary if the definition of "partner"  in  the  rules
depended not the nature of the  relationship  but  on  an  applicant  being
required to make a specific application.

44. Further the  paragraph  399(b)(ii)  requires  "compelling  circumstances
over and above those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM". It  would
be difficult, if not impossible, to give that  effect  if  the  meaning  of
"partner" for the purposes of a rule offering relief in the case  of  undue
harshness was harder to satisfy if people had cohabited.

45. There is no definition of "partner" in Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act.  The
prescribed characteristics under section 117D(1)  that  the  partner  is  a
British citizen or lawfully settled in the United Kingdom are  clearly  not
exhaustive.

46. The undefined words of the statute cannot be limited by a definition  in
the  immigration  rules.  Whilst  evidence  about   cohabitation   can   be
illuminating for the purpose of an article 8 balancing exercise and I  find
that a claimed to have a "partner", must, in the  absence  of  a  statutory
definition,  be  decided  after  an  evaluation  of  the  evidence  of  the
relationship, its duration and the parties' aspirations. I  do  not  accept
the cohabitation is necessary for a relationship to be partnership for  the
purposes of Part 5A.

47. At the hearing on 14 June 2019 Mr Malik drew to my  attention  a  bundle
paginated 1 to 64 that was prepared for the hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal
and called oral evidence.

48. The appellant gave evidence.  He adopted the  statement  in  the  bundle
dated 20 June 2018 and in that statement he said  that  he  relied  on  his
"previous statement". He identified himself and said how  he  came  to  the
United Kingdom in March 2000 with his brother to live  with  their  mother.
He expressed his regret for his criminal activity and pointed out  that  he
had kept out of trouble since he had been sent to prison.

49. I take particular note of the claim in the statement  dated  7  December
2014 where he said:

  "I had nothing left in Thailand as my  mother  decided  that  the  entire
  family must settle in the United Kingdom. My mother  divorced  my  father
  because of the domestic violence. I witnessed the violence my mother  was
  subjected to at the hands my father who was constantly beating her. As  a
  result, my mother decided to leave the country and  came  to  the  UK  to
  start a new life. She left me with my brother at the hands of our  father
  who was not taking care of us. He was an alcoholic  and  failed  to  take
  care of us. Thus, because of his bad behaviour,  our  mother  refused  to
  allow us to contact him since we arrived in the UK. I  do  not  know  his
  whereabouts. I do not know anything about  any  family  members  left  in
  Thailand as the  entire  family  is  settled  in  the  UK  including  our
  grandparents, uncles, cousins, nephews, niece and my brother and sisters.
  I do not have any other relatives in Thailand."

50. Before me he  confirmed  that  his  whole  family  were  in  the  United
Kingdom. He explained that he had one brother and three sisters, six nieces
and nephews and that his grandmother and uncle as well as cousins  live  in
the United Kingdom.

51. He had a girlfriend, Carly [H].  They had  known  each  other  for  some
time before the "got together on 2nd October 2012".  He  spoke  of  her  in
tender terms and said how they hoped to marry.

52. He offered the opinion that it would be unduly harsh for him to be  sent
to Thailand.  He said he left that country when he was 9 years old.  He had
no family or friends there.  He said he would have "no clue where to begin"
and his situation was aggravated by reason of his not being able to read or
write in Thai.  He also regarded it as unduly harsh to  separate  him  from
his family and his girlfriend.  He was  particularly  concerned  about  the
impact that his removal would have on his mother.

53. He was cross-examined.  He confirmed that he did not share a  home  with
Carly.  He had tried to discuss what they might do if  he  was  removed  to
Thailand but she did not want to discuss it.  She had a job.

54. He said that relatives on his father's side still lived in Thailand  but
he had had no contact with them since he came to the  United  Kingdom.   He
visited Thailand for a holiday in 2012 and went with his family.

55. He said that he spoke a little Thai but could  not  read  or  write  the
language.  He had not met up with relatives when he went to Thailand.

56. He was re-examined.   He  confirmed  that  he  did  not  live  with  his
girlfriend.  She lived with her mother and father, but they saw each  other
often and "stayed over"  at  each  other's  houses.   He  wanted  to  start
cohabitation when his circumstances were more certain.

57. The appellant's mother gave evidence.  She adopted her  statement  dated
20 June 2018.  She confirmed the appellant's immigration history which  was
not contentious.   She  said  that  her  son  had  learnt  from  his  being
imprisoned.

58. She felt that he was anxious  and  depressed.   She  deduced  that  from
conversations they had had.  Much was hanging over him.  She  regarded  him
as a "good person" who would not get  into  trouble.   She  confirmed  that
there was a strong family support network in the  United  Kingdom  and  his
relatives in the United Kingdom would "be devastated" if he had  to  leave.
She thought she would be "heartbroken" and was concerned  about  how  Carly
would feel.

59. She was cross-examined.

60. She said that she had holidays in Thailand most recently in  March  2019
when she stayed there for about eighteen days.  She did not visit  Thailand
every year.  She said she had no friends  left  in  Thailand.   There  were
religious reasons for going.  Her son spoke a little Thai.

61. The appellant's mother's husband, Mr  Roland  Berkeley,  gave  evidence.
He identified himself as a British national born  in  1957.   He  confirmed
that all of the appellant's relatives are in the United Kingdom.  He  first
met the family in 2005 when the appellant presented as an  "ordinary  young
boy getting  used  to  life  in  the  United  Kingdom".   His  relationship
developed with the boy and he supported him when he  went  to  prison.   He
said that the appellant is close to his relatives and  contributes  to  the
family with practical  advice  on  decorating  and  similar  projects.   He
described the appellant  as  a  "natural  engineer".   He  was  not  cross-
examined.

62. Ms Carly [H] gave evidence.  She adopted her statement of 20  June  2018
where she identified herself as a British citizen.  She said  how  she  was
attracted to the appellant because of his kindness and  selflessness.   She
described the impact of his removal to Thailand as "unimaginable".  It will
clearly undermine their plans to marry and make  a  family  together.   She
believed it unduly harsh to separate them in this way.

63. She was asked in  cross-examination  if  they  had  discussed  what  had
happened if he had to leave.  She said she could  not  read  or  speak  the
language in Thailand.  She did not want to break up and could  not  imagine
how she could live there.

64.  There  was  also  a  statement  from  Miss  [H]'s  mother.   She  wrote
approvingly of her relationship with the  appellant  and  the  relationship
between the appellant and her daughter and how it would be "extremely heart
breaking" for Ms [H] and herself if he had to go.  She would regard  it  as
losing her son.

65. I confirm too that I have seen the statements prepared  in  the  earlier
bundle.  They are in many ways similar to the more recent  statements  but,
in the case of the appellant, tell me a  little  more  about  his  personal
circumstances.  I note that he has obtained work on occasions but does  not
seem able to have held a job for very long. He has taken various courses.

66.  Having  reflected  on  the  evidence  and  the   submissions   of   the
representatives I find that I have, broadly, been told the  truth.   It  is
quite clear that the appellant came to the United Kingdom as a boy  aged  9
years.  He has been educated in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  has  committed
criminal offences which are entirely to his personal discredit but  he  was
last in trouble in September 2012.

67. I was satisfied that he has integrated into life in the United  Kingdom.
 He certainly speaks English and understands the British way  of  life.   I
accept that he has a close relationship with his  immediate  relatives  but
nothing that is out of the ordinary.  Rather  they  are  the  relationships
that are to be expected between young people and their  relatives  and  are
not something worthy  of  particular  weight  in  an  Article  8  balancing
exercise.  Certainly they are not anything like the important  relationship
that exists between parents and minor children or husband and wife.

68. Importantly I accept that the appellant has  no  relatives  in  Thailand
who are inclined to support him.  The claim that he has  lost  all  contact
with his father is told consistently and is consistent with the facts  that
his mother came to the United Kingdom bringing the children  without  their
father. I cannot know that there are no relatives  who  would  support  the
appellant in Thailand.  Often family ties are preserved for the sake of the
children and  often  more  distant  relatives  have  a  genuine  degree  of
friendship that survives a  breakup  between  partners  but  there  was  no
evidence that that is the case here and I have  been  given  no  reason  to
disbelieve the claim that the relatives are not  known  and  certainly  not
available for support.  This is important.

69. The relationship between the claimant and Ms [H] is  not  marriage.   It
is not characterised by cohabitation, at least not in the sense  of  having
their own home, but it is also a long lasting relationship.  I  accept  the
evidence from Ms [H] that she longs to be in a permanent  relationship  and
longs to start a family with the appellant and I accept the evidence of the
appellant's mother and Ms [H]'s mother that this  relationship  is  one  of
which the family approve.  This too is important. Clearly it is more than a
casual relationship. It has lasted for more than 6 years. Further there was
credible evidence that it is not  a  static  relationship  but  one  moving
towards creating even stronger "family life" when circumstances  permit.  I
am satisfied that the appellant and Ms [H] are to be  treated  as  partners
for the purposes of part 5A.

70. I consider now the refusal  letter  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State
relies.  This begins with rehearsing the appellant's criminal  convictions.
The details of the convictions  are  not  nearly  as  important  for  these
purposes as the fact of the conviction but he was convicted of  two  counts
of possessing a class B drug with intent to supply and a count  of  assault
occasioning actual bodily harm  and  a  charge  of  using  threatening  and
abusive words and behaviour.

71. The decision to  deport  is  made  because  it  is  concluded  that  his
deportation would be conducive to the public good.   As  I  have  explained
above, I am satisfied that the respondent misunderstood the length  of  the
sentences  that  were  passed  and  her  decision  that   the   appellant's
deportation is in the public good is unexplained.

72. It is the appellant's case that he was left with his father for  a  time
while his mother established herself in the United Kingdom and  because  of
his father's alcoholism he was not given proper care during that  time  and
it was a consequence of that that provoked his mother to saying there would
be no contact after they had arrived in the United Kingdom.

73. The most telling thing about his integration in the  United  Kingdom  is
that notwithstanding reservations expressed in the OASys Report  about  his
future there has been no evidence that he has committed  further  offences.
The offences were now committed 6 years ago.  I must conclude that  he  has
put his offending behind him.  I say immediately this does not mean that he
is somehow entitled to remain.  The point  is  that  for  the  purposes  of
integration this is not a young man who is  disaffected  with  society  and
fixed on a life of crime.

74. I note it was part of  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasoning  that  the
appellant had lived with his father's family before arriving in the  United
Kingdom in 2002 and that he could readapt and that it is "considered likely
that your client or member of your client's immediate family in the  United
Kingdom have maintained contact with family and friends in Thailand".   The
first point makes no sense in the light of the appellant's  claim  to  have
been so ill treated by his father that his mother forbade  further  contact
and the second is entirely speculative.  There is no evidence to show  that
there are relatives able to help.  It was  clearly  the  Appellant's  case,
raised in the solicitors' letter of 20 November 2013, that he had lost  all
contact with his father because of domestic abuse arising  from  alcoholism
and that he had no  ties  with  Thailand.  It  does  not  follow  from  its
longevity that the claim  is  true  but  the  respondent  appears  to  have
rejected it for no good reason whatsoever.

75. I prefer evidence to speculation.  I find that there  are  no  relatives
available to support this appellant  in  Thailand.   There  might  be  some
friends who can give some nominal support because the family have kept some
contacts there but there is  no  basis  for  concluding  that  anyone  with
sufficient concern to help  the  appellant  re-establish  himself  in  that
country.

76. I accept the evidence that the claimant does not write or  read  in  the
Thai language.  He has some ability to speak the language.  However he  has
not spoken the language naturally except within the  immediate  family  for
many years.  I have no reason to assume that his  mother  and  her  husband
speak Thai.  I accept that the claimant can speak some Thai but it  is  the
Thai of a child not a mature man.

77. For the purposes of paragraph 399(b) I find that the appellant does  not
have a "partner" within the meaning of the rules. The relationship does not
meet the definition in Appendix FM which, I find, applies.

78. I accept  he  has  a  close  relationship  with  Ms  [H]  and  that  the
relationship began when he had indefinite leave to remain and so his status
was not precarious. It would be hard for her to live in  Thailand.  She  is
not an educated person.  She has no knowledge at all of the culture or  the
language.  She would not be going into an environment where her partner was
there to support and assist her because he too would  be  struggling  under
considerable difficulty. However the  provisions  of  paragraph  399(b)(ii)
require that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  partner  (she  is  not  a
partner) to live in Thailand for "compelling circumstances over  and  above
those described in EX.2 of Appendix FM. This means something over and above
the "insurmountable obstacles" necessary to continue  their  life  together
and they are not present. It would not  "unduly  harsh"  for  Miss  [H]  to
remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant. It would be  very  hard
and hurtful and would dash her hopes and plans but, if I may  be  permitted
that clich�, that is what deportation does.

79. I find that Miss [H] and the appellant do enjoy a "partnership" for  the
purposes of section 117(5) but for  similar  reasons  the  adverse  effects
would not be "unduly harsh" for the purpose of Exception 2 at subsection 5.

80. Separate consideration of the requirements  of  Article  8  outside  the
rules does not help the appellant. If I am wrong and he does  not  enjoy  a
partnership for the purposes  of  the  section  he  and  Ms  [H]  enjoy  an
important close supporting relationship that is at the "family life" end of
the "private and family life" spectrum and is, I find, entitled to  respect
but it is not enough to overcome the public  interest  in  the  appellant's
deportation.

81. I am satisfied that for the purposes of  paragraph  399A  the  appellant
has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life  and
that he is socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom.
Clearly there would be significant obstacles in the way of his  integration
into life in Thailand. He has no adult experience of  living  the  Thailand
except as an occasional holiday maker. He cannot read or write Thai and his
spoken Thai is limited although no doubt it would improve quite quickly. He
has no obvious trade and, importantly, no one to support him or  guide  him
as he strove to find shelter and employment  in  a  country  where  he  has
little experience.

82. When considering Exception 2 under s117C I remind myself  of  the  words
of Sales LJ in Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
EWCA Civ 813 that:

  "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative  judgment  to  be
  made as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider  in  terms
  of understanding how life in the society in that other country is carried
  on and a capacity to participate in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
  opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on  a  day-to-day
  basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time a  variety
  of human relationships to give substance to the individual's  private  or
  family life."

83. He left Thailand when  he  was  9  years  old.  He  is  illiterate.  His
capacity to speak the language is limited.  He  has  no  one  to  help  and
support him. I am satisfied that there will be difficulties in  integrating
into society in Thailand.

84. He has made significant progress in  putting  behind  him  his  criminal
past but he has done that with considerable familial support, including the
support of Ms [H].

85. The appellant's mother visits Thailand from time to time but she has  no
strong links there and she has  responsibilities  to  her  husband  in  the
United Kingdom. She cannot be expected to return with  the  appellant  help
him start his new life. Neither can she be expected to much use.

86. Notwithstanding the advantages of relative youth, apparent  good  health
and some knowledge gained by occasional visits to Thailand I cannot see how
he can cope.

87. I am required to balance his rights, and the rights of  those  who  care
about him,  with  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  Given  the  thin
reasoning by the respondent and the short prison sentence I put the  public
interest at a low level but it still an interest that requires  deportation
unless at least one of the exceptions applies. I find that there  would  be
very significant obstacles in the way of integration into Thai society.

88. I have noted the points in section 117B that apply in  all  "Article  8"
cases. He speaks English and, I accept, although the evidence is  thin,  he
will earn a living. His family would encourage him to  do  that  but  these
points add little if anything to his case. They are  relevant  because  his
position would be worse if they were not satisfied.

89. I remind myself that the appellant did assault someone and  damaged  his
eye but the best evidence I have about the seriousness of that  offence  is
the sentence of 40 weeks imprisonment.

90. I find that his deportation would  be  a  disproportionate  interference
with his human rights.

Notice of Decision

91. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I  substitute  a
decision allowing the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 February 2020               |




