
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00003/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 November 2013                            |On 11 November 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

       Lord Boyd of Duncansby sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                     NKM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Banda, Legal Representative. Duncan Lewis
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1.       This matter comes before us  following  the  decision  of  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 23 September 2013  to  grant  permission  to
      appeal against the determination of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal
      chaired  by  Judge  Walters  dismissing  the  appellant's  deportation
      appeal.


Background

   2.       The appellant was born on 16 December 1978 and is  a  Zimbabwean
      national from Harare. He entered the UK as a student in June 2004 with
      two years' leave to enter. He then overstayed and in January 2005  was
      convicted of the first in a series of several  convictions,  the  most
      recent of which was on 12 November 2012. In 2009 he claimed asylum but
      that was refused in January 2012. In December 2012 a  deportation  was
      made by virtue of section 32)5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

   3.       The appellant's case is that he would be at risk  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe on account of his support for the MDC.  He  claimed  to  have
      attended two rallies in Zimbabwe and to have  distributed  flyers.  He
      also claimed that he had been attacked by ZANU PF supporters  in  2002
      but managed to escape them. His mother  had  told  him  that  ZANU  PF
      supporters had continued to visit since his departure.  The  appellant
      had a child in the UK with a former partner. In 2005 he was  diagnosed
      as HIV positive. In 2008 he got married.

   4.       The panel considered the appellant's convictions  and  found  he
      showed no signs of  remorse  and  had  done  nothing  to  address  his
      dishonesty.  It  considered   that   there   were   many   significant
      contradictions in his account of events in Zimbabwe and  rejected  his
      claim that he had been attacked by ZANU PF  and  that  supporters  had
      continued to look for him over the next ten years. It found he had not
      taken part in any political activities in the UK.  The  Tribunal  also
      noted that appellant's delayed asylum claim. It concluded that he  had
      not made out his case for international protection.

   5.       The panel also gave consideration  to  the  appellant's  medical
      condition but found that it did not engage Articles 2, 3 or 8. It took
      account of the public  interest  in  his  deportation  balancing  that
      against the factors argued in his favour. It found that there  was  no
      evidence that he was in contact with his daughter particularly as  her
      mother wanted to exclude the appellant from having any contact and  no
      civil proceedings for  contact  had  been  initiated.   In  any  event
      neither the child, nor the mother (both Zimbabwean nationals) had  any
      leave to remain here and there was no evidence to show that the  child
      had lived here for a continuous period of seven years.

   6.       The panel considered the appellant's marriage but noted that his
      wife had not attended the hearing and had not written  in  support  of
      it. There being no  evidence  of  contact  with  her  other  than  the
      appellant's oral evidence, the panel concluded that  family  life  had
      not been established. It accepted  that  there  was  private  life  on
      account of his presence here and a short period of work but found that
      in all the circumstances his deportation was justified.





Error of Law

   7.       The appellant's case was that the panel had failed  to  consider
      and apply the country guidance case of  CM  (EM  -  Country  guidance;
      disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC), the Country of Origin
      Information Report and the Operational Guidance Note (OGN) of February
      2013.  It was maintained  this  information  was  in  the  appellant's
      bundle and in the skeleton argument  relied  upon.  The  grounds  then
      proceed to set out the head note of CM and maintain that none  of  the
      principles therein were applied.

   8.       The grounds also argue that the panel  gave  inadequate  reasons
      for its findings and that there was  no  consideration  given  by  the
      panel to the delay on the part  of  the  respondent  in  deciding  the
      asylum claim.

   9.       At the hearing before us, Ms Banda only  made  submissions  with
      respect to the panel's failure to apply CM.

  10.       Having considered  the  submissions  made  by  the  parties,  we
      indicated that we would be upholding the determination and we now give
      our reasons for so doing.

Conclusions

  11.       We accept that, where applicable,  country  guidance  should  be
      considered and applied. It would have been preferable, in  this  case,
      had the panel shown that CM had been considered even if  it  was  then
      found to have no bearing on the case or its outcome. To  that  extent,
      the panel did err. However, for the following reasons,  we  find  that
      the error does not require the setting aside of the determination.

  12.       The first point to make is that even if CM had been  considered,
      it would not have assisted  the  appellant.  Ms  Banda  was  asked  to
      explain how the principles set out in the head note (as  contained  in
      the grounds) would have supported the appellant's case. She relied  on
      notes 5, 7 and 9 which pertain to returns to Harare. However, even  if
      the appellant were returning to a high density part of the city, given
      his lack of MDC profile it is difficult to  see  how  he  could  bring
      himself into the categories of those who might feature of  a  list  of
      those targeted for harassment (head note 5). The appellant has no  sur
      plus political profile. His activities in Zimbabwe, even if  accepted,
      were extremely low level  in  that  they  amounted  to  attending  two
      rallies and distributing flyers. He  has  family  who  remained  there
      after he left. It was not accepted there was any interest  in  him  by
      ZANU PF supporters over the following years. There being no real  risk
      of serious harm in Harare, the issue of  relocation  to  another  area
      (head note 7) does not  arise.  Ms  Banda  did  not  explain  how  the
      Tribunal's failure to refer to the improvement of the economy in  head
      note 9 has disadvantaged the appellant.

  13.       The second point to be made is that although CM was contained in
      the appellant's bundle, it may be seen from the Tribunal's  Record  of
      Proceedings that it was only alluded to in the briefest  of  terms  in
      the submissions and that contrary to what the grounds assert, it  does
      not feature at all in the skeleton argument except for being mentioned
      in the list of cases contained in the appellant's bundle (on page 1).

  14.       Third, no evidence was called on whether the appellant lived  in
      a high, medium or low density area of Harare or on the possibility  of
      relocation elsewhere. In the absence of any evidence on this issue and
      the lack of submissions, either orally or in the skeleton argument, it
      is difficult to see how the panel could have applied CM to  the  facts
      of the appellant's case even if it had been considered.

  15.       Ms Banda did not seek to make submissions on any  of  the  other
      grounds for permission and we need not therefore  address  those.  She
      did however raise  a  new  ground  -  that  the  panel  had  erred  in
      considering the appellant's convictions  for  offences  of  dishonesty
      when  assessing  credibility.  Quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  no
      application for permission to vary the grounds was sought, it is plain
      from the determination that the panel  did  not  use  the  appellant's
      dishonesty as a means for discrediting his asylum account.  The  panel
      pointed out inherent inconsistencies within the accounts given,  noted
      the seven year delay in the making of the asylum claim and the lack of
      any political activity in the UK and concluded that the claim had  not
      been made out. That was a findings fully open to them on the evidence.



  16.       Ms Banda did not seek to challenge any of the  adverse  findings
      and conclusions pertaining to the appellant's health, section  55  and
      his marriage.

  17.       The Tribunal made an anonymity order which we continue.

Decision

  18.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make an error  of  law  and  the
      decision to dismiss the deportation appeal is upheld.


Signed:





Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

Date:  7 November 2013
