
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/00099/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |   Decision and Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 27 September 2017                      |   On 11 October 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                             DANIEL IONEL ANCUTA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Reyaz, Rasools Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Romania born on the 12th November  1995.
     He appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Malik) to dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to deport  him  in   accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


 2. The reason for the decision to deport was that on the 29th January 2016
    Mr Ancuta was convicted at Preston  Crown  Court  of  the  offences  of
    Affray and Assault and sentenced to one year in  prison.   It  was  his
    fourth offence since  August  2014.   The  Respondent  considered  this
    offence  serious  enough  to  warrant  expulsion,  finding   that   the
    Appellant's removal was justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  and
    security in accordance with Regulation 21.  The Respondent premised her
    conclusions on her finding that the Appellant had not demonstrated that
    he attracted any enhanced level of protection  against  explusion,  for
    instance by demonstrating that he had established a permanent right  of
    residence in the UK under Regulation 15.

 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the first  question
    that it was asked to determine was whether the Appellant  had  in  fact
    resided in this country for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  in
    accordance with the Regulations.  It  determined  that  matter  in  his
    favour [at paragraph 22] and  there  has  been  no  challenge  to  that
    finding.

 4. The next question that the Tribunal was required to address was whether
    the Respondent was  correct  to  have  deported  the  Appellant.    The
    relevant legal framework for that enquiry was Regulation 21 of the 2006
    Regs. This provides:

           21.-(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is
         necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the Convention
         on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly of the
         United Nations on 20th November 1989(1).

           (5) Where a relevant decision is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
         the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c)the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d)matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
         decision;

         (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
         justify the decision.

           (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.

           (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of public
         health-

         (a)a disease that does not have epidemic potential as defined by
         the relevant instruments of the World Health Organisation(2) or is
         not a disease to which section 38 of the Public Health (Control of
         Disease) Act 1984(3) applies (detention in hospital of a person
         with a notifiable disease) shall not constitute grounds for the
         decision; and

         (b)if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, diseases
         occurring after the three month period beginning on the date on
         which he arrived in the United Kingdom shall not constitute grounds
         for the decision.


 5. It will be observed that Regulation 21(3) imports  a  higher  level  of
    protection for those who can establish that they have a permanent right
    of residence in the UK. In those cases the Respondent  is  required  to
    demonstrate that there are "serious grounds" of public policy/security,
    not simply "grounds" as in sub-section (5). That then, was the test  to
    be applied here, given the Tribunal's findings on that matter.

 6. The Appellant's point in this appeal was that it is not clear from this
    determination that this was the test that  the  Tribunal  did  in  fact
    apply.  The proportionality of the decision is considered in  paragraph
    30.  The Tribunal concludes that the decision  of  the  Respondent  was
    justified "with reference to Regulation 21(5) and (6)". No reference is
    made to Reg 21(3) or to the "serious grounds" test therein.

 7. On the 14th September 2017 the Home Office Specialist Appeals  Team  in
    London filed a Rule 24 response it which the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department conceded that the error of law  had  been  established.
    The Tribunal is therein invited to re-make the decision in the appeal.

 8. Having got this far, Mr Reyaz invited me to simply allow the appeal. He
    did so for this reason. At the hearing,  he  stated,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had expressly conceded that the expulsion could  not
    be justified if the Appellant  had  a  permanent  right  of  residence,
    because the offence was  not  serious  enough  to  meet  the  threshold
    required  by  Regulation  21(3).    This  concession  is  recorded   at
    paragraph 29:

         "The respondent's representative acknowledged that if the appellant
         had acquired a permanent right of residence, that the offending had
         to be more serious to justify exclusion and he left this for me  to
         decide..."

 9. Read in the context of the decision overall, I took this to  mean  that
    the HOPO accepted that 'serious grounds' could not be demonstrated, and
    that he was leaving the question of permanent residence for  the  judge
    to decide. That was certainly the reading favoured by Mr Reyaz, and  it
    reflected his understanding of the submissions made at a hearing  where
    he was present.  For the Respondent Mr Mills very  fairly  agreed  that
    the HOPO's own minute was consistent with this:


         "Pressed by the IJ, I conceded that if the appellant  had  acquired
         the right to permanent residence, his offending - serious as it was
         - was unlikely to be of sufficient gravity to justify expulsion"


    The note went on to accurately predict the  finding  of  the  Tribunal:
    "the IJ will likely find that the appellant has acquired the  right  to
    permanent residence, bearing in mind our concession that he arrived  in
    2009".

10. Having had regard to these three sources, I find it beyond  doubt  that
    the HOPO did make that concession. The parties before me agree that  in
    those circumstances I could do no other than find that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is set aside by consent,  and  to  re-make  the
    decision in the appeal by allowing it.


      Decisions


11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


12. The appeal is allowed.


13. There is no order for anonymity.
                                                   [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                 27th September 2017




