
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 28 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                                     HD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazeli
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  He  is  married  to  a  British
    citizen and they have two young children.  The  respondent  decided  to
    make a deportation order against the  appellant  in  March  2014.   The
    appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following
    an oral hearing and by a decision promulgated on 24  October  2014  the
    appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I
    summarise the grounds seeking permission as follows:-

      a) The panel was satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with his children  who  are  under
         the age of 18 and who are British  citizens.   There  was  evidence
         supporting the appellant's claim that  he  takes  the  children  to
         nursery and to GP appointments.   The  panel  had  the  benefit  of
         seeing the appellant and his  children  interact  (albeit  briefly)
         during the hearing.  Nevertheless, the Tribunal concluded  that  it
         was not satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
         live in Vietnam, or that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to
         remain in the UK without him.  That conclusion is inconsistent with
         the evidence.

      b) The Tribunal found at paragraph 50 that the appellant and his  wife
         are in a genuine and subsisting relationship but was not  satisfied
         that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 399(b) of  the
         Immigration  Rules.   Although  the  appellant  may  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 399(b)(i) the  Tribunal  had  a  duty  to
         consider the effect that deportation would have on the  appellant's
         wife who is a British citizen.  The Tribunal was bound to  consider
         the impact of deportation  of  a  foreign  national  on  a  British
         national spouse.

      c) The Tribunal failed to make any reference  to  Section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.   Generally,  the
         Tribunal failed to consider the best interests of the children  and
         the effect on the children if their father were to be deported.

      d) The Tribunal did  not  consider  adequately  or  at  all  the  oral
         evidence of Mrs BC, the family's close friend, who stated that  the
         appellant is the primary  carer  for  the  children.   He  is  very
         important to them.  He is central to their lives  and  without  him
         she imagines that they will be scarred for life.  If they are  sent
         to Vietnam she would be very worried  about  how  they  would  cope
         there.

      e) The Tribunal failed to consider adequately the  appellant's  family
         life in the UK in light of the case law.

 3. The judge granting permission to appeal stated that  although  most  of
    the grounds are not  arguable,  it  is  arguable  that  in  failing  to
    consider the best interests  of  the  children  and  make  findings  in
    relation to their best interests, the panel may have  made  a  material
    error of law.  Both children  and  the  appellant's  wife  are  British
    citizens.  Findings in relation to the children's  best  interests  may
    arguably have affected the outcome of the proportionality exercise.

 4. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response submitting that the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed itself appropriately.  Although there  is  no  direct
    reference to Section 55  in  the  totality  of  the  determination  the
    Tribunal took account of the relevant issues, not  least  of  which  is
    that the children are in  full-time  nursery  despite  the  appellant's
    claimed presence at home.  The children are not apparently cared for by
    the appellant who cannot  work.   Both  children  are  very  young  and
    clearly able to adapt to  life  elsewhere.   In  the  light  of  recent
    legislation and current case law it is not unreasonable for the  family
    to be split.  Both parties were aware of the  appellant's  status  when
    the children were conceived.  The appellant evaded immigration  control
    on two occasions.  Comments are then made  in  the  response  that  the
    panel failed to deal  with  other  matters,  not  the  subject  of  the
    application to appeal and which do not form any part of a cross appeal.
     I have therefore not taken those matters into account.

 5. I heard submissions.  Ms Victor-Mazeli for the appellant relied on  all
    of the grounds, but in the main  relied  on  the  submission  that  the
    Tribunal failed to consider the true impact  on  the  children  of  the
    appellant's deportation.

My consideration

 6. At paragraph 44 and onwards of the determination the  Tribunal  directs
    itself correctly on the law.  Under 398(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    where a person claims that their deportation will be  contrary  to  the
    UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,  the
    deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public  good
    and in the public interest because the appellant in this case has  been
    convicted of an offence for which he has been sentenced to a period  of
    imprisonment of less than four years, but at least twelve months.  This
    is  so  unless  outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    399 and 399A of the said Rules.

 7. What the Tribunal found and reasoned in paragraphs 48  and  49  of  the
    determination are that the Tribunal was not satisfied that it would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to live in Vietnam, or that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK without the  appellant.   The
    Tribunal reasoned that the children are very young (they are aged 3 and
    2), and whilst accepting that initially the removal  of  the  appellant
    would create a considerable void in their lives, they are young  enough
    to adapt and to continue with their lives in the UK with their  mother.
    The Tribunal recognised that they could not be  required  to  accompany
    their father.  That would be a decision that would have to be taken for
    them and they would be able to keep in contact with him through various
    means of communication.  No reasons were advanced why  they  could  not
    visit him in Vietnam.

 8. The Tribunal was satisfied that the appellant and his  wife  are  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  That relationship began in  2003.
    There have been interruptions to it.  The relationship was formed at  a
    time when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  They went through  a
    traditional form of marriage and had two children in the full knowledge
    that the appellant could be removed.  The  appellant  "has  not  helped
    himself by absconding on two occasions from immigration detention ...".
     The Tribunal expressed that it had given careful consideration to  the
    position of the appellant's wife who has been here since the age of  14
    and who very recently, in May 2014, acquired British citizenship.   The
    panel took into account that the wife could not be removed but she  has
    a choice and would not find it unduly harsh to return to Vietnam.   She
    came to the United Kingdom as a teenager and has adapted to life  here.
    The panel could find no reasons why she could not readapt  to  life  in
    her home country  whose  language  she  still  speaks.   The  panel  at
    paragraph 53 found that the children are in full-time  nursery  and  it
    was not accepted that the children's mother would not be able  to  find
    alternative additional childcare arrangements in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant.  Further findings and comments were made in paragraph 57  of
    the determination viewing the overall position.

 9. Although it is true that the panel has  not  referred  specifically  to
    paragraph 55 or stated in terms that the best interests of the children
    are a primary consideration, it is nevertheless apparent that the panel
    very much had the best interests of the children in  mind,  and  indeed
    considered the interests of  the  family  as  a  whole.   The  Tribunal
    considered also the consequences of the appellant  being  deported  and
    the effect upon the children and the appellant's wife if that happened.



Notice of Decision

10. The panel could have placed additional wording in  the  decision  which
    might have avoided  any  attempt  at  further  appeal.   However,  read
    overall this is a careful determination that reveals no error  of  law,
    such that the appeal should be reheard or for any other reason requires
    the circumstances to be further examined.

11. For these reasons the decision of the panel in the First-tier  Tribunal
    is upheld.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


