
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00085/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2013                                |On 4 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    N T N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:        Ms V Pearson, of Brown & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against a determination by a panel  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal comprising Judge Handley and Ms Singer, promulgated  on  14
   March 2013, dismissing her appeal against deportation.

2) The grant of permission summarises the grounds of appeal as (1)  adopting
   the respondent's reasoning without indicating the panel's reasoning;  (2)
   wrongly concluding that the existence of a particular  social  group  was
   not disclosed; (3) failing to assess risk on return, including absence of
   consideration of an expert report; and (4) failing properly  to  consider
   the medical evidence.  While ground 1 was thought to be of no  substance,
   the other grounds were arguable, particularly as the  panel  appeared  to
   have overlooked the expert report entirely, and to  have  considered  the
   medical report only in relation to availability of treatment  in  Vietnam
   and not in other relevant respects.

3) The Presenting Officer correctly conceded that the panel erred, and  that
   its decision could not stand.

4) The appellant's inventory in the First-tier Tribunal  includes  a  report
   by Professor Mark Sidel of the University of  Wisconsin-Madison.   It  is
   relied upon extensively in the appellant's written submissions, the first
   item in the inventory.  The determination does not mention the report  or
   the  submissions  based  upon  it.   That  error   alone   requires   the
   determination to be set aside.

5)  The  inventory  includes  psychological  reports  by   Dr   Tagg,   also
   extensively relied upon in the submissions.  The determination  does  not
   deal adequately with those reports.

6) Ms Pearson indicated that as the appellant's  relevant  personal  history
   is (almost entirely) common ground,  it  was  not  anticipated  that  any
   further oral evidence would be taken from her at the next hearing.

7) If the appellant does propose to offer any further  evidence,  notice  of
   that should be given not less than 14 days  in  advance  of  the  further
   hearing, with an explanation of why an interpreter might be required.

8) The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  in  its
   entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are  to  stand.   Under
   section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of  Practice  Statement  7.2  the
   nature and extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision  to
   be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-
   tier Tribunal.  The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  chosen  to
   reconsider the case are not to include Judge Handley or Ms Singer.

9) No anonymity order has been requested or made, but in view of the  nature
   of the case this determination has been anonymised.

                               [pic]
                                4 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
