

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00674/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 17 August 2015                             |On 22 September 2015         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     AK

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Osmans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  and  I  find
that it is appropriate to continue the order. I make  clear  that  anonymity
is not granted in order to protect the appellant's reputation following  his
conviction  for  a  criminal  offence  but   because   the   case   involves
consideration of the welfare of four young  children.  Unless  and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family. This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  15
    March 2013 to deport him from  the  UK  following  his  conviction  for
    communicating false information with intent for which he was  sentenced
    to three years imprisonment.

2.    The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 19 June  2013.
    The respondent was granted permission to appeal against  the  decision.
    In a decision dated 05 September 2013 the Upper Tribunal found that the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in mischaracterising the factors weighing  in
    favour of the appellant and undervaluing the factors  relating  to  the
    public interest in  deportation.  The  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the
    decision and went on to dismiss the appeal. The appellant  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. In  a  decision  dated  27
    November 2014 the Court  of  Appeal  noted  that  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal erred in proceeding  to  determine  the
    appeal without reference to the scheme contained  in  Part  13  of  the
    immigration rules. The appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal. At  a
    hearing on 01 June 2015 it was agreed  that  the  decision  finding  an
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision was maintained but the
    appeal fell to be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

3.    At the hearing on 17  August  2015.  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    parties, which have been noted in my record of  proceedings  and  where
    relevant are incorporated into my findings.

Decision and reasons

Factual circumstances

4.    The facts of the case are not in dispute. The appellant is a  45  year
    old man from Pakistan who first came to the  UK  in  August  2001  with
    entry clearance as a visitor. It is unclear when the appellant met  his
    wife (who is now a British citizen but is of Pakistani origin) but they
    were married in the UK on 10  July  2003.  The  appellant  was  granted
    further multiple entry visit  visas  but  it  is  not  clear  from  the
    evidence exactly how much time he spent in the UK in the  period  2001-
    2008. On 12 November 2008 he applied for leave to remain as the  spouse
    of a British citizen. The application was refused on 02 April 2009  but
    the appellant was granted Discretionary Leave to Remain until 02  April
    2012. The immigration summary contained in the  respondent's  PF1  form
    states that leave was granted "on Article 8 grounds due to  his  wife's
    depressive illness, attempted suicide and the requirement to  care  for
    the children. It was also deemed that as Mrs [K] was granted status  as
    a refugee family life could not be continued in Pakistan."  The  couple
    have four children aged 13, 11, 9 and 1 year  old.  All  four  children
    were born in the UK and are British citizens.

5.    On 25 November  2011  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  three  years
    imprisonment for Communicating False Information with Intent. It  seems
    that his actions  arose  out  of  a  dispute  with  some  of  his  work
    colleagues. The appellant  sent  a  total  of  73  letters  to  various
    organisations making false accusations and threatened  that  explosions
    would take place in different places. The sentencing judge  made  clear
    that this had a number of grave consequences. Firstly,  he  made  false
    accusations against a number  of  people  who  were  totally  innocent.
    Secondly, he involved the security services in an  enormous  amount  of
    work investigating false threats when their resources should have  been
    properly directed to real threats. Thirdly, the organisations  involved
    had to increase security and members of the public were put in fear for
    no good reason. The sentencing judge took into account  the  depressive
    illness that the appellant had been suffering from but made clear  that
    it was only relevant to "a minor degree".  The  judge  also  took  into
    account the fact that the appellant was of previously  good  character.
    He was given credit for his guilty plea  but  this  was  reduced  to  a
    certain extent due to  the  lateness  of  the  plea.  Given  the  grave
    consequences of the offence the appellant  was  sentenced  to  3  years
    imprisonment.

6.    The  pre-sentence  report  dated  23  November  2011  noted  that  the
    appellant did not have a pattern of offending but given the  nature  of
    the offence for which he had been convicted he was  assessed  to  be  a
    medium risk of causing harm to others but at low risk  of  reoffending.
    The psychiatric report of Dr Frank Farnham that was prepared at  around
    the same time concluded that the appellant was suffering  from  a  mild
    depressive illness but in the period that the offences  were  committed
    the symptoms he described suggested that he  had  been  suffering  from
    clinical depression of "moderate severity".

7.    In a letter dated 08 March 2013 his then  probation  office  confirmed
    that the appellant had made excellent progress in prison and was  in  a
    position of trust. He had made positive use of his time in  prison.  He
    attended courses and reflected  on  his  offending  behaviour.  He  was
    granted periods of home leave  and  returned  to  prison  in  a  timely
    manner. He was assessed as low risk of  reoffending  and  low  risk  of
    serious harm to the public. In a more recent letter dated 12  September
    2014 his probation officer confirmed that the appellant  had  completed
    his Licence, had fully adhered to the  conditions  and  was  no  longer
    required to attend probation appointments.

Legal Framework

8.    In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  the  Court  of  Appeal
    concluded that the immigration rules relating to deportation provided a
    "complete code" to Article 8. This was largely because  the  provisions
    contained in paragraph 398 of the immigration rules were deemed  to  be
    sufficiently wide to encompass a full proportionality assessment.  Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")
    introduced a statutory requirement for courts  and  tribunals  to  have
    regard  to  certain  factors  when  considering  "the  public  interest
    question". Nothing in the wording of sections 117A-D  would  appear  to
    undermine the  assessment  under  the  immigration  rules.  The  public
    interest factors outlined in Part 5A can be taken into account as  part
    of the overall proportionality assessment that takes place  within  the
    context   of   the   immigration   rules:   see   Bossade   (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415.

9.    It is clear that the combined effect of the UKBA  2007,  section  117C
    and the amendments made  to  Part  13  of  the  immigration  rules  now
    emphasise the significant weight that should be  given  to  the  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals. The wording of  paragraph  398
    of the immigration rules  reflects  the  basic  principle  outlined  in
    section 117C(1) NIAA 2002 that the deportation of a foreign criminal is
    in the public interest. The sliding scale  of  offending  contained  in
    paragraph 398 and section 117C also recognises the principle outline in
    section 117C(2) that the  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a
    foreign criminal, the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation.
    The sliding scale shows that a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of more than four years will  only  be  able  to
    resist deportation if there are "very  compelling  circumstances"  that
    outweigh the public interest. However, in cases involving sentences  of
    less than four years the scheme recognises that Article 8 rights  might
    still  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   deportation   in   certain
    circumstances if the foreign criminal meets  the  requirements  of  the
    exceptions contained in paragraphs 399  and  399A  (also  reflected  in
    sections 117C(4) and 117C(5)).

10.   Paragraph 399(a) requires a person to have a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child who is either  a  British
    citizen or who has lived continuously in the UK for a period of 7 years
    immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision. If it would
    be "unduly harsh" for the child to leave the UK in order to live in the
    country to which the person is to be deported and is "unduly harsh" for
    them to remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported  then
    the person will meet the requirement of the exception.

11.   Although the exact wording of paragraph 399(b) relating to a  person's
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner is  more  convoluted
    and is not entirely in harmony  with  the  test  reflected  in  section
    117C(5) the essence of the requirements are  essentially  the  same  as
    those relating to children i.e. whether it would be "unduly harsh"  for
    the partner to live in the country of proposed deportation  or  in  the
    alternative whether it would be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the  partner  to
    remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

12.   In the recent decision of MAB (para 399; "unduly  harsh")  USA  [2015]
    UKUT 00435 the Tribunal found that the phrase "unduly harsh"  does  not
    import a balancing exercise requiring the public interest to be weighed
    against the circumstances of the individual. The focus is  solely  upon
    an evaluation of the consequences and  impact  of  deportation  on  the
    individual concerned. Whether the consequences of deportation  will  be
    "unduly harsh"  involves  a  considerably  higher  threshold  than  the
    consequences merely being  "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable,
    unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging". The consequence for  an
    individual will be "harsh" if they are "severe"  or  "bleak"  and  they
    will be "unduly" so if they are "inordinately" or  "excessively"  harsh
    taking into account all the circumstances of the individual.

13.   I agree with the reasoning of the Tribunal in MAB as to the  focus  of
    the enquiry under paragraph 399(a) and (b)  of  the  immigration  rules
    (also reflected in section 117C(5) NIAA 2002). In clear contrast to the
    wording of paragraph 398 the wording of paragraph 399 is not phrased in
    a way that gives rise to a full proportionality assessment. It does not
    state that the impact on the child or partner must be  weighed  against
    the public interest. Either a decision to deport is unduly harsh on  an
    individual  or  it  is  not.  Seeking  to  weigh  the  consequence   of
    deportation against public interest considerations does not make it any
    more or less harsh on an individual.  The  partial  balancing  exercise
    proposed  by  the  respondent  in  MAB  could  not  equate  to  a  full
    proportionality  assessment,  which  must  weigh   all   the   relevant
    circumstances of a case. The respondent's own guidance recognises  that
    the exceptions  relating  to  family  and  private  life  are  separate
    considerations and that the assessment of the cumulative effect of  all
    the relevant factors is likely to take place within the wider ambit  of
    paragraph 398 of the immigration rules: see paragraph 6.6 "Chapter  13:
    Criminality  guidance   in   Article   8   ECHR   cases".   A   partial
    proportionality assessment would be a wholly inadequate assessment  for
    the purpose of Article 8. However, given the weight to be placed on the
    public interest in deportation, it must be recognised that  the  phrase
    "unduly harsh" imports  a  fairly  high  threshold  before  a  person's
    Article 8  rights  are  deemed  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation for the purpose of the immigration rules.

Findings on the facts

14.   It is not in dispute that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his wife and four children or that the  rest  of  his
    family  are  all  British  citizens.  At  the  date  of  the   original
    immigration decision in March 2013 the appellant  had  three  children.
    The original  notice  of  decision  accepted  that  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK.  The  respondent
    stated that it was "widely accepted that a child's best  interests  are
    remaining in the UK and having access to their parents" but  considered
    that other factors might  outweigh  the  child's  best  interests.  The
    respondent considered  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  his
    children to remain in the care of their mother in  the  UK  and  stated
    that it would be possible for them to continue  to  have  contact  with
    their father through "modern forms of  communication".  The  respondent
    noted that his wife and children could visit him in Pakistan should she
    wish to do so. It should be noted that the decision was made before the
    "unduly harsh" test was incorporated into the immigration rules.

15.   On 27 January 2015 the respondent issued  a  supplementary  notice  of
    decision taking into account the position of all four children. At this
    stage the wording of the exceptions contained in paragraphs 399(a)  and
    (b) had been amended to reflect the  statutory  changes  introduced  by
    Part 5A of the NIAA 2002. Despite the fact that the  family's  position
    was essentially the same as it was when the original decision was  made
    in March 2013 (save for the need to consider the welfare of  a  further
    child) the respondent now considered that it would not be unduly  harsh
    to expect the four British children to live in Pakistan. Their  parents
    were both of Pakistani origin and  had  knowledge  of  the  social  and
    cultural customs in Pakistan. It  was  noted  that  they  had  gone  to
    Pakistan for a family holiday in 2010.  While  acknowledging  that  the
    children were British citizens the respondent asserted that  they  were
    also Pakistani citizens and were "equally entitled to benefit from  the
    experiences of [their] cultural background". The respondent noted  that
    the children were not subject to  removal  and  it  would  be  for  the
    appellant and his wife to decide whether they  chose  to  relocate  the
    family to Pakistan or whether the children  remained  in  the  UK  with
    their mother and kept in contact with  the  appellant  through  "modern
    means of communication".

16.   The  respondent  went  on  to  note  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    initially granted Indefinite Leave to Remain as a refugee  but  despite
    this fact she considered that it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect
    her to live in Pakistan with the appellant if she chose to do  so.  She
    was familiar with Pakistani culture. It was not accepted that it  would
    be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to remain in  the  UK  without
    the appellant. As a British citizen she would have access to a range of
    publicly funded services. She was previously separated from her husband
    when he was in prison and "although struggled managed to cope being the
    sole carer for her children with  the  help  and  support  of  extended
    family members and friends in the UK". The  respondent  concluded  that
    she no longer feared to return to Pakistan in view of the fact that she
    returned for a family holiday in 2010.

17.   In assessing the best  interests  of  the  children  and  whether  the
    effects of deportation would  be  "unduly  harsh"  I  have  taken  into
    account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child  Matters:  Change  for
    Children" (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties
    owed to children under section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  In  that  guidance  the  UKBA  acknowledges  the
    importance of a number of international instruments relating  to  human
    rights including the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child  (UNCRC).
    The guidance goes on to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil  the
    requirements of  these  instruments  in  relation  to  children  whilst
    exercising its functions as expressed in UK  domestic  legislation  and
    policies." I take into account the fact that the UNCRC sets out  rights
    including a child's right to survival and  development,  the  right  to
    know and be cared for by his or  her  parents,  the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child. I also take  into  account  that
    the younger the child the more important the involvement of a parent is
    likely to be: see Berrehab v Netherlands (1988) 11 EHRR 322. It  is  in
    the best interests of a child to be brought up by both  parents  unless
    it is contrary to his best  interests  to  see  one  or  other  of  his
    parents: see also E-A (Article 8 - best  interests  of  child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00315.

18.   The appellant did not meet the requirements for leave to remain  as  a
    spouse  and  his  application  was  refused  in  2009.   However,   the
    respondent's  own  summary  of  the  appellant's  immigration   history
    confirms that, at the time, his family circumstances were  sufficiently
    compelling for him to be granted Discretionary Leave to Remain  outside
    the  immigration  rules.  In  particular,  the  appellant's  wife   was
    suffering from severe post-natal  depression  that  led  to  a  suicide
    attempt. The summary suggests that leave was granted in order  for  the
    appellant to assist his wife to care for the  children  because  family
    life could not be continued in Pakistan because she had been recognised
    as a refugee.

19.   The appellant's bundle contains a letter dated 17 December  2014  from
    his wife's GP, which confirmed that she had been suffering from chronic
    depression for a number of years. She suffered from migraines  and  had
    been seen by a neurologist. The patient suffered from  a  peptic  ulcer
    since August 2004 and had  constant  dyspepsia  symptoms.  The  patient
    reported to her GP that she was too ill to do  the  housework  and  was
    dependent on her husband to help her look after  the  children.  Whilst
    there is no recent report there is up to date evidence to show that the
    appellant's wife continues to be signed off by  her  GP  as  unfit  for
    work. In light of this evidence I am satisfied that there is nothing to
    suggest that her long term problems with depression and  other  medical
    issues are likely to have improved to any significant extent.

20.   A letter from the appellant's probation  officer  dated  03  May  2013
    stated that she had visited the appellant's home address  in  order  to
    assess his suitability for Resettlement on Temporary Licence. She noted
    that his wife was very tearful during the visit and told her  that  she
    had found it very hard to cope being the  sole  carer  of  their  three
    children while her husband had been in prison in addition to  the  fact
    that she suffered from depression.  She  understood  that  although  he
    worked the appellant took "huge responsibility" for  the  care  of  his
    wife and children before he went into custody. She concluded that there
    were "valid reasons" why the appellant should remain at home to provide
    support for his family's mental and emotional well-being. The fact that
    the appellant's wife has suffered from severe depression and  attempted
    to take an overdose has been consistent throughout the  various  pieces
    of evidence before me and was mentioned in the pre-sentence report  and
    psychological assessment prepared prior to his sentencing in 2011.

21.   The statements made by the appellant and his wife in  support  of  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal both outlined the negative impact
    that his imprisonment  had  on  their  children.  Of  course,  this  is
    entirely as a result of the appellant's own actions. They said that the
    children's education suffered in his absence. The  children  were  less
    able to concentrate, there had been a drop in their academic  standards
    and they had shown signs  of  withdrawal.  The  youngest  child  became
    "extremely clingy". The couple decided not to  tell  the  children  the
    truth about their father's imprisonment because they  thought  that  it
    would be extremely damaging to them. Instead they led the  children  to
    believe that their  father  was  working  abroad.  They  were  able  to
    maintain this pretence for a period of a year while he  was  in  prison
    and it seems that the appellant then had a phased release where he  was
    able to spend some time at home before being released on Licence.

22.   Their evidence is supported to  some  extent  by  letters  of  support
    written by B J (a home tutor) and A W  M  (a  religious  tutor).  While
    those letters tend to support their evidence they do not  provide  much
    detail and it is notable that there does not appear to be any  evidence
    from the children's school teachers. Although  I  find  that  I  cannot
    place a great deal of  weight  on  those  letters  they  are  at  least
    consistent with the overall picture disclosed by  the  evidence,  which
    shows that it is  likely  that  the  appellant  has  been  particularly
    involved in the upbringing of his children due to the difficulties that
    his wife faces as a result of  ongoing  depression  and  other  medical
    problems. There is nothing implausible about  the  assertion  that  the
    children's school performance,  concentration  and  general  well-being
    might have been adversely affected in their father's absence.

23.   In an up to date statement the  appellant's  wife  states  that,  very
    reluctantly, she travelled to  Pakistan  in  2006  for  a  short  visit
    following the death of her husband's brother. She only did  so  because
    she had become a British citizen and relatives convinced her that  they
    would not tell her extended family members that she  was  in  Pakistan.
    She says that she did not venture outside  her  husband's  family  home
    during the visit and kept a low profile. They visited Pakistan again in
    July 2010 when her husband's sister died. They stayed  in  Karachi  for
    two weeks in an area far away from where she used  to  live.  She  said
    that she found the visit very stressful because "it brought back bitter
    and painful memories".

24.   It is difficult to assess what weight to place on the  fact  that  the
    appellant's wife was recognised as a refugee because no information has
    been provided to show what her reasons are for  fearing  to  return  to
    Pakistan. I can only make a very general inference from the information
    contained in her statement that she may fear some form of reprisal from
    members of her own family rather  than  fearing  persecution  from  the
    state.  In  2009  the  respondent  recognised  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's wife to continue their family life
    in Pakistan because she had been recognised as  a  refugee.  While  the
    fact that she was willing to make a short visit  to  Pakistan  in  2010
    might undermine her claim to continue to fear persecution, if the basis
    of her original claim was fear of persecution from family  members,  it
    is possible that a short  and  discreet  visit  could  have  been  made
    without any significant risk. But that does not necessarily  mean  that
    the appellant's wife would no longer be at risk if she had to settle in
    Pakistan on a longer term basis. In the end, the appellant  has  failed
    to produce sufficient evidence to show what the current risk  might  be
    to his wife, if any, for the purpose of assessing whether it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect her to continue her  family  life  with  him  in
    Pakistan.

25.   The children are British citizens and are entitled to the benefits  of
    that  citizenship:  see  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.  The
    respondent's initial position was that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to  leave  the  UK.  While  education  and  medical
    facilities are available in Pakistan they are not of the same  standard
    as the UK. The children were all born in the UK and have known no other
    life. Although they would have the benefit of their  parents'  cultural
    heritage to assist them to adjust to life in Pakistan they  would  face
    considerable disadvantages in terms of denial of the benefits of  their
    rights as British citizens. They would be taken away from all that they
    know and would have to adjust to life in a new country where they would
    not have access to the same level of services  and  where  there  would
    generally be a lower level of security.  There  is  a  marked  contrast
    between making a short two week visit to Pakistan and the  longer  term
    disadvantages that the children would face  if  they  had  to  relocate
    there on a permanent basis.

26.   If the children remain in the UK they would not have  the  benefit  of
    their father's ongoing emotional, financial and practical support.  The
    evidence shows that the appellant is likely to be a crucial figure that
    keeps the family functioning  given  the  physical  and  mental  health
    problems faced by his  wife.  Whilst  more  detailed  and  up  to  date
    evidence could have been produced there is nothing to suggest that  her
    condition has improved over time. In  2009  the  respondent  considered
    that the appellant's presence was sufficiently important to  grant  him
    leave to remain in order to care  for  the  children.  While  his  wife
    managed to cope for a limited, and what she knew to be  finite,  period
    of time while he was in prison her statement indicates that it  was  at
    real emotional cost to her and the children. Now the situation would be
    made more difficult by the fact that she would have  to  cope  with  an
    additional young child. The evidence shows that she would be unable  to
    work and would in all likelihood  become  heavily  dependent  upon  the
    social assistance  system  at  great  cost  to  the  public  purse.  In
    contrast, the evidence indicates  that  before  his  conviction  it  is
    likely that the appellant worked to support his family.

27.   More detailed and professional evidence could have  been  provided  to
    explain the impact that prolonged separation of the family  would  have
    on the appellant's wife and children. However, the evidence before  the
    Tribunal shows that the  appellant's  wife  has  suffered  from  severe
    depression for a number of years and on at least one occasion found  it
    so difficult to cope that she attempted suicide. While she  managed  to
    cope for a finite period of time while the appellant was in prison I am
    satisfied that the long term effect of separation from her  husband  is
    likely to affect her mental health in a negative way and is  likely  to
    cause her very real suffering. This is turn is  likely  to  affect  her
    ability to fully support  and  care  for  the  children.  The  evidence
    suggests that the appellant's absence from his children while he was in
    prison had a detrimental effect and this would only be  exacerbated  if
    they were separated on a long term basis. It is  wholly  inadequate  to
    suggest that a parental relationship with such young children could  be
    conducted by way of "modern methods of communication".  Young  children
    require nurturing, both physically and emotionally, and this could  not
    be done from abroad. The evidence before me shows  that  the  appellant
    takes a particularly active role in the family because  of  his  wife's
    various physical and mental health problems. His absence  is  therefore
    likely to impact on all other members of the family in  a  particularly
    serious way.

28.   I bear in mind that the  threshold  to  show  whether  the  effect  of
    deportation is "unduly harsh" on a partner or child is  demanding.  For
    the reasons given above I conclude that it could properly be said  that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's children to relocate
    to Pakistan given that they were born in the UK  and  have  significant
    ties to this country. If they were expected to live in Pakistan  solely
    in order to continue their family life with both parents they would  be
    denied access to a host of rights and advantages that they derive  from
    their British citizenship over a long term period. For  the  reasons  I
    have already given the separation of four young British  children  from
    their father over a long term period is likely to have  a  particularly
    damaging effect  on  their  welfare.  Their  mother  is  already  in  a
    vulnerable position due to her physical and mental  health  and  it  is
    likely that this would be exacerbated if she was left to look after the
    children on her own. In the past her depression became so serious  that
    she  attempted  to  harm  herself.  The  situation  was  deemed  to  be
    sufficiently compelling to grant the appellant Discretionary  Leave  to
    Remain even though he didn't meet the requirements of  the  immigration
    rules at the time. In the  circumstances  of  this  particular  case  I
    conclude that it would also be unduly harsh to expect the  children  to
    remain in the UK without the appellant. For these reasons I  find  that
    the appellant meets the requirements  of  the  exception  contained  in
    paragraph 399(a).

29.   The evidence relating to his wife's fear  of  return  to  Pakistan  is
    lacking and for this reason it is difficult to assess  whether  she  is
    currently at risk in Pakistan. The fact that she was  recognised  as  a
    refugee gives rise to a presumption that she may be at risk  on  return
    but it is not clear from the evidence whether two  short  and  discreet
    visits are sufficient to  show  that  she  re-availed  herself  of  the
    protection of that country or whether the conditions that gave rise  to
    her refugee status have now ceased within the meaning  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. In contrast to the children the appellant's wife  was  born
    and brought up in Pakistan and will be familiar with the culture there.
    The limited evidence only gives rise to a suggestion that it  might  be
    unduly harsh to expect his  wife  to  continue  their  family  life  in
    Pakistan. For this reason I conclude that the appellant has  failed  to
    produce sufficient evidence to show that  it  would  affect  her  in  a
    sufficiently serious way to reach the demanding threshold  required  to
    show that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  to  expect  her  to  return  to
    continue  their  family  life  together  in  Pakistan.  However,  I  am
    satisfied that if the appellants' wife remains in  the  UK  the  longer
    term separation of the family is likely to be "unduly harsh" within the
    meaning of the immigration rules in light of  her  particular  physical
    and mental health problems and the fact that it would  be  particularly
    demanding for her to give four young children the proper care that they
    need on her own.

30.   I have concluded that there is insufficient evidence to show that  the
    appellant also meets the requirements of paragraph 399(b) but  for  the
    purpose  of  this  appeal  it  is  sufficient  for  him  to  meet   the
    requirements of one of the exceptions. The respondent has  drafted  the
    immigration rules in a way that is said to strike a fair balance  under
    Article 8. Section 117C(2) outlines the  general  principle  that,  the
    more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the  greater
    is the public interest in deportation.  The  scheme  contained  in  the
    immigration  rules,  in  conjunction  with  the  statutory   provisions
    contained in section 117A-D of the NIAA 2002, makes clear that there is
    a sliding scale of offences. Where a person has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period  of  imprisonment  of  more  than  four  years  the  offence  is
    considered sufficiently serious that he will not have  the  benefit  of
    being able to argue that he meets the exceptions  to  deportation.  But
    where the person has been convicted of a lesser offence then the scheme
    recognises that there will be certain circumstances  where  the  public
    interest in deportation may be outweighed by the  person's  private  or
    family life considerations.

31.   I conclude that the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    399(a) and therefore comes within  one  of  the  stated  exceptions  to
    deportation under Article 8 as defined by  the  immigration  rules  and
    section 33(2)(a) of the UK Borders Act 2007.


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date  22 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








