

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00970/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4th December 2013                        |On : 13th December 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  C. W. D.
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Alice Holmes of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Miss O. Ukachi-Lois of Freemans Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   A deportation order under section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    against Mr CD was made on 22nd October 2012, following  his  conviction
    two years previously of a drugs offence for which he was  sentenced  to
    three years' imprisonment.  It was not his first  offence,  and  indeed
    the trial judge, in his sentencing remarks, said  that  Mr  CD  had  "a
    dreadful record."  It may not have been with high hopes of success that
    notice of appeal was given to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  on  8th
    August 2013 the appeal came before a  panel  comprising  Judge  Parkash
    Aujla and Ms Vivien Street, JP, and the appeal was allowed.  The  panel
    accepted that the appellant before them had been a police  informer  in
    the past, that this would be known about and greatly disapproved of  in
    his native Jamaica, and that on his return there he would  be  at  real
    risk of serious harm from drug gangs.  Mr CD's removal would  therefore
    be contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention.   The  appeal  was
    also allowed under the private life aspect of Article 8 of the ECHR, as
    encapsulated by paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules, and under  the
    family life aspect of Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules,  using
    the approach approved in cases such as Izuazu and Nagre.

2.   The Secretary of State  challenged  this  outcome,  but  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was initially refused by Judge  Ford,  who
    considered the panel's findings to be  adequately  reasoned  and  fully
    open to them on the evidence.  On renewal, however, leave  was  granted
    to the Home Secretary on 4th November  2013  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb, save for a ground which would only have been appropriate in  the
    context of an asylum claim.  When the matter came  before  me,  it  was
    agreed on all hands that this ground should be disregarded.

3.   Mr CD attended the hearing with his partner, Miss MD,  and  I  had  the
    advantage  of   very   full   and   careful   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal  had  reached  what
    seemed at first blush a surprising conclusion, in the end  it  did  not
    appear to me that they had made a material error of law which  required
    their determination to be set aside.  My reasons for this are  set  out
    briefly below.

4.   If the panel did not err in respect of  Article  3,  Mr  CD  cannot  be
    deported, however strong the public interest in his  deportation.   The
    Secretary of State's challenge  is  here  directed  to  an  absence  of
    corroborative evidence that he needed to be put "on  protection"  while
    serving his sentence at  HMP  The  Mount,  having  (he  said)  received
    threats from fellow-prisoners because of his previous  informing.   The
    panel are also criticised for not drawing  the  inference  that  Mr  CD
    could not have continued operating in the drug scene, as he did, if  he
    had been execrated as a police informer.

5.   That the appellant before them had  been  a  police  informer  was,  It
    seems to me, a finding which the panel were entitled to adopt,  on  the
    Devaseelan principle, from the determination of  the  adjudicator,  Mrs
    Lane, who heard his appeal in November 1998.  This was backed up by  an
    article in the Express on Sunday, which reported that Mr  CD  had  been
    working for the police since 1991, and was still working  for  them  in
    1997.  As for the  appellant's  claim  that  this  activity  was  still
    remembered at the present time and held against him, the panel had  the
    testimony of CD himself and his partner.  As explained at paragraphs 40-
    41 of their determination, the panel  found  this  testimony  credible.
    They found CD "honest and straightforward" in his oral evidence, giving
    as an example of this his  admission  that  he  still  smoked  cannabis
    occasionally, when it might have seemed more  advantageous  to  him  to
    pretend that he had abjured drugs altogether.  I cannot  say  that  the
    panel were not entitled to reach this finding.  They had the  advantage
    of hearing and seeing live evidence from witnesses,  and  an  appellate
    tribunal will not lightly interfere with credibility findings  made  on
    that basis.

6..  The panel went on from there to find that "it is reasonably  likely  to
    assume that the information that he provided to the police  would  have
    proved useful in bringing criminals  to  justice  as  well  as  perhaps
    resulting in some offenders being removed from the  United  Kingdom  to
    Jamaica."  It could  readily  be  inferred  that  members  of  powerful
    criminal gangs in Jamaica would bear a grudge against CD,  and  relying
    on the 'country guidance' in AB (protection - criminal gangs - internal
    relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 18, the panel held that CD would be
    at risk from them in Kingston, whence he hailed, that the police  would
    not be able to offer effective protection, and that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to relocate to a rural area, on account of his
    disability.  The chain of reasoning adopted by the panel here cannot, I
    think, be castigated as illogical or not based on evidence.  The upshot
    is that the finding on Article 3 has to stand.

7    As Article 3 trumps Article 8,  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  is  not
    affected by what does seem to be an error in the  panel's  decision  on
    private life.  They noted that CD had lived in the United  Kingdom  for
    27 years, and found that he had "no ties (social, personal  or  family)
    with Jamaica."  But this misquotes paragraph 399A(a) of the Immigration
    Rules, which refers  to  'cultural',  not  'personal',  ties.   As  the
    Grounds of Appeal argue, CD had spent the first 20 years of his life in
    Jamaica, and "would have knowledge of the culture and  customs  there."
    It is not as if he was brought to the United Kingdom as a young  child,
    and spent all his formative years here

8.   On the other hand the panel have not, in my judgment, made an error  of
    law in their setting of the proportionality balance under Article 8  in
    its family life aspect.  Having reached the  fifth  of  Lord  Bingham's
    questions in Razgar, they consider the factors which should be  weighed
    on the public interest side of the balance.  First  they  observe  that
    according to the OASys Report completed on 3rd December 2012  the  risk
    of CD re-offending is 'low', and that he has  been  classified  by  the
    London Probation Trust as 'being of low risk of harm'.  Then  they  set
    out at length the well-known passages from N (Kenya) and OH (Serbia) in
    which the Court of Appeal enjoins adjudicators/ immigration  judges  to
    keep in mind certain important facets  of  the  public  interest.   The
    panel do not omit the injunction of Lord  Justice  Wilson  (as  he  was
    then) that "the risk  of  re-offending  is  one  facet  of  the  public
    interest but, in  the  case  of  very  serious  crimes,  not  the  most
    important facet."  Those other facets are also quoted.   They  are,  of
    course, deterrence, the expression  of  society's  revulsion,  and  the
    building of public confidence.

9.   Save for the passages quoted from N (Kenya) and OH (Serbia), the  panel
    do not refer explicitly to those other facets of  the  public  interest
    when they say, "We have carried out a balancing  exercise  between  the
    public  interest  in  removing  the  Appellant  in  the   interest   of
    maintaining law and order and preventing crime on the one hand and  the
    Appellant's and his family's compassionate circumstances on the other."
     They are very clear that "the Appellant  had  committed  very  serious
    offences  over  time.   He  was  engaged  in  drug  dealing  and  other
    offences."  Have they said enough to assure the reader that the  public
    interest has been properly taken into account?

10.  It seems to me that the instant  case  can  be  distinguished  from  PK
    (Congo) [2013] EWCA Civ 1500, in which the First-tier Tribunal  allowed
    an appeal against deportation by  a  man  with  an  appalling  criminal
    record, whose risk of re-offending had been assessed as high,  but  who
    had regular contact with children of his.  There was no mention at  all
    of the public interest facets listed in  OH  (Serbia).   The  Court  of
    Appeal upheld the Upper Tribunal's finding that the First-tier Tribunal
    had not taken account of those facets and had accordingly erred in law.
     Those facets have, of course, been set out by the panel in the instant
    case.  Having done that, can they be said to have forgotten about  them
    almost immediately,  when  carrying  out  the  all-important  balancing
    exercise?  The structure of this part of  the  determination  does  not
    support such a  notion.   Having  looked  at  the  public  interest  at
    paragraphs 55-59, the panel look at the factors going the other way  at
    paragraphs 60-61, including the best interests of the children  (which,
    Miss Ukachi-Lois points out, a family court thinks will  be  served  by
    having contact with CD).  At paragraph  62  the  panel  carry  out  the
    balancing   exercise   and   conclude   that   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate.

11.  Matters of weight are classically not matters of law, and I cannot  say
    that the panel here erred in law by holding that  the  public  interest
    was outweighed in the present case.   It  follows  that,  overall,  the
    First-tier determination must stand.


     DECISION

     The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           7th December 2013



