
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00830/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th May 2014                              |On 19th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S M KEBEDE

                                   Between

                           MR delroy samuel denton

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Davies of Counsel instructed by Mohammed & Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 11th November 1960.

2.   On 19th July 1996 at Inner London Crown  Court  he  was  convicted  for
    murder and sentenced to life imprisonment, with  a  minimum  tariff  of
    fifteen years eleven months.

3.   The respondent took a decision on 10th April  2013  refusing  to  grant
    him asylum and making a deportation order  against  him  as  a  foreign
    national criminal  under  Section  32(5)  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   The
    appellant sought to appeal against that decision on the basis  that  he
    fell within a Section 33(2) exception to automatic deportation  because
    such an order would breach  the  UK's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and his own Convention rights under the European  Convention
    on Human Rights, specifically Articles 2, 3 and 8.

4.   The Secretary of State certified under Section  72(9)(b)  of  the  2002
    Act that the presumption under Section  72(2)  applied  to  the  asylum
    claim, namely that a person presumed to have been  convicted  by  final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime constituted a  danger  to  the
    community in the UK and was excluded from protection under the  Refugee
    Convention.  The presumption is of course rebuttable on the balance  of
    probabilities.  The appellant by  virtue  of  his  having  committed  a
    "serious crime" is mandatorily excluded from a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

5.   The appellant's appeal against  the  decision  came  before  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy and First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Cox sitting as a panel on 10th October 2013.  The  determination  is  a
    detailed one.  The Tribunal considered the Parole Board decision of 3rd
    July 2013 which makes it  perfectly  clear  that  the  appellant  still
    constitutes a danger to the community posing a high risk of  committing
    further sexual or  other  violent  offences.   The  Tribunal  therefore
    concluded that the presumption under Section 72(2) was not rebutted and
    accordingly the appellant remained excluded from protection  under  the
    Refugee Convention.

6.   The Tribunal however  went  on  to  consider  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
    together with Article 2.  The case for the appellant, then as now,  was
    that because of his profile in  Jamaica  and  his  activities  both  in
    Jamaica and in the UK,  he  was  at  risk  of  retribution,  both  from
    politicians and from police.  The issue for the  Tribunal  was  whether
    that fear as expressed was objectively well-founded.

7.    The  Tribunal  expressed  themselves  satisfied  that  generally   the
    appellant was a credible witness. It found in  paragraph  25  that  his
    profile in Jamaica was such as to constitute a real risk  to  his  life
    and wellbeing were he to return.  In the circumstances the  appeal  was
    allowed in respect of Article 3 of the ECHR.

8.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department had sought to  challenge
    that decision on the basis  that  the  panel  had  failed  properly  to
    consider the content of some 189 folios attached to  the  Parole  Board
    report.  Had they done so it would have been readily apparent that  the
    credibility of the appellant could not safely be regarded, particularly
    in the light of the comments  made  by  many  medical  people  who  had
    examined him in  the  past.   In  essence  it  is  contended  that  the
    appellant, far from being a credible witness, was a "Walter Mitty"  and
    that his experiences as claimed were in fact objectively ill-founded.

9.   That challenge came before us on 12th March 2014 and  our  decision  in
    respect thereof is dated 28th March 2014.   It  was  our  finding  that
    there was a material error of law in that the panel  did  not  properly
    consider  the  documents  attached  to  the  Parole  Board  report,  in
    particular a number of reports as identified in our decision.  Clearly,
    a proper assessment as to the profile of the  appellant  was  vital  in
    order to determine  the  safety  of  his  removal.   That  to  overlook
    material evidence was an error of law, such that the decision should be
    set aside.

10.  Thus the matter comes before us  to  determine  the  live  issues  that
    remain in this case.  We do not revisit the issue of certification.  We
    are  entirely  satisfied  from  the  documentation  produced  that  the
    appellant indeed is still a very dangerous individual and constitutes a
    threat to the public.  The approach of the First-tier Tribunal  to  the
    certification is adopted by us and the certificate upheld.

11.  The real issue in this case, as indeed was  identified  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, is whether the return of the appellant to Jamaica  would
    be in breach of his rights to life and safety as envisaged in  Articles
    2 and 3 of the ECHR.

12.  In order to determine that matter we need to  focus  particularly  upon
    the appellant's profile in Jamaica.  In particular we need to  consider
    his profile before he left Jamaica to come to the  United  Kingdom  and
    his current profile, taking into account, not only what he had done  in
    the past but also the element of his acting  as  an  informant  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The extent to which that matter presents a risk to the
    appellant is to be considered within the overall context of the case.

13.  A matter that was not highlighted with any particularity by Mr  Davies,
    who represents the appellant, is however the issue of suicide.   It  is
    apparent from a number of reports that in the past  the  appellant  has
    sought to commit suicide and therefore it behoves us in considering the
    safety of return to bear in mind the case of J v SSHD  [2005] EWCA  Civ
    629  and the considerations that flow from it.

14.  We note the documents that were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   We
    note the Parole Board report and the appendices to  it.   We  note  the
    appellant's witness statement as originally submitted within the bundle
    and a statement also from Daphne Lloyd Cook.   The  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report for Jamaica dated 15th January 2013  has  also  been
    presented for our attention, although that was in the  original  bundle
    of  documents.   We  note  the  submissions  that   have   been   made,
    particularly the written submissions submitted to us by  Mr  Jarvis  in
    summary of his final submissions.  The appellant  adopted  his  witness
    statement and his asylum interview and gave  evidence  at  considerable
    length before us.
15.  He indicated that he joined the People's National Party (PNP) in  1978.
     He became involved with the "Tel Aviv Gang"  who  were  affiliated  to
    that party.  He worked in short-term jobs for politicians, cleaning  or
    construction and made money from stealing.   He  became  in  effect  an
    enforcer  using  violence  against  those  who  opposed  his  political
    masters.  In that connection he shot and killed and injured people.

16.  Indeed he spoke of the fact that in 1978 he went  to  Cuba  with  other
    people  for  military  training.   He  said  that  his  employers  were
    Government officials and members of the  security  forces  in  Jamaica.
    There was widespread corruption, indeed his party  and  his  gang  were
    funded by drug money.  He named a number of  people  for  whom  he  had
    worked during this period.

17.   In particular he said that in 1978 he was part of  a  group  that  had
    killed a number of opposition reporters, taking them to a firing  range
    and killing them.  He spoke of a political war in 1980 in  the  central
    part of Kingston and a shooting incident in which  many  people  fought
    together in Gold Street on 20th April 1980.

18.  He was an area leader and began to be  more  and  more  influential  in
    gang matters.  He said he became a leader of the gang.

19.  He spoke on a number  of  occasions  about  having  been  arrested  and
    charged with offences, but because of the protection that he  had  from
    members of the  security  services  and  police,  most  of  those  were
    dropped.  He spoke of spending some time on remand for various offences
    saying that the gang managed to  frighten  off  the  witnesses  and  so
    gradually no evidence was offered on  the  various  charges  that  were
    proffered  against  him.   He  claimed  that  he  had  some  degree  of
    protection from his political masters in what he did.

20.  In any event there came a time when he was convicted for two  robberies
    and possession of a firearm and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment
    of eight years.  The  appellant  was  released  from  prison  in  1991,
    according to his evidence.  Apparently he  had  spent  time  in  remand
    before his sentence.

21.  It is not disputed that the appellant had such convictions in  Jamaica.



22.  Following his release in 1991  he  began  working  for  Colonel  Leslie
    Lloyd, a PNP candidate in the central Kingston  area.   He  became  the
    campaigner for the politician and managed the media and PR for him.  He
    would help arrange rallies and functions and meetings  between  the  MP
    and the constituents.  As he knew the  area  very  well  he  knew  what
    people wanted and how to get the politicians to deliver it.

23.  When asked about his criminal activities the appellant  indicated  that
    while he was working for the MP he was still involved  with  the  gang.
    He had increased status and he was no longer responsible  for  carrying
    out the murders and the killings, but  entrusted  other  people  to  do
    that.  In the interview the appellant had indicated that he  worked  at
    several jobs during this period.  He said that  those  were  in  effect
    sham jobs and merely a front to have respectability.   He  stated  that
    his status within the gang was greater after his release  than  before.
    Indeed, he said that at one stage  he  worked  for  the  current  Prime
    Minister who then was a young  MP  helping  her  out,  helping  her  to
    maintain stability and sorting out the gangs and violence.

24.  The appellant maintained that the party had considerable corruption  in
    its midst and depended largely upon its funding for  the  illegal  drug
    trade.

25.  The appellant had indicated in his previous evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal that whilst working for the PNP candidate he had sight of
    documents and information from the Prime Minister's office about budget
    allocations in the constituency.  He  realised  that  money  was  being
    creamed off by local politicians and as a gang leader he felt  that  he
    had a duty to look after his  people.   He  went  to  see  the  General
    Secretary of the PNP, Dr Peter Phillips, and told him about the  money.
    Dr Phillips made investigations and as a result the money began  to  be
    spent properly in the constituency.  A number of politicians, including
    the Finance Secretary, started a campaign against him that  he  was  an
    embarrassment to the party.

26.  In March 1993 he had been invited to  a  local  community  meeting  and
    whilst walking to that meeting of another gang member he  was  attacked
    by men firing machine guns.  His companion, Junior Brown, was shot  but
    he, the appellant, managed to pull out his gun, causing the men to  run
    off.  It was the account given to the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  the
    evidence before us that he had noticed this particular document in  the
    Prime Minister's office dealing with $3,760,000.  The politicians  bore
    him ill-will for revealing that corruption.  He  said  that  three  men
    attacked him with machine guns.  He managed to run away  by  a  zig-zag
    motion.  He said that that happened about three to four weeks before he
    left Jamaica.  There was no arrest warrant out  for  him  otherwise  he
    would have been stopped at the airport.  He denied that he was  running
    away to avoid prosecution.  He  agreed  however  that  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom using his brother's passport and on a false identity.

27.  On arrival he made contact with the Yardies who dealt  with  money  and
    clothes who wanted him to get involved with drugs and gun-running.   On
    one occasion when he had gone to a caf� to discuss the  drugs  business
    there was a raid by police.  He was taken to Brixton Police Station and
    processed by immigration but not charged.

28.  It was put to him that if he had been in danger from the  gang  members
    in Jamaica it made little sense for him to contact the Yardies  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He said that the Yardies in  the  UK  were  different,
    although he accepted that some had a PNC connection.

29.  In 1994 he was recruited as a police informer following his arrest  and
    charged with possession of an offensive weapon.  He  was  recruited  by
    the Immigration Officer Brian Fotheringham and a Police Officer,  Steve
    Barker.  It was indicated that if he gave them information about Yardie
    activity they would let  him  claim  asylum  and  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  They offered him money on a regular basis  with  extra  money
    for information.

30.  According to him the  police  would  get  him  to  call  gangsters  and
    politicians in Jamaica and would record the  conversations.   The  main
    politician who was implicated was Paul Burke, Founder of the PNP  Youth
    Organisation.  Mr Burke provided inside information for bank  robberies
    in Jamaica.

31.  The appellant worked as an informant until his  arrest  for  murder  in
    1996.  The case  against  him  was  discontinued  and  so  he  was  re-
    registered as an informant, but in December 1995 he was re-arrested and
    de-registered.  At this point his asylum claim was rejected.

32.  Thereafter his activities as  an  informant  were  well-publicised  and
    that angered local politicians and others in Jamaica.  So much so  that
    his daughter and her mother (Latoyah Denton and Cynthia Cork) were shot
    in 1996 in an incident organised by a local MP.  He was told about  the
    shooting in a letter from a friend of a friend and by other inmates  in
    Her Majesty's Prison, Full Sutton.  He believed that there was a  "hit"
    out on him.  He claimed that he had a pseudonym for his information.

33.  His life work was recalled in a book called "Gangsta" written  by  John
    Davies and published in March 1997.  He was interviewed by him and  the
    book is about his life, he being referred to Michael  throughout  until
    at the end  he is revealed to be who he is.

34.  On 19th July 1996 he was convicted for the murder of Marcia  Lawes  and
    sentenced to life imprisonment.  It is his claim that his former bosses
    in Jamaica know that he was working with Scotland Yard and  would  seek
    reprisals.  It appeared that  the  appellant  had  a  number  of  other
    children and partners whilst in Jamaica.  He  indicated  that  none  of
    those to his knowledge had been harmed by the  gang,  although  he  had
    very little contact with his friends and had even less contact with his
    family and children in Jamaica.  Following the shooting of his daughter
    he made no further enquiries as to the safety of his other children  or
    relatives.

35.  Indeed, he said that  he  only  received  information  of  that  matter
    second-hand from a Jenny Streeter in a letter that was given to him  at
    prison in 2002.

36.  Reference is made to that shooting in  his  interview  on  31st  August
    2011.  He says that on that occasion that he was told in September 1996
    by letter.  He found out about the shooting of  his  daughter  and  her
    mother from other prisoners.  He said it was Harry Douglas, an MP,  who
    had ordered the hit on his  daughter.   There  were  three  people  who
    intercepted them whilst driving.  He insisted that there was a hit  out
    for him.

37.  The respondent's letter of 29th December 1995  makes  reference  to  an
    interview which the appellant had with an Immigration Officer  on  15th
    May 1994.  The account given in that interview is said to  be  that  he
    was paroled in 1992 and was unable to live a peaceful life because  the
    local people believed that he was an informer.  The appellant indicated
    that the police had asked him to retrieve a stolen precious stone  from
    a politician's security guard.  He  claimed  that  he,  with  a  Duncan
    Ainsworth, tried to retrieve the gem peacefully and a fight broke  out.
    After that incident he realised  that  his  past  political  activities
    would prevent him from leading a normal life and decided to  leave  the
    country.  He arrived with a document in the name of his brother.   Even
    when arrested during a drugs raid he was reluctant to give  details  of
    his true identity, claiming indeed to be Donovan Ainsworth.

38.  Our attention was drawn to the Parole Board documents, particularly  to
    a psychological category A  report  prepared  on  the  appellant  by  a
    forensic psychologist, L Edmondson, dated 8th April 2009.  That  is  to
    be found at page 63 onwards of that bundle.  At paragraph  4.4  it  was
    recorded according to the appellant that following his release in  1991
    a "peace treaty" was signed with members of other gangs.  The  Jamaican
    Government was against the move and responded by paying two hit men  to
    execute him.  Because his life  was  in  danger  he  left  Jamaica  and
    entered the United Kingdom.

40.   Mr  Jarvis,  who  represents  the  respondent,  invites  us  to  place
    considerable weight upon the documents that are attached to the  parole
    report.  They cover a considerable period in the life of the appellant.
    The assessments and interviews that have been conducted with  him  over
    the years show, he submits, a variation in account such as to undermine
    the appellant's credibility.

41.   In particular our attention was drawn to page 69  of  the  bundle  and
    the report of Mr Edmondson, to which reference has already  been  made,
    significantly  at  paragraph  6.2.2.4  where  it  is  said   that   the
    appellant's  profile  on  the  assessment  indicates  an   ability   to
    manipulate and impression manage.  The comment was made in that  report
    that he has told highly convincing, yet untrue, stories in  prison  and
    is clearly intelligent and socially skilled.  It  was  considered  that
    his stable and pro-social behaviour,  although  seemingly  far-reaching
    and consistent, may not necessarily be  underpinned  by  a  significant
    cognitive change.  There was research,  although  limited,  to  suggest
    offenders with such a profile may convince staff that progress has been
    made, but in fact an individual might be providing  "learnt  responses"
    as the SARN writer notes, or be "faking good".

42.  Our attention is also drawn to page 55 of that bundle to a progress  in
    treatment report dated 19th May 2004 prepared by  John  Hartland.   His
    report  deals  with  a  number  of  factors,  particularly  looking  at
    attitudes and emotional and social functioning.  Reference is made that
    there was information from other psychometric cub scales which  suggest
    that the appellant may be to some extent deceiving himself  as  to  the
    true nature of his attitudes, thoughts and emotions.  We found at  page
    37 of the report and  at  page  39,  looking  at  self-management   the
    comment that the appellant has some capacity  to  deceive  himself  and
    this may have resulted in his psychometric profiles  being  less  valid
    than they should.

43.  Of more relevance is the comment at page 55 of  that  report  that  the
    appellant at times creates his own world, laws and interests.

44.  We note the OASys assessment in  relation  to  the  appellant  of  26th
    April 2013, in particular  page  128  of  the  bundle  which  sets  out
    something of the background of the appellant.  He is the  fourth  child
    of eight children but has no contact with family members.  He has  nine
    children by eight different mothers in Jamaica.  Two  of  his  brothers
    have criminal records, having been involved with  aggravated  burglary.
    He has a long-term relationship with Daphne  Cook.   He  spoke  of  his
    involvement with crime gangs and political activities as a way of life,
    indicating that he believed that he could run away from those  problems
    by leaving Jamaica.

45.  We note also the psychiatric court report prepared in relation  to  the
    appellant dated 4th June 1996.  This was prepared at the request of the
    Central Criminal Court . In  it  the  appellant  describes  intermitted
    periods of employment as a labourer, painter and decorator.  In 1991 he
    became a security guard in a restaurant and spent much of his income on
    gambling and stole to maintain  his  habit.   He  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in April 1993 after he was attacked because of  the  Government
    corruption he was trying to expose.

46.  It is this report in particular  that  reveals  since  his  arrival  at
    Belmarsh Prison  he  has  made  three  suicidal  gestures.   There  are
    documented mood swings from being happy go lucky to severely  depressed
    .On one occasion he attempted to throw himself off the wing landing but
    was restrained by staff.  He was also cut down from an attempted  self-
    hanging.  The report is of some age namely  1996.  There  are  no  more
    recent incidents of suicide or self harm documented.

47.  It was noted in the report at 5.12  that  the  appellant  can  be  very
    emotionally volatile, feeling calm and then becoming very  tearful  and
    animated.  Certainly, that was our experience of him in the  course  of
    his giving evidence to us.

48.  That the appellant was  an  informer  for  the  authorities  in  UK  is
    accepted, although the extent to which he was is less clear.  At around
    his trial a local journalist made known to the wider public,  the  fact
    that he was an informer and there  are  a  number  of  local  newspaper
    cuttings from that period around 1996 which speak of that fact and  are
    in the bundle.  Mr Davies  of  course  heavily  relies  upon  those  as
    creating an adverse profile for  the  appellant,  both  in  the  United
    Kingdom and in Jamaica.

49.  The matter indeed came for hearing before the Court of Appeal  in  R  v
    Denton [2002] EWCA Crim 272.  This case came into being because it  was
    alleged by the appellant and by those acting on his behalf that because
    of all the publicity concerning his being an informer he did not have a
    fair trial.  That general proposition was  rejected  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal who found there to be no danger to the fairness of the trial.
50.   In the course of the judgment  the  Court  of  Appeal  looked  at  the
    circumstances giving  rise  to  the  brutal  murder  of  Marcia  Lawes.
    Significantly, it was  noted  that  the  appellant  had  given  various
    different accounts of  his  movements  and  of  his  relationship  with
    Marcia.  Thus it was clear that the appellant was able to lie about the
    circumstances of his behaviour with Marcia.  A number of versions  were
    given and indeed he denied the offence up to and after his trial.   The
    appellant  later accepted the brutal stabbing and rape of  his  victim,
    speaking of the pleasure that it gave him.  Thus clearly he is somebody
    who is quite capable of giving a false account of a matter were  it  to
    suit his purposes to do so.

51.  The Court of Appeal heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  from  his
    handlers, namely DC Barker, DS Bayes and Brian Fortheringham.

52.  It was the contention made by the appellant to the court  that  he  had
    been threatened that if he failed to co-operate he would be returned to
    Jamaica and that his handlers  and  others  had  been  instrumental  in
    ensuring that the drugs charges and later the charge of rape  were  not
    proceeded with.  In terms of whether or not he was instructed to  avoid
    telling his solicitors that he was an informant,  the  court  preferred
    the evidence of the police officers to that of the appellant.

53.  Mr Davies relies upon the book "Gangsta" which is enclosed  within  the
    Home Office bundle. This was in effect a  biography  of  the  appellant
    referred to throughout as Michael.  It  details  the  life  of  a  gang
    leader in Jamaica said to have emanated from what  the  appellant  gave
    verbally to the author of the document.  It spoke of the  gang  culture
    and particularly the importance of guns in  and  around  the  political
    scene.  There is a stated link between the gangs and  the  politicians.
    Fund-raising gained some money but  most  came  from  crime  and  armed
    robberies that  the  MPs  helped  to  set  up  and  later  from  drugs.
    Reference is made to the Gold Street  massacre  in  August  1980,  with
    other violent events being described, particularly in the  late  1970s,
    early 1980s.

54.  The matters relied upon in the account are as follows:-

     "It is a game he eventually grew tired of, he says, with  its  constant
         threat of death or violence.  He saw  many  friends  shot  down  or
         stabbed to death beside him and after a second stint in  prison  he
         decided that enough was enough and went to Britain to try and  lead
         a normal life.  He was speaking  out  he  said  because  he  wanted
         things to change in Jamaica."

55.  This is relied upon by Mr  Jarvis  as  being  reflective  of  what  the
    appellant as Michael was saying.

56.  As indicated before, the appellant has a  long-term  relationship  with
    Daphne who has visited him on at least 45 occasions whilst he has  been
    in prison, but they have been together in a relationship  since  August
    1994.  On 22nd March 2013 in the sentence planning  and  review  report
    found at page 164 of the parole documents  it  was  recorded  from  the
    appellant that Daphne has been threatened due to his previous  gangster
    lifestyle.  This is not mentioned either in his statement,  nor  indeed
    in the statement to which Daphne has prepared of 5th October 2013.   It
    is suggested that if there was any truth in  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant was on the hit list and so were his relatives and friends, it
    is perhaps surprising that nothing has been done so  obviously  to  his
    long-term girlfriend.

57.  A number of matters are noted from the evidence attached to the  Parole
    Board report that the appellant claims to have raped dozens of women in
    Jamaica.  He states that he was charged with eight counts of murder and
    fifteen counts of shooting in 1980 and with murder  in  1984.   It  was
    noted that such matters emanated from the appellant himself and that no
    objective evidence would seem to be forthcoming to substantiate any  of
    what is claimed.  The evidence of the shooting of his daughter and  her
    mother comes from what he has  to  say  from  the  letter  from  Anthea
    Dawkins written to a friend dated 9th  September  1996.  He  said  that
    Cynthia and the daughter were murdered cold-bloodedly in their home  in
    Brownstown.  There was mention that another baby mother has  also  been
    murdered in Kingston two or three years before the date of the  letter.
    There was also a letter seemingly from Denise dated 3rd  November  1996
    written to the appellant in prison. Such recounts an incident in  which
    she overheard three or four men discussing the killing  of  the  mother
    and baby in Jamaica, seemingly being the ones that had carried out  the
    killings.

58.  Mr Jarvis, in closing his case relies upon his written submissions.  We
    were asked to find that little  reliability  can  be  placed  upon  the
    evidence of the appellant.  It is undoubtedly right  that  he  was  the
    subject of publicity at his trial.  Many years have elapsed since  that
    time.

59.  Those with whom he had dealings and with whom  he  claims  to  have  an
    adverse interest, Winston Green, Ralph Brown, Clinton Davey and Colonel
    Leslie Lloyd, are all dead.  There is little evidence about a Mr McLean
    or a Councillor Mussingham or a Greeta Robinson.  Dr Peter Phillips  is
    a Minister.  Paul Burke retired in 2008  and  Harry  Douglas  has  also
    retired.

60.   We are asked to find that the power of corrupt police  is  not  to  be
    substantiated.  It was submitted in the light of the COI  Report  which
    shows a substantial  ongoing  improvement  in  the  identification  and
    dismissal of corrupt police officers.  There  has  been  a  significant
    decline in armed gangs. Our attention was drawn to the country guidance
    cases, particularly that of AB (Protection - criminal gangs -  internal
    relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018. Mr Jarvis submits that it is
    clear from the background material  that  efforts  are  being  made  to
    improve the situation in  Jamaica  and  there  is  no  reason  why  the
    appellant could not return there too.

61.  Mr Davies, on behalf of the appellant, invites us to find that he is  a
    witness of truth and that his profile is considerable.  Though many  of
    the politicians are dead or retired there would  seem  to  be  a  large
    number of politicians or police officers in power who  would  bear  him
    ill will.  The fact that he was notified as an informer many years  ago
    does not prevent his punishment on that account were he to return.

62.  To a large extent therefore  our  assessment  of  the  evidence  as  to
    profile turns upon the credibility of the appellant himself.   In  that
    connection we note we should consider the whole context  of  the  case,
    seeking to put each and every factor into that context and to give such
    weight to those factors as would be appropriate.  We  remind  ourselves
    in fairness to the appellant  that  there  are  certain  areas  of  his
    evidence that have some support from the background material.

63.  In the 1970s, 1980s it is  clear  from  the  background  material  that
    Jamaica was fairly lawless in its activities with much corruption among
    politicians and violence between the gangs.   That  the  appellant  was
    involved in a gang and was caught up in the cycle of violence has to us
    the ring of truth about it.  The appellant indicated  that  he  was  in
    remand for a long period before  release  and  then  convicted  of  the
    robberies in 1984.  We do not accept, however, that he was of the great
    influence at that time which he claims to be.   We  note  that  he  has
    given an account of working in various jobs. Were he to be  so  steeped
    in the narcotics trade as a prominent organiser  of  the  gangs  as  he
    claims it is surprising  that he was doing the part-time working  which
    he has described that he did.  Although he claims that he did not  face
    prosecution for serious matters because of his political protectors, it
    was also indicated that part of the reason why he did not  always  come
    to trial was because pressure was brought to bear upon witnesses.

64.  In any event he received a long prison sentence  and  was  out  of  the
    loop for a considerable period of time.

65.  We concentrate our attention therefore upon the  period  following  his
    release, either in 1991 or 1992.  We bear in mind  that  thereafter  he
    had but a short time in Jamaica.  Whilst recognising, as  we  do,  that
    the link between organised crime and  the  politicians  may  have  been
    stronger in 1991 than now, we find it lacking  in  credibility  that  a
    politician, seeking to establish  his  credentials  in  an  area  would
    employ as his PR and media representative somebody  with  the  criminal
    background and convictions of the appellant.  So far as  the  appellant
    seeks to paint himself  as  having  considerable  power  and  influence
    within the gangland structure, upon his release, we place little weight
    upon that given his tendency to self-deception and  self-aggrandisement
    and fantasy, as spoken of in the various reports attached to the Parole
    Board report.

66.  We note that the reasons for the appellant leaving  Jamaica  have  been
    variously stated by him and that they do not sit well one account  with
    the other.  There is the gemstone incident and the incident  concerning
    the Prime Minister's office and the documents  found  therein.   As  we
    have indicated we would find it surprising and reasonably unlikely that
    the appellant would have access to such politicians given  his  profile
    in the past.  It makes little sense  for  him  to  be  concerned  about
    corruption of politicians when, according  to  him,  that  was  endemic
    throughout the party at that time, and indeed the party drew its  funds
    from drug offences and other less savoury matters.

67.  We note finally  the  contention  that  was  made  elsewhere  that  the
    appellant was simply fed up with the violence that was in Jamaica,  and
    finding little way to advance himself and that society, thought that he
    would come to the United Kingdom.

68.  We note the various descriptions  of  the  shooting  incident  that  he
    relies upon and find it difficult to reconcile those incidents one with
    the other.  We do not find it credible that the  appellant,  being  the
    subject of gang violence at the behest of politicians would come to the
    United Kingdom and immediately associate himself with the  Yardies,  no
    doubt still in contact with Jamaica.

69.  Notwithstanding the claimed attempted assassination of  him  there  has
    been no evidence of any attempt upon his life, either before custody or
    during custody.

70.  We note what is said in relation to the killing  of  his  daughter  and
    birth mother but place little reliance upon  that  evidence,  it  being
    certainly second or  third-hand  through  correspondence.   It  is  not
    entirely clear whether or not that was  introduced  as  an  attempt  to
    bolster the claim for asylum.  The appellant has, on his own account  a
    number of  children  and  their  birth  mothers.  We  find  it  lacking
    credibility that the appellant made no sustained  effort  to  find  out
    about them, given what he claims to have happened to one of  them.   We
    recognise of course there is a limitation upon the  ability  to  obtain
    information in prison, but nevertheless the appellant  was  in  contact
    with his girlfriend and no doubt she, through her friends,  could  have
    made further enquiries had  that  been  necessary.   Seemingly  nothing
    seems to have been done since the receipt of the letters in 1996 to the
    present time.

71.  We do not find, therefore, looking at the matter as a  whole  that  the
    appellant is credible as to the profile which he claims  to  have  made
    for himself in Jamaica.

72.  We are aware that he was an informer in the  United  Kingdom  and  that
    that was revealed publicly in the various articles  in  or  around  his
    trial in 1996.  There has been little more recent than that in terms of
    publicity.  We are not persuaded that  there  would  be  any  realistic
    likelihood of such being alive in the minds of  those  in  Jamaica  who
    might bear him ill-will.  There is a paucity of information as  to  the
    extent to which he gave information.  An article from Nick Davies dated
    3rd February 1997 records the appellant as claiming  that  he  provided
    information about other Jamaican  gangsters  in  London,  but  gave  no
    reference  to  giving  information  about  anybody  in  Jamaica.    The
    appellant included in his amended bundle  dated  9th  October  2013  at
    pages 521 to 522 a decision refusing permission to  appeal  decided  by
    Special Adjudicator Allen  which shows that  at  the  previous  hearing
    before Mr Justice Hodge, then Chief Adjudicator, a decision promulgated
    on 10th October 2001, it was not accepted that the appellant had  given
    information  about  the  Jamaican  police  to   the   UK   authorities.
    Unfortunately that determination is no longer available.   We  cite  it
    simply within the overall context of this case.

73.   In  terms  of  the  up-to-date  background  evidence  we  pay  regard,
    particularly to the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  of  15th
    January 2013, to the references to the  various  politicians  that  are
    claimed to have featured in the life of the appellant and note comments
    made by Mr Jarvis as supported in that report as to their retirement or
    demise.

74.  Perhaps of more relevance is to note the efforts that have  been  taken
    to deal with corruption and to reduce the  power  of  gangs.   We  note
    particularly paragraph 9.03, a  quotation  of  the  USSD  Report  2011,
    noting of the community policing initiative to address the longstanding
    apathy between the security forces and many  poor  neighbourhoods,  and
    also at 9.11 the actions taken to address corruption within the  police
    force.  Many police were arrested on corruption.  There were  voluntary
    lie detector tests introduced and it is clear that their initiative  of
    retraining police officers to restore respect and responsibility.

75.  We note the issue of witness protection. Whether or not  the  appellant
    would fall within that is not entirely clear.  What is clear however is
    that steps are being taken to address  corruption  and  to  reduce  the
    power of the gangs.

76.  In all the circumstances we do  not  find  there  to  be  any  credible
    evidence that we can accept that the  appellant  is  any  more  than  a
    convicted criminal in Jamaica and a murderer in the United Kingdom.  We
    find there to be no reasonable likelihood in such circumstances that he
    would be the target for retribution I returned. We find   that  he  may
    safely be returned to Jamaica to resume his life there.

77.  We bear in mind his children and family connections in that regard.

78.  We note the  statement  of  Daphne  Lloyd  Cook  and  of  her  physical
    condition.  Her statement is however to persuade us that the  appellant
    will face ill-treatment in Jamaica rather than she cannot go there.

79.  In any event, it is entirely clear to us, given the  danger  which  the
    appellant presents to the public in the United Kingdom  that  it  would
    not be in any sense in the public interest for him  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  We see no reason why any relationship that he may have
    with Daphne could not be continued elsewhere.

80.  The other matter of course which we must bear in mind is  the  risk  of
    suicide in the light of the reports that have been cited.  We  bear  in
    mind the structured approach that is to be taken and  set  out  in  the
    case of J.  There was no evidence that the appellant  is  disorientated
    in mind such as to present a risk to his health  .  We  note  that  the
    suicide attempts were made in custody in 1996 whilst on remand for  the
    Murder. There are mood swings but it is not suggested  they  themselves
    generally create any danger to the appellant in his taking of his life.



81.  The suicide risk therefore is a small one coming into  prominence  many
    years ago when in  detention  awaiting  his  trial.   There  is  little
    indication in the  folios  attached  to  the  parole  report  that  the
    appellant has attempted any self-harm or suicide  since.   Clearly,  we
    recognise that were he to be in  detention  with  a  view  to  imminent
    removal that that might precipitate another suicide attempt.

82.  We  note  however  that  the  authorities  were  able  to  monitor  the
    appellant and to prevent that which he had attempted to do to  himself.
    We see no reason why he cannot be monitored and protected from  himself
    during the period of his removal to Jamaica.

83.  We  note  that  there  are  supportive  agencies  in  Jamaica  and  the
    appellant himself on his own account has family members there to assist
    him should he chose to seek their support.  We do  not  find  that  the
    applicant's  fear  of  ill-  treatment  in  the  receiving   state   is
    objectively well-founded or that there is  any  real  risk  of  suicide
    outside the immediate process of his removal.

84.  We do not find therefore that the appellant is at risk of harm,  either
    from politicians, police, gang members or himself were  he  to  return.
    As to Article 8, we adopt the reasoning of  the  Tribunal  set  out  in
    paragraphs 36 to 39 in relation to that matter.

85.  Thus, in  remaking  the  decision  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    dismissed.

86.  The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.   The  appeal
    on human rights grounds in relation to Articles 2 and 3 is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

