
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00200/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2015                    |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     OD
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria.   I  have  anonymised  this
         decision  as  it  refers  to  sensitive  matters   concerning   the
         appellant's sexuality and mental health.

Procedural history

      2. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
         decision to make a deportation order against him, which was  served
         on 16 January 2014.  In a decision promulgated on 16  June  2014  a
         panel of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  appeal,
         having found the appellant not to be a credible witness and  having
         concluded that Dr Winton's psychiatric report dated 25 May 2014 was
         unreliable.

      3. In grounds of appeal dated 25 June 2014 Counsel who appeared before
         the panel set out four grounds of appeal.  Ground 1 states that the
         panel made four factual errors in its decision and these amount  to
         errors of law.  This was accompanied by a  witness  statement  from
         the appellant's solicitor, Ms Brown and an email  from  Dr  Winton.
         Ground 2 submits that the panel erred in law in  stating  that  any
         Article  8  analysis  is  completed  solely  by  reference  to  the
         Immigration Rules.  Ground 3  argues  that  the  panel  reached  an
         irrational conclusion that alternative medication is  available  to
         the appellant in Nigeria.  Ground 4 submits that the panel  wrongly
         expected Dr Winton to comment upon the availability  of  healthcare
         provision In Nigeria when this is outside his expertise.

      4. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on 7 July 2014 but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr on
         8 September 2014.

      5. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision contains a material error of law.

Hearing

      6. The appellant did not appear at the hearing.   Ms  Smith  explained
         that his mental health had deteriorated and he  had  recently  been
         detained at HMP Nottingham.  Ms Smith was content for  the  hearing
         to proceed but only to determine whether or not the panel had  made
         an error of law.  Mr McVeety did not object to this.

      7. During the course of her helpful oral submissions Ms  Smith  relied
         upon the four grounds of appeal prepared by Counsel who represented
         the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, save  for  ground  2,
         which she accepted was difficult to follow.  Mr  McVeety  responded
         to each ground  of  appeal  in  turn.   I  refer  to  the  parties'
         submissions in more detail when I address each ground below.

      8. After hearing submissions I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

      9. I observed at the hearing and both representatives agreed that  the
         decision of the panel is not a clearly written one.  There  are  no
         sub-headings and there is  no  clear  structure  to  the  decision.
         There is no clear direction that the relevant  legal  framework  is
         set out entirely within the Rules (398 and 399) and that these  are
         a complete code.  The recitation of what was said during the course
         of  the  evidence   is   difficult   to   follow.    However   both
         representatives agreed that the question for me is whether  or  not
         the decision contains a material error of law  and  that  I  should
         assess this by reference to the grounds of appeal  relied  upon  on
         behalf of the appellant.  I now consider each ground of  appeal  in
         turn.

    Ground 1

     10. Ground 1 submits that the panel made mistakes of fact  that  caused
         unfairness and as such erred in law in four discrete  ways  divided
         (a) to (d), which I address in turn below.

     11. I first deal with the fresh evidence  relied  upon  which  was  not
         before the panel - the statement of Ms Brown and the email from  Dr
         Winton.  Mr McVeety argued that this evidence was a belated attempt
         to explain matters, which could and should have been  explained  to
         the panel and should not be admitted.  Ms Smith relied upon in E  &
         R [2004] EWCA Civ 49 which has of course been applied in R (Iran) v
         SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  982  and  reminded  me  that  the  appellant
         maintains he is at risk of serious harm in Nigeria and  as  such  I
         should apply a flexible approach to fresh evidence.   It  is  clear
         from [66] of E & R that for  a  mistake  of  fact  giving  rise  to
         unfairness to be a head of challenge in an appeal  on  a  point  of
         law, there must first have been a mistake as to an  existing  fact,
         including a mistake  as  to  the  availability  of  evidence  on  a
         particular matter; secondly the fact or  evidence  must  have  been
         "established"  in  the  sense  that  it   was   uncontentious   and
         objectively verifiable, and, thirdly, the appellant or his advisors
         must not have been  responsible  for  the  mistake.  Fourthly,  the
         mistake must have played a material (not necessarily decisive) part
         in the Tribunal's reasoning.

     12. In order to establish a mistake of fact, it is often  necessary  to
         admit fresh evidence, as in this case.  The principles  upon  which
         fresh  evidence  may  be  admitted   in   appeals   restricted   to
         establishing an error of law were considered authoritatively by the
         Court of Appeal in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489.   It  is  now
         accepted that these must be applied flexibility in public law cases
         and particularly asylum cases, where anxious scrutiny is  required.
         However as Jackson LJ observed in JG (Jamaica) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
         Civ 215 at [9]:

             "Nevertheless the fact remains, as Mr Gill  points  out,  that
             the Ladd v Marshall principles are  still  relevant,  although
             the court applies them more flexibly. There must be a limit to
             that flexibility."

     13. Unfortunately the appellant's solicitors  have  not  complied  with
         rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
         and paragraph 4.2 of the Practice Direction of the Immigration  and
         Asylum  Chamber  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    I   have   still
         nonetheless  considered  whether  the  fresh  evidence  should   be
         admitted.  In my view the evidence explaining delay (para 3 of  the
         statement) could and should have been before the panel.  There  was
         an obvious and lengthy delay in  the  appellant  telling  the  SSHD
         about his claimed bisexuality yet this  was  not  fully  explained.
         This is obvious evidence that was easily available and  could  have
         been obtained with reasonable diligence.  The fact that  Dr  Winton
         was not instructed to address the appellant's  bisexuality  at  all
         but had access to the relevant materials is clear from  his  report
         (para 2 of statement).  I do not consider that the remainder of the
         statement and Dr Winton's email contains material that  would  have
         an important influence on the result of the case for reasons I  set
         out in more detail below.

     14. In case I am wrong about not admitting the fresh  evidence  I  have
         gone on to determine whether or not  that  evidence  in  any  event
         establishes mistakes of fact causing unfairness.

     15. Turning to (a) first.   The  panel  was  entitled  to  express  its
         concern that the instructions to Dr  Winton  did  not  include  the
         appellant's claim to be bisexual and the fact that he  was  opposed
         to members of his close family finding out about  this  because  of
         their religious and cultural beliefs [39].  This must  be  seen  in
         context.  Whilst a person's sexuality may not always be relevant to
         an assessment of risk of deterioration in mental health if  removed
         to another country, this appellant was  very  concerned  to  ensure
         that his family members in the  UK  did  not  find  out  about  his
         claimed bisexuality such that the public  were  excluded  from  the
         hearing [11] and the witnesses gave evidence without knowing  about
         this aspect of his claim.  The appellant's reasons for not  telling
         his family members about his sexuality are set out in  some  detail
         in his witness statement.  The panel merely  observed  that  it  is
         surprising that the instructions did not highlight the  appellant's
         concerns on the basis that they might be relevant to his perception
         of risk and his prognosis when in Nigeria.  The grounds  of  appeal
         assert that the panel was  wrong  to  state  that  the  appellant's
         solicitors failed to mention his claim to be bisexual to Dr  Winton
         and refer to [39] in this regard.  The panel did  not  state  this.
         The panel simply observed there is no reference to the  appellant's
         bisexuality in the report and  went  on  to  state  there  were  no
         express instructions on the role his bisexuality  and  his  claimed
         difficulty in being open about it  might  have  on  his  prognosis.
         These are not errors of fact.

     16. I now turn to (b).  The panel was entitled to express  its  concern
         that either no steps were taken to seek  evidence  from  those  who
         knew about the appellant's homosexual relationship "or  to  explain
         why such evidence was not available" [41] Even if  steps  had  been
         taken (as set out in Ms Brown's statement) it is not disputed  that
         no explanation was given for the absence of such evidence until the
         appellant was cross-examined [14].  Any mistake of  fact  regarding
         the absence of steps taken is therefore not material  and  did  not
         cause unfairness because the panel made it plain that even if steps
         were taken these were not explained.

     17. It is submitted at (c) that it was a mistake for the panel to state
         "that the appellant had not  actually  told  his  solicitors  about
         those who knew  of  his  bisexuality  when  the  appeal  was  being
         prepared".  This is said to be based upon [42].   This  is  a  very
         difficult paragraph to follow and is not  clearly  expressed.   The
         panel here appear to express its concern about  the  delay  in  the
         appellant's claim to be bisexual being put to the SSHD.  It is  not
         disputed  that  when  the   appellant   completed   his   screening
         questionnaire in April 2012 he did  not  refer  to  this  being  an
         issue.  The appellant explained at the hearing  that  he  told  his
         solicitor about his sexuality after this in 2012.  Yet neither  the
         appellant nor his  solicitors  sought  to  clarify  or  update  the
         information contained in the questionnaire until January 2014  when
         grounds of appeal  were  lodged  in  relation  to  the  deportation
         decision.  On the material available to the panel, it was  entitled
         to be concerned about this delay.  Ms Smith argued that  any  blame
         lies with the solicitors and not the appellant.  I  do  not  accept
         that the panel was not entitled to draw adverse inferences from the
         appellant's failure to ensure that his full claim was available  to
         the SSHD at an early stage.

     18. At (d) the grounds criticise the panel's "assertion that Dr  Winton
         had not received the  letter  of  13  June  2013".   The  reference
         provided for this in the panel's decision is [57].  This  criticism
         is difficult to follow.  The point being made by the panel at  [50]
         to [57] is that Dr Winton's summary of the 13 June 2013  letter  at
         4.3.1  is  not  an  accurate  one  [51-52].   The  panel  therefore
         concluded that either Dr Winton did not receive the correct  letter
         or  that  he  has  misinterpreted  its  contents  [53].   In  these
         circumstances I can detect no mistake of fact causing the appellant
         unfairness regarding the panel's findings in this regard.

     19. Before leaving ground 1 it is important to observe that even if the
         panel, contrary to my conclusions, made an  error  of  law  in  not
         accepting  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  bisexual,  it  is  very
         difficult to see how this is a material error, in so far as Article
         3 of the ECHR and asylum is concerned.  It is now well  established
         following HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 13 that if it is  accepted  that  a
         gay person will be returned to a  country  where  people  who  live
         openly are subject to persecution,  the  Tribunal  must  go  on  to
         determine what the individual would do. If the individual would  in
         fact live discreetly and so avoid  persecution,  then  it  must  be
         asked why he would do so.  HJ (Iran) then said this [82]

             "If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.

             If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted."

     20. It is clear from the appellant's evidence  in  this  case  that  he
         lives discreetly in the UK. He has not disclosed his  sexuality  to
         his mother and sister or close  friends.   His  statement  explains
         that they will not understand.  He maintained that position at  the
         hearing and made it clear that he was not ready to  be  open  about
         his sexuality either in the UK or Nigeria [15].  This seems to be a
         case in which the appellant would  choose  to  live  discreetly  in
         Nigeria as he does in the UK, simply because that is how he himself
         wishes to live, or because of social pressures, such as not wanting
         to distress his family members or embarrass his friends.

    Ground 2

     21. Ms Smith did not rely upon this ground.  She was right  to  do  so.
         It is very difficult to follow.  It is now and was at the  time  of
         the hearing accepted that the Immigration Rules are a complete code
         in deportation cases.  This has been recently explained in  Bossade
         (ss117A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC):

             "31.      The existing case  law  makes  very  clear  that  in
             foreign national deportation  cases,  the  two-stage  approach
             must be conducted entirely within the Rules because they are a
             "complete code" for these purposes (MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA
             Civ 1192 at [16]); the same is not necessarily true for  other
             types of cases where there may be gaps. In Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department v AJ (Angola) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1636,
             Sales LJ stated at [39]:

                  "The fact that the new rules [on  foreign  criminals]  are
                  intended  to  operate   as   a   comprehensive   code   is
                  significant, because  it  means  that  an  official  or  a
                  tribunal should seek to take  account  of  any  Convention
                  rights of an appellant through the lens of the  new  rules
                  themselves, rather than looking to apply Convention rights
                  for themselves in a  free-standing  way  outside  the  new
                  rules. This feature of the new rules makes  the  decision-
                  making  framework  in  relation   to   foreign   criminals
                  different from that in relation  to  other  parts  of  the
                  Immigration Rules, where the Secretary of State retains  a
                  general discretion outside the Rules in exercise of which,
                  in some circumstances, decisions may need to  be  made  in
                  order to accommodate certain claims for leave to remain on
                  the basis of Convention rights, as explained in Huang  and
                  R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
                  [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)."

             32. In SS (Congo) Sales LJ at [45] put matters this way:

                  "The latter stage of  the  [two-stage  analysis]  analysis
                  will be covered by the text of the Rules themselves, as in
                  relation to the  Rules  covering  deportation  of  foreign
                  criminals reviewed in MF (Nigeria). Those Rules laid  down
                  substantive conditions which, if satisfied, would lead  to
                  the grant of LTR,  but  also  stated  that  LTR  might  be
                  granted in "exceptional circumstances" if the  substantive
                  conditions were not satisfied in a particular case.  Where
                  the Rules take this form, it can be said that they form  a
                  "complete code", in the sense  that  both  stages  of  the
                  analysis are covered by the text of the  Rules.  But  this
                  does not take one very far, since under  the  "exceptional
                  circumstances"  rubric  one  still  has   to   allow   for
                  consideration of any matters bearing on the application of
                  Article 8 for the purposes of  the  second  stage  of  the
                  analysis: see AJ (Angola), above, at [46] and  [55].  This
                  is the basic point made by this court at paragraph. [44] -
                  [46] of its judgment in MF (Nigeria)."

             33. We have seen cases in which tribunal judges have  regarded
             Part 5A considerations as provisions that have to be  directly
             applied and without qualification when  deciding  cases  under
             the Immigration Rules. We respectfully suggest  that  such  an
             approach cannot be correct for a number of reasons."

     22. Whilst the panel did not properly direct itself to paragraph 398 of
         the Immigration Rules  and  instead  conducted  a  full  Article  8
         assessment, this is not a material error  of  law  on  the  panel's
         findings.

    Ground 3

     23. This ground submits that the panel's  conclusion  that  alternative
         medication would be available [61] and [74] in Nigeria  is  without
         any evidential basis and irrational.  One of the difficulties  with
         this submission is that Dr Winton himself understood that there are
         other injectable  medications  in  Nigeria  at  8.3.2  and  "it  is
         possible that one of them would work to the extent  of  suppressing
         his symptoms although it would be unlikely to lead to full control.
          In conclusion if he  were  to  be  placed  on  a  different  depot
         medication it is possible that  it  might  prove  as  effective  as
         Paliperidone but there is no guarantee".  Of course Dr  Winton  had
         acknowledged at 8.3.1 that Paliperidone  had  only  suppressed  his
         symptoms by about 50%.

     24. The panel did not accept that there was  sufficient  evidence  that
         Resperidone remained ineffective for the appellant [59].  The panel
         accepted that there was evidence from 2012 that it  was  unsuitable
         at that time but concluded that the analysis has not  been  updated
         in evidence upon which it was prepared to place  reliance.   Whilst
         the panel did not accept the reliability of Dr Winton's report,  Dr
         Winton's evidence was not that Respiridone was not suitable for him
         at present but that if he is given tablets his psychosis  would  be
         more difficult to  control.   It  was  submitted  that  absent  the
         support of family he would not be sufficiently prompted to take his
         medication.  This was based upon the appellant's case that  he  did
         not have  supportive  family  in  Nigeria.   The  panel  of  course
         rejected the evidence of the appellant, his sister  and  mother  to
         that effect [68-74].

     25. When the decision is read as a whole it is clear that the panel did
         not consider that the appellant displaced the burden  upon  him  to
         establish that alternative medication was not available.

    Ground 4

     26. At [48] the panel merely observed that  it  would  have  been  more
         helpful for Dr Winton  to  have  been  appraised  of  the  relevant
         services available in Nigeria to treat the  appellant.   The  panel
         was entitled to make this observation - it would have been entirely
         within Dr Winton's expertise for  him  to  assess  the  appellant's
         likely response  to  the  mental  health  services  and  medication
         available in  Nigeria.   Indeed  Dr  Winton  plainly  regarded  the
         availability of medication to be relevant  to  his  assessment  and
         conducted research himself (as his email makes clear).

     27. It follows that I do not find that the  appellant  has  established
         that  the  panel  made  an  error  of  law.    Whilst   there   are
         unsatisfactory aspects to the decision and it might be described as
         harsh in its findings and treatment of Dr Winton's report, it  does
         not contain any material error of law.

Decision

     28. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and I do  not  set
         aside the decision.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 August 2015

