
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00010/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     g b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, G B, was born in 1982 and is a citizen of  Jamaica.   I
    shall hereafter refer to the appellant as the  respondent  and  to  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. On 10 December 2013,  the  respondent  made  an  order  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application to revoke a deportation order.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Levin)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 10 September 2014, allowed the
    appeal.  The respondent now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. In a long and very detailed decision,  Judge  Levin  has  set  out  the
    appellant's immigration history [4]  and  his  findings  [18-65].   The
    grounds of appeal do not challenge those findings of fact.  Rather, the
    respondent challenges the decision on the basis that the judge used  an
    incorrect version of the Immigration Rules in his analysis.  The  judge
    had found that the Immigration Rules for those  pertaining  as  at  the
    date of the decision; however, the grounds assert that the judge should
    have determined the appeal having  regard  to  the  new  provisions  in
    paragraphs 398 and 399 as per the changes to those provisions put  into
    effect on 28th July 2014.  Before me, Mr  Nicholson,  Counsel  for  the
    appellant, accepted that the grounds were correct in that the judge had
    applied the incorrect rules.  He argued, however, that any error of law
    was entirely immaterial in the light of the judge's  detailed  findings
    and his conclusions on the evidence.

 4. In short, the  appeal  turns  on  the  situation  of  the  son  of  the
    appellant,  J.   The  judge  found  that  J  would  "have  to  go  into
    residential care if the  appellant  were  removed".   J  is  a  British
    citizen who has resided in the United Kingdom continuously for the last
    seven years (at the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
    he was aged 12 years).  There was medical evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to indicate that the mental condition of J's  mother  was
    "brittle".  The judge found that J's mother was not able to care for  J
    by reason of her history of depression and her medical condition at the
    time  of  the  hearing.   Incorrectly,  as  it  transpired,  the  judge
    considered whether or not it would be reasonable for  J  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom to live abroad with the appellant.  It  is  clear  that,
    had he applied the correct version of the Immigration Rules, the  judge
    should have considered whether or not it was "unduly harsh"  for  J  to
    leave the United Kingdom to live with the appellant  in  Jamaica.   The
    judge clearly found that J and the  appellant  enjoyed  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship [58].  Moreover, in the light  of  his
    findings regarding J's mother,  the  judge  had  found  that  only  the
    appellant was able to provide a stable home for J  and  would,  if  the
    appellant were removed, have to live in foster care  or  a  residential
    home.  The evidence  indicated  that  J  himself  would  be  likely  to
    experience a number of behavioural  and  other  difficulties  including
    soiling himself, behaving badly at school.  The judge  accepted  expert
    evidence indicating that improvement in these behaviours have been "all
    down to his father".  The judge concluded that only the  appellant  was
    in a position to care for J; his partner was, as a result of her mental
    condition, incapable of caring for him whereas  J's  birth  mother  had
    handed him over to Manchester Social Services in  November  2013.   The
    judge's finding [61] that  neither  the  appellant's  partner  nor  J's
    biological mother were either willing or able to  care  for  J  in  the
    event of the appellant being deported has not been  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

 5. In the light of these various findings, the judge concluded that it was
    "out of the question for J to move to Jamaica [without the  appellant's
    partner] given his severe behavioural problems  previously  identified.
    I therefore find it would not be reasonable to expect J  to  leave  the
    UK."  The judge accepted (also a finding not challenged in the  grounds
    of appeal) that the appellant's partner was either unwilling or  unable
    to travel with the appellant and J to Jamaica.

 6. Mr Nicholson referred me to the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    (Chapter 13: Criminality Guidance in Article 8  ECHR  Cases)  dated  28
    July 2014 a copy of which had been before the First-tier Tribunal.   At
    paragraph 3.5.14 it is stated:

         "If the only way a child could  remain  in  the  UK  if  a  foreign
         national is deported would be in the care  of  social  services  or
         foster care that is not already in place (excluding  care  provided
         by a family member or a  private  fostering  arrangement)  it  will
         usually be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the  UK  without
         the person who is to be deported, unless there  was  evidence  that
         the child's best interests would be better served in such care than
         in the care of the foreign criminal.  However consideration must be
         given to the age of the child or how long he is likely to remain in
         care."

 7. It is true to say that Judge Levin did not investigate  in  any  detail
    the probable length of time J might remain in  foster  or  other  local
    authority care in the event that the appellant were deported.  However,
    it is clear from any  reading  of  his  determination  that  the  judge
    believed that, on the evidence and  given  the  incapability  of  those
    individuals who might otherwise care for J, the child would  remain  in
    local authority care for the remainder of his minority.   Mr  Nicholson
    submitted that, in the light of the  instructions  from  which  I  have
    quoted above, the judge would, on the evidence,  have  reached  exactly
    the same conclusion had he applied the correct version of HC 395.

 8. I accept Mr Nicholson's submissions.  As I have  noted,  Judge  Levin's
    decision and reasons is extremely detailed and his analysis  thoughtful
    and thorough.  It was unfortunate that neither he nor the  professional
    representatives appear to have  been  aware  of  the  change  from  the
    provisions of HC 395.  However, because his analysis and  reasoning  is
    so thorough, I am satisfied that, even if the  judge  had  applied  the
    relevant law, he would have reached the same decision.  Indeed, such  a
    decision would have been in line with the respondent's own instructions
    for its officers applying the new (i.e. "unduly harsh") provisions.  In
    the circumstances, whilst I find that there has been an error of law, I
    have chosen to exercise my discretion to refrain from setting aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which I direct shall stand.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 4 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
