

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: DA/00257/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |            Decision and Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 24th November 2015                  |            On 11th December 2015       |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before


                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Zdravko Yordanov Zdravkov
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    -

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Bulgaria  born  in  1982.  On  the  3rd
    February 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Page and Ms VS Street  JP)
    allowed his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  deport
    him pursuant to section 32(5) of the Borders Act 2007.   The  Secretary
    of State now has permission[1] to appeal against that decision.


 2. This matter first  came  before  me  on  the  20th  October  2015.  The
    Respondent did not attend. It was clear that this was  because  he  did
    not know about the hearing. The last address that the Tribunal  had  on
    file had been his place of detention, yet Mr Melvin was able to tell me
    that the Respondent had been released from detention in May 2015.     I
    was not satisfied on that occasion that it would be in the interests of
    justice to proceed in the Respondent's absence. Although  the  Tribunal
    did not have a current address for the  Respondent,  the  Secretary  of
    State did. Mr Melvin was able to supply me with this address, given  by
    the Respondent upon his release, at the hearing.  I therefore adjourned
    the matter so that notice of hearing could be served on all parties.

 3. This was done on the 26th October 2015 when a  notice  of  hearing  was
    sent to the last known address held for the Respondent by the Secretary
    of State. The Respondent did not attend the hearing  before  me.  I  am
    satisfied that on this  occasion  it  would  not  be  contrary  to  the
    interests of justice to proceed. I was not  satisfied  that  a  further
    adjournment would result in the  Respondent's  attendance  at  a  later
    date.  I therefore proceeded to hear submissions from Mr Melvin, and  I
    reserved my decision.



    The Appeal Before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Secretary of State's case before the First-tier Tribunal  was  that
    the deportation was justified on grounds of public policy or  security.
    The Respondent had, since his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  been
    convicted on four occasions of six offences: he had been cautioned  for
    common assault in August 2011, received  a  conditional  discharge  for
    damaging property and failing to surrender to custody  in  December  of
    that year, was fined and subject to a restraining order in  July  2012,
    received a suspended sentence of 12 weeks' imprisonment in October 2013
    for battery which was activated a month later when he was brought  back
    to court on charges of damaging  property.    He  was  sentenced  to  a
    further week in prison on that occasion. The Secretary of  State  noted
    that the Respondent had failed to comply with his community order: this
    indicated that he had not undertaken the necessary  rehabilitation  and
    he therefore remained a risk to the public. His record  showed  him  to
    have an "anti-social attitude".

 5. The First-tier Tribunal agreed that the Respondent had not  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom and so attracted  no
    enhanced protection against removal. If the Secretary  of  State  could
    show his removal to be justified on the grounds  of  public  policy  or
    security he would not succeed in his appeal; the determination sets out
    Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006  in  full.   The  Tribunal  directs  itself  to  the   established
    principles of proportionality, in particular that the  conduct  of  the
    person in question must represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the fundamental interests  of  society.  Relevant  to
    this was the question of rehabilitation and propensity to reoffend.

 6. Applying these principles to the facts the determination notes that the
    Respondent has been convicted of a  number  of  offences  arising  from
    "domestic incidents" and that he has  failed  to  comply  with  various
    orders.  Live evidence was taken from a DC Barnes  of  Operation  Nexus
    who expressed a fear that the Respondent would return to his  place  of
    former  habitual  residence,  Haringey  in  North  London,  where   the
    likelihood was that he would take up with his girlfriend, a woman  with
    a criminal record to put the Respondent's "in the shade". Much  of  her
    offending, as his, was linked to excessive consumption of alcohol.   DC
    Barnes believed that this relationship would have a  "negative  impact"
    on the Respondent.  In his favour was the evidence that he did come  to
    the United Kingdom with an intention to work, has in fact  worked,  and
    that he had taken numerous courses whilst in prison.

 7.  Weighing  all  of  this  evidence  together  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    concluded  that  DC  Barnes  was  right  to  have  concerns  about  the
    Respondent's relationship with his girlfriend:

         "35...If the past is a reliable guide to the  future  there  is  an
         obvious risk of further domestic discord - and possible offences  -
         should the appellant return to Haringey  and  a  relationship  with
         Ashley McKay. However this is not  enough  to  establish  that  the
         appellant poses sufficient risk to the public for  his  deportation
         to be justified on the grounds of public policy, public security or
         public health.


         36. However, we find on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
         respondent has made out a case for saying, that if  this  appellant
         returns to his  relationship  with  Ashley  McKay  then  given  his
         volatile nature and her problems with alcohol, there is  likely  to
         be more minor offending if he has been drinking alcohol  and  there
         are any domestic arguments or incidents with her. But that  is  not
         the risk to the general public that the respondent has  argued  for
         to justify  the  appellant's  deportation.  The  respondent's  risk
         assessment  is  based  entirely   on   the   appellant's   previous
         convictions and his relationship with his  previous  associates  in
         Haringey. There is no general risk to the public".

 8. For these reasons, the appeal was allowed.




    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 9. The Secretary of State submits that the decision must be set aside  for
    the following reasons:


        i) In respect of the finding that the Respondent does not present a
           genuine present and sufficiently serious threat so as to justify
           his expulsion, the Tribunal has failed to give adequate reasons,
           has made findings contrary to the evidence, and  has  failed  to
           take relevant evidence into account;


       ii) In its consideration of proportionality the Tribunal has  failed
           to consider whether there  is  a  propensity  to  reoffend,  and
           whether the Respondent is integrated into UK society.


10. To these written grounds of appeal Mr Melvin  added  that  the  central
    core of the determination, paragraphs 35 and 36,  were  irrational,  or
    approaching irrationality. The finding that the Respondent did  present
    a risk of reoffending in Haringey could not be squared with the finding
    that he did not present a sufficiently serious threat  to  warrant  his
    deportation.




    My Findings

11. In this deportation action  it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    establish that the personal conduct of  the  Respondent  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  The Secretary  of  State  sought  to
    discharge this burden by pointing to the Respondent's six offences in a
    period of four years' residence, his failure to complete courses  which
    would satisfy the Secretary of State that he  had  been  rehabilitated,
    his problems with alcohol and his tempestuous relationship with a woman
    whose criminal record put the Respondent's "in  the  shade".   Although
    the Secretary of State failed to comply with the directions to  produce
    various documents including the  OASyS  assessment  and  pre-sentencing
    report, the Secretary of State was able to rely on the  evidence  of  a
    live witness, DC Barnes. Her evidence then, formed the  centrepiece  of
    the Secretary of State's case.


12. The evidence of DC Barnes is recorded and evaluated at  paragraphs  25-
    28.  It is summarised at 27 as being that the Respondent only  posed  a
    risk in  Haringey.  That  evidence  is  endorsed  by  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 36 to support the overall conclusion that the Respondent does
    not present a "general risk to the public".  I  am  satisfied  that  in
    reaching this conclusion the First-tier Tribunal  has  failed  to  take
    relevant matters into account. DC Barnes directed her evidence  at  the
    risk that the Respondent posed in Haringey simply because that is where
    she believed he would go:

         "Her assessment of risk was  that  the  appellant  had  no  friends
         outside of Haringey, London, where the appellant lived  before,  so
         she feared that the appellant  would  return  to  Haringey  to  his
         former associates and drink alcohol" [25]


    The fact that the risk posed was localised did not mean that it did not
    impact upon society as a whole. That is because  the  domestic  discord
    between  the  Respondent  and  his  partner  or   friends   had   wider
    ramifications once public services became involved. This  determination
    nowhere recognises the cost to society of  the  multiple  police  call-
    outs,  interventions,  prosecutions,  sentences  and   involvement   of
    agencies such as the probation service. Nor, as Mr Melvin  points  out,
    was  any  consideration  given  to  the  upset  or  distress  that  the
    Respondent's behaviour might cause to people in  his  local  community.
    The finding that further offences were likely [at 28] should  have  led
    the Tribunal to an analysis of whether such offences could be deemed  a
    sufficiently serious threat to warrant deportation.    As  it  is  such
    analysis appears to be confined to noting that there is no risk to  the
    general public (as opposed to his girlfriend or other associates).  For
    the reasons given, I consider this to be an incomplete  assessment  and
    the determination must be set aside.


13. As the determination is set aside I  need  not  address  the  remaining
    grounds in any detail. I would only add that there is some merit in  Mr
    Melvin's  argument  that  the  ratio  of  this  decision   "approaches"
    irrationality: in the vast majority of actions taken  under  Regulation
    21 it is likely that the risk posed will  be  'localised'  rather  than
    posing a risk to the general public throughout the whole country.   The
    question is whether the behaviour in question reaches the threshold set
    out in Regulation 21(5)(c).


14. Having had regard to the extent of fact finding  required  in  the  re-
    making of this decision, I consider it appropriate that this matter  be
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the
    Respondent will avail himself of the opportunity to  attend  a  further
    hearing, give evidence and make representations on his own behalf.




      Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


16. The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  order  to  be
    remade.


17. I make no direction for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           28th November
                                    2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

