

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                      Appeal Number:
DA/00605/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated               |
|On 19 December 2013                         |On 23 December 2013       |
|                                            |                          |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                 Ah Mei Chen
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       The appellant is a Chinese national born  on  15  June  1963.  A
      deportation order was made against her  on  11  March  2013  following
      various  criminal  convictions.  On  25  October  I  set   aside   the
      determination of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal chaired  by  Judge
      Stanford and promulgated on 23 August 2013.  I declined to remake  the
      decision at that stage  as  the  appellant  was  unrepresented  and  I
      considered  that  she  should  have   the   chance   to   seek   legal
      representation.

   2.       When the matter came before me on 19 December, the appellant was
      represented. Mr Pipi relied on a skeleton  argument  which  he  served
      just before the commencement of the hearing and  in  which  he  raised
      numerous  problems  with  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   and
      procedure. Mr Tarlow was given time to  digest  the  contents  of  the
      statement and on resuming he sought an adjournment for  the  Secretary
      of State to rectify the paperwork. Mr Pipi objected. He submitted that
      as the respondent had accepted that the decision  was  defective,  the
      appeal should be allowed on the basis that it was  not  in  accordance
      with the  law.  Mr  Tarlow  then  indicated  he  was  withdrawing  the
      decision.

   3.       I reserved my determination which I now give.

   4.       Having considered Mr Pipi's  skeleton  argument  and  the  brief
      submissions made, I conclude that the most Mr Tarlow could  have  done
      at this stage was to withdraw the respondent's case, rather  than  the
      decision. That, however, would have meant that the  challenge  to  the
      original determination, which was raised by the  Secretary  of  State,
      was withdrawn and that the decision allowing the appeal on  Article  8
      grounds stood. As what Mr Tarlow wanted,  was  for  the  Secretary  of
      State to remake the defective decision, it seems to me that  the  best
      course of action is to do as Mr Pipi urged and to allow the appeal  to
      the limited extent that the decision is not  in  accordance  with  the
      law, there being no reference within it to the country to which it  is
      proposed  the  appellant  should  be  returned.  Although  Mr   Tarlow
      suggested that the letter of refusal made the  destination  plain,  he
      accepted that this information was not contained within the notice  of
      decision as required by  reg.  5(1)(a)  and  (b)  of  the  Immigration
      (Notices) Regulations 2003. In the circumstances I must find that  the
      notice of decision is not in accordance with the law.

   5.       Mr Tarlow has assured the court that his communication with  the
      Home Office caseworker will result in the matter being addressed as  a
      priority.

Decision

   6.       The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it  is  not  in
      accordance with the law.

      Signed:

      Dr R Keki?
      Judge  of  the  Upper   Tribunal                                    19
      December 2013
