
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00116/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2014                                |On 28 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

      THE HON LORD BANNATYNE, SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     S S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

1.   On 14 February 2012 a decision was made by the respondent  to  issue  a
    Deportation Order in respect of the appellant.  The appellant exercised
    his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal  was  based
    on the appellant's contention of a well-founded fear of persecution  or
    a real risk of a breach of his rights under Article 3.  The appeal  was
    dismissed.  The appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  to
    this Tribunal was initially refused.  On a renewed application  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  Judge  Warr  again  refused  permission.   Thereafter
    permission having been granted by the Court  of  Appeal  to  apply  for
    judicial review and there being no request under CPR Part 54.7A(9)  for
    a substantive hearing, the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  refuse
    permission to appeal was quashed.

Background

2.   The appellant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  conveniently
    set out at paragraphs 6  to  16  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as follows:

        "The Appellant's Case
           6.  The Appellant  submitted  two  witness  statements  for  the
              hearing of his appeal which he testified were both read  back
              to him in his own language, were true and  accurate,  and  he
              adopted as  his  evidence  in  chief.   The  first  of  those
              statements was dated 1 February 2012.  In that statement  the
              Appellant said that he is a Tamil from Sri Lanka and that  he
              was born on 13 March 1987.  At the date of hearing he was  25
              years of age.  He said that he  has  one  brother  and  three
              sisters and that his parents are still living.  All of  these
              close family continue to live in Sri  Lanka  except  for  one
              sister who is living in the UK, in Wembley, where she  has  a
              post-study work visa.
           7.  The Appellant explained in his statement  that  in  February
              2006 he was in the second year of studying for his  A-levels.
              The LTTE was in control of the area of Jaffna which  included
              his school  and  they  held  meetings  at  the  school.   The
              Appellant said that he was asked by the LTTE to join them but
              he did not wish to do so as he was  studying  and  wanted  to
              stay with his friends.  He protested about the disruption  to
              his studies, which led  to  him  being  accused  of  being  a
              supporter of the  government  Tamil  party,  the  EPDP.   The
              Appellant claimed that in February  2006  four  people  in  a
              white van came to his parents' house and that he  was  forced
              into the van, blindfolded and taken away to a place where  he
              was detained, beaten and pressured to  join  the  LTTE.   The
              Appellant said that  he  was  kept  in  a  room  without  any
              external light, that he was caught on a few occasions when he
              tried to escape and that he was beaten further.  After  about
              three weeks he was taken to a second camp where he was placed
              in an underground bunker.
           8.  In October 2006 the Appellant claims that he capitulated and
              agreed to join the LTTE.  He says that he was warned that  if
              he tried to escape he would be killed and that he  was  taken
              to another camp where he was  required  to  undergo  military
              training, which he refused to do as he refused to fight.   He
              was placed to work in the hospital for injured soldiers where
              he worked as a cleaner.
           9.  While in that camp the Appellant claims that he was  injured
              when a bomb fell and he was hit by shrapnel in his right  arm
              and his side.  His right leg was  broken.   Although  he  was
              treated at the camp for the shrapnel  wounds,  the  Appellant
              said that he could not be taken from the camp by  his  family
              because he was so badly injured.  The Appellant  claims  that
              the LTTE eventually agreed that he could be removed from  the
              camp provided that he undertook to provide information to the
              LTTE once he had recovered.  He was taken to Jaffna  by  boat
              and then to hospital where he had an operation  on  his  leg.
              He went to the hospital in April 2007 and  returned  home  in
              May 2007 where he convalesced.
          10.  When he eventually began to go out again, he  said  that  he
              began  to  supply  the  LTTE  with  information  about   army
              movements and units in  the  area.   In  his  testimony,  the
              Appellant said that he would go to  the  local  Hindu  Temple
              which was near to a main road and army camp  where  he  could
              observe movements of soldiers and army units.  Once a week he
              was visited by a member from the LTTE to whom he  passed  the
              information.  He said in his  testimony  that  he  also  gave
              information about the  location  of  landmines,  although  he
              clarified that this was information  about  the  location  of
              people and cattle because the LTTE believed that there  would
              not be any landmines where there were people and cattle.  The
              Appellant was questioned as to why he had not  mentioned  any
              of this information  gathering  activity  during  his  asylum
              interview.  He replied that he had only been  asked  what  he
              did immediately  after  joining  the  LTTE  and  he  had  not
              commenced the spying  activities  until  after  he  had  been
              released from hospital and returned home.
          11.  In his statement the  Appellant  claimed  that  in  July  or
              August 2008 officers of the CID and  the  army  came  to  his
              family home looking for him.  He hid behind or under  a  sofa
              and his brother, who spoke to the officers, denied  that  the
              Appellant was at home.  The Appellant said in  his  testimony
              that  the  officers  had  not  searched  the  house  on  that
              occasion.  They came on a second  occasion  looking  for  the
              Appellant and he said, in his statement, that he was able  to
              escape out of the back of the house and  go  to  his  uncle's
              house.  His father then arranged for him to  go  to  Colombo,
              which he did in September 2008 where he stayed with a  friend
              of his father's called Kamalan who was with the EPDP.   While
              in Colombo, the Appellant obtained a visa to come to  the  UK
              to study.  He arrived in the UK on 9 January 2009 with  leave
              to remain until May 2010.  The Appellant  testified  that  he
              had undertaken the  studies  although  his  main  reason  for
              coming was for his safety but he had not  claimed  asylum  on
              this occasion because he  had  a  visa  to  remain.   Shortly
              before the expiry of his visa  he  had  applied  for  further
              leave to remain as a student but when  that  application  was
              refused and he did not have funds to remain,  he  voluntarily
              returned to Sri Lanka.
          12.  While in the UK as a student the Appellant says that on four
              or five occasions between February and June 2009 he  attended
              demonstrations in support of  the  Tamil  people  which  took
              place outside the Sri Lankan embassy in London.
          13.  Having voluntarily returned to Sri Lanka in July  2010,  the
              Appellant said that he was  detained  at  the  airport  by  a
              soldier, that he was questioned about his activities  in  the
              UK and about what  he  did  before  going  to  the  UK.   The
              Appellant said that he answered honestly  that  he  had  been
              passing information to the LTTE.  He said that he  was  asked
              if he had been involved with Tamil expatriates while  in  the
              UK, which the Appellant denied at which the officers hit  him
              and  showed  him  a  photograph  of  himself  standing   with
              protesters in London.  He claimed that the officer  told  him
              that the photograph had  come  from  the  'Lankasri'  website
              (http://www.lankasri.com/ta/index.html).   In  his  testimony
              the Appellant said that he had  been  unable  to  locate  the
              photograph on the website in question.  The Appellant claimed
              that he was taken to  an  army  camp  where  he  was  further
              tortured  by  being  continuously  beaten  and  burned   with
              cigarette butts.  He said in his statement that  his  injured
              right foot was broken again and that he  had  wounds  on  his
              left foot and left arm.  He was beaten with a rifle butt  and
              batons as well as hands and feet and he was  not  fed.   This
              torture went on for the first 15 days but after that  he  was
              given some food and beaten only occasionally.
          14.  The Appellant says that he was  detained  until  March  2011
              when he was visited by the same man who had helped  him  come
              to the UK in 2009.  This man, who he said was called Kamalan,
              promised to help the Appellant's parents to get him released.
               A few days later, Kamalan returned and took the Appellant to
              his house in Colombo from where he was able to speak  to  his
              parents on one occasion.  The Appellant said in his statement
              that he  thought  that  Kamalan  may  have  bribed  the  army
              officers.  He had some native treatment  consisting  of  oils
              and herbal medicine for  his  injuries  but  did  not  see  a
              doctor.
          15.  While he was staying in  Colombo  the  Appellant  said  that
              Kamalan and his parents arranged for him to leave Sri  Lanka.
              He was given a false Malaysian passport  and  in  April  2011
              travelled to Malaysia.  The Appellant said that he had had no
              difficulty leaving Sri Lanka.  The passport that he had  been
              given did not have his real name in it,  nor  his  photograph
              although the photograph in the passport looked very  similar.
              The Appellant said that the  agent  had  directed  him  which
              immigration desk to go to where he was only asked to  declare
              a name and date of birth.  He was not subject  to  any  other
              enquiry or  rigorous  checks.   The  Appellant  said  in  his
              testimony that it was a possibility that  Kamalan  had  known
              the immigration officers but he could not be sure as  he  had
              simply pointed out the counter to go to.   From  Malaysia  he
              travelled to the UK by lorry, van and  containers  on  ships.
              The Appellant said that he was under the control of an  agent
              at all times and that he did not know the  countries  through
              which he had passed.
          16.  After arrival in the UK in July 2011 the Appellant said that
              he met a man called Kandan who took him to a place  to  stay.
              The Appellant said that he had planned to seek asylum in  the
              UK but it was a long time before Kandan  came  to  take  him.
              Eventually he was taken and put in  a  car  with  some  other
              people and Kandan called him on the telephone to say that  in
              the jacket he had been given was a passport  that  he  should
              use to travel to France and there claim asylum.   On  arrival
              in Dover the Appellant said that he  presented  the  passport
              but was arrested for using a false  document.   That  was  21
              September 2011 and when he was detained  he  claimed  asylum.
              He was prosecuted for using a false document and sentenced to
              12 months imprisonment.  While in  prison  he  spoke  to  his
              parents on the telephone.  Later he received  a  letter  from
              his mother who told him that the army had come to  know  that
              the Appellant had contacted them and they assumed that  their
              telephone line was tapped.  In his  statement  the  Appellant
              said that he feared to return to Sri Lanka because  he  would
              be detained by the army and would be tortured again."

3.   In support of his  claim  the  appellant  produced  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal a medical report from a Dr Peter D Toon and we shall refer  to
    the detail of that report later in this determination.

The Grounds of Appeal

4.   There were two grounds of appeal:

    1)   The First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  make  proper  findings  of
       fact.
    2)   The approach which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  taken  to  the
       medical report prepared by Dr Toon had not been a proper one.

Submissions for the Appellant

5.   With respect to the first ground of appeal it  was  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 26 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal had correctly
    identified the core of the appellant's claim for asylum as this:

        "26. ... that having been forced to assist the LTTE by working in a
              hospital prior to being injured in a bomb  attack  and  then,
              passing  information  to  them  about  army  movements,   the
              Appellant was detained when he voluntarily  returned  to  Sri
              Lanka in July 2010."

6.   The appellant's being forced  to  assist  the  LTTE  by  working  in  a
    hospital,  being  injured  in  a  bomb  attack  and  beginning  passing
    information to the LTTE about army movements was said by the  appellant
    to have occurred pre-January 2009 when he arrived in the UK.

7.   It was Counsel's contention that the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to
    make any assessment or finding on the part  of  the  appellant's  claim
    which related to the period pre-January 2009.  It was her position that
    from paragraph 27 onwards the First-tier Tribunal  had  restricted  its
    findings to the appellant's claim of ill-treatment which he suffered on
    his return to Sri Lanka at the end of his student visa in July 2010.

8.   It was her submission that the First-tier Tribunal's failures  went  to
    the core of the appellant's account  as  to  why  he  would  have  been
    wanted, on return from the UK, having been here for over a year,  on  a
    student visa.  In these  circumstances,  the  failures  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.

9.   The relevance of the failure to make findings of fact  in  relation  to
    the above she illustrated by saying this:  If it is the case  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal accepted this part of the appellant's account  then
    this should have been expressly set out.  Furthermore, it  should  have
    assessed this part of the appellant's  claim  in  accordance  with  the
    country guidance of LP (LTTE area, Tamils, Colombo, risk?) Sri Lanka CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00076.  This she submitted was particularly so  given  the
    part of the  appellant's  account  set  out  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination which highlighted that CID and army had come looking  for
    him at the family home on two occasions.  If this was an accepted fact,
    it impacted on whether the appellant was known to the  authorities  and
    had a record.  In such circumstances TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka
    CG [2009] UKAIT 00049  paragraph  134  was  directly  material  to  the
    appellant's case in that if the appellant were to return to  Sri  Lanka
    the authorities at Colombo Airport would have, or  at  the  very  least
    would find a record showing he had been sought in the past.

10.  Turning to the  second  ground  of  appeal,  Counsel  submitted,  under
    reference to her grounds upon which permission to  apply  for  judicial
    review had been sought (and ultimately  granted)  the  following:   the
    evidence of Dr Toon potentially assisted in determining the question of
    whether the  appellant  had  been  tortured  in  detention.   Therefore
    determination of that question was crucial.

11.  She submitted that the following findings in Dr Toon's report  were  of
    relevance:

        "Bombing raid


        He told me that when he was with the LTTE in 2007 he was injured in
        a bombing raid from the air  by  the  Army......The  appearance  is
        diagnostic of an injury caused by tearing of the flesh by  a  hard,
        sharp object, with so much damage to the skin that suturing was not
        possible.


        He has significant deformity and scarring of the right  leg.  (145)
        The calf shows  loss  of  muscle  tissue  and  there  is  a  bowing
        distortion of the tibia, and a 5 cm of shortening in the right leg.
         As a result of this he walks with an obvious limp.  The appearance
        is diagnostic of a facture,


        Beating by the army


        He told me he in 2010 he was kicked and punched at the airport then
        taken to a camp where they took off all his clothes and was  naked.
        They tied a rope around his left ankle and hung him up by one  leg.
        He was beaten with the butt of the gun.  He  was  also  burnt  with
        cigarettes all over the body, he had electric shocks to the hands.


        He has a broad linear scar approximately 9 cm x 2 cm  on  his  left
        heel.  He told me that this was caused when he was tied up by  that
        foot.(148) The shape and appearance is highly consistent  with  the
        type of scar which can be caused by abrasion  from  a  rope.....The
        site makes it improbable that this  was  where  the  weight-bearing
        rope was attached, as this would have to be above the ankle to take
        his body weight however in this position  his  heel  friction  burn
        which would heal with this appearance.  There  are  no  rope  marks
        above the ankle- however one would not expect these  from  a  thick
        rope tightly wound round the limb, which is what would be needed to
        suspend him in the way he describes.


        Anterior to that 4 small round  scars  (154)  which  he  says  were
        caused when he was burnt with cigarettes during this assault.  They
        have the typical appearance of cigarette burns.


        He has two 6 mm diameter round scars on forearm which he says  were
        caused when he was burnt with cigarettes during this assault.  They
        have the typical appearance of cigarette burns.


        Also on the left forearm he has two 2 parallel linear  scars  2  cm
        long and 4 cm apart which he says  were  caused  when  he  was  cut
        during this assault.  They are  diagnostic  of  deliberate  cutting
        with a sharp blade.  They could be self  inflicted  but  he  denies
        that he has ever cut  himself  and  his  medical  records  show  no
        history of self harm.






        Right arm


        Near the shoulder he has a 6 mill keloid scar (15) whl.ch  he  says
        were caused when he was burnt with a cigarette during this assault.
         This scar is highly consistent with a cigarette burn in  size  and
        shape although keloid formation obscures the typical appearance  of
        a cigarette burn.


        On his Left pectoralis major he has a 5 mm scar which he says  were
        caused when he was burnt  with  a  cigarette  during  this  assault
        (152).  The appearance is typical a cigarette burn.


        He has a similar scar 9 cm infero lateral to nipple which  he  says
        were caused when  he  was  burnt  with.  a  cigarette  during  this
        assault.(153)  Again this scar is typical of a cigarette burn.


        Two cm above the umbilicus he has a scar which he says  was  caused
        when he  was  burnt  with  cigarettes  during  this  assault.   The
        appearance is typical of a cigarette burn.


        Left leg


        shape which he says were caused when he was burnt  with  cigarettes
        during this assault.  The appearance is typical of cigarette burns.


        There is another similar scar proximal to  medial  aspect  of  left
        knee which he says was caused when he  was  burnt  with  cigarettes
        during this assault  The appearance is typical of a cigarette burn.


        In the same area he has a scar which he thinks was caused by a blow
        with a rifle.  The appearance is diagnostic of a  clean  cut  which
        has healed without  being  sutured,  but  it  is  not  possible  to
        ascertain the cause from the appearance.


        He has 6 x 1cm linear scars on the dorsum  of  the  foot  which  he
        thinks were  caused  when  he  was  hit  with  a  rifle  butt.  The
        appearance is diagnostic of a clean cut which  has  healed  without
        being sutured, but it is not possible to ascertain the  cause  from
        the appearance.


        He has four marks on the left buttock  (157)  which  he  says  were
        caused when he was  burnt  with  cigarettes  during  this  assault.
        These have the typical appearance of cigarette burns, and any other
        cause in this site is extremely unlikely.


        He has an  unusually  large  number  of  scars  of  various  types,
        indicating he has been subject to major trauma,  accidental  and/or
        deliberate.  They can be divided into two groups; those  which  arc
        the result of major cuts and bruises and those which are typical of
        cigarette burns.


        His account. of how he sustained the  larger  scars  is  consistent
        with the appearance: it is also credible that in  a  bombing  or  a
        torture assault the victim cannot give a precise  account  of  each
        and every wound.  The appearance of his leg is consistent with  the
        history of a fracture in the bomb attack  which  was  treated  with
        only moderately good results in hospital.  It is not clear  whether
        in the assault he describes by the army the limb was  broken  again
        or merely bruised by beating in (10 already fragile  limb.   Either
        is consistent with the history; radiography may provide  additional
        clarification.


        He walks with a profound limp and has severe muscle wasting in  the
        damaged limb.  He told me that he does cycling and exercises in the
        gym to strengthen his leg,  but  I  think  he  would  benefit  from
        physiotherapy and  probably  surprising  that  this  has  not  been
        arranged as part of his healthcare in prison or detention.


        Whilst the appearance of the scars  which  he  says  occurred  from
        beating with a rifle butt are consistent with that causation, it is
        not possible to distinguish with certainty  those  from  the  scars
        which he sustained in the bombing.


        More significant though less obvious to the untutored eye  are  the
        multiple scars which  have  the  typical  appearance  of  cigarette
        burns.  I have described  each  of  them  individually  as  typical
        rather than diagnostic because it is possible for skin to be  burnt
        by other "hot" objects of similar size  to  cigarettes.....I  would
        consider it  inconceivable  that  more  than  20  such  scars  (and
        probably also some less  clear  similar  scars  which  I  have  not
        commented on) distributed  in  various  parts  of  the  body  where
        accidental trauma  is  unlikely  could  be  caused  other  than  by
        deliberate burning with cigarettes.


        Cigarette burns are commonly the result  of  self  harm,  but  self
        inflicted injuries are usually found on the flexor  aspect  of  the
        forearms and other accessible  sites.   The  wide  distribution  of
        scars is characteristic of d6arette [sic] burns inflicted  as  part
        of torture. It would be difficult to burn oneself in  many  of  the
        sites where he has scars and impossible to inflict those he has  on
        the buttock on oneself.  Nor is accidental injury to  produce  this
        type of scar on the buttock likely, since it is usually covered  by
        clothing.


        In summary his gross scars and his limp make it obvious that he has
        sustained a major injury, and the scars from  the  cigarette  burns
        make it clear that he has been tortured.


        I am not an expert in the diagnosis of PTSD, but I would agree with
        the prison doctor that the systems he describes are typical of that
        condition and is consistent with the history which he gives."

12.  Moving to the First-tier Tribunal's findings she drew our attention  to
    paragraph 32 when it had stated that it  disagreed  with  the  doctor's
    opinion that the site of the scarring rendered it impossible  that  the
    scarring was self-inflicted.  In addition it had noted  adversely  that
    the doctor had not aged the scarring.  At paragraph  33  it  had  found
    that the medical  evidence  was  not  strong  enough  to  overcome  the
    embellishments and discrepancies in the appellant's evidence.

13.  Counsel submitted that the approach of the First-tier Tribunal  to  the
    medical evidence was irrational in that:

     a) It had approached the medical evidence with a presumption that  the
        appellant had caused the scarring by self-infliction, and that  the
        medical  evidence  had  to  be  "strong  enough"  to   rebut   this
        presumption.


     b) She submitted that the application of  such  a  presumption  in  an
        asylum case is inconsistent with a standard of proof that  requires
        only a reasonable likelihood that the facts are true.   Effectively
        it was saying that it approached the evidence of  scarring  on  the
        basis that it was self-inflicted and the onus was on the  appellant
        to rebut that presumption.

     c) She submitted under reference to  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
        Appeal regarding the proper approach to the Istanbul Protocol in SA
        (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1302  per  Sir  Mark  Potter  at
        paragraph 28 that the sole question for the First-tier Tribunal was
        whether the expert had complied with the guidance in  the  Istanbul
        Protocol.  The expert  was  not  required  under  the  Protocol  to
        examine or comment upon when  the  wounds  were  inflicted  or  who
        inflicted the wounds.   The  expert  was  required  to  illicit  an
        account, examine the  scarring  and  comment  on  consistency.   To
        require an expert to  do  more  was  to  apply  an  additional  and
        therefore unlawful evidential requirement to the  determination  of
        an appeal.

     d) The First-tier Tribunal had failed to  take  into  account  country
        evidence that stated that torturers were trained in "well developed
        techniques" of torture and that torturers brand  their  victims  so
        that they are in effect a living record.

     e) The country evidence showed that  torture  claims  had  intensified
        including in respect of those who had returned to Sri Lanka.

     f) The First-tier Tribunal's failure to take account of this  evidence
        was material because it showed that there was growing  evidence  of
        torture inflicted in respect of those who had returned, voluntarily
        to Sri Lanka.


     g) Dr Toon had found that the claimant had an unusually  large  number
        of scars of various types, indicating that he had been  subject  to
        major trauma, accidental and/or  deliberate.   He  further  advised
        that these could be divided into two groups; those which  were  the
        result of major cuts and bruises and those which  were  typical  of
        cigarette burns.  She submitted that the medical  opinion  had  not
        been considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  an  aid  to  the
        credibility of the subjective evidence, as it should be.  Rather it
        was clear from the determination that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
        already made its mind up in respect of credibility.   It  was  also
        clear that it was not open-minded in respect of the medical  report
        because it already had a strong suspicion  that  the  scarring  was
        self-inflicted.

Reply on Behalf of the Respondent

14.  With respect to the first ground of appeal Mr Avery submitted that  the
    only sound construction of the determination  as  a  whole  and  having
    particular regard to the  last  sentence  of  paragraph  26;  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 31 and the last two sentences of paragraph 33  of
    the determination was that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  proper
    findings on the appellant's claim as it related  to  the  period  pre-9
    January 2009.

15.  Moreover he submitted it was clear from the determination  as  a  whole
    that the First-tier Tribunal had held the appellant not to be  truthful
    in relation to his evidence about that part of his claim.

16.  In relation to the second ground of appeal his submission was  a  short
    one: the First-tier Tribunal had considered  the  medical  evidence  as
    part of the overall evidence  and  this  was  an  entirely  justifiable
    approach.

Discussion

17.  With respect to the first ground of appeal we are  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has failed to make adequate  findings  of  fact  in
    relation to that part of the appellant's claim  which  related  to  his
    period in Sri Lanka prior to 9 January 2009.

18.  The First-tier Tribunal accepted in the first sentence of paragraph  26
    of its determination that a  core  element  in  the  appellant's  claim
    related to the period prior to January 2009.  It is trite law  that  in
    relation to relevant factual issues it is necessary for  the  judge  at
    first instance to fully consider and assess the evidence regarding that
    issue and to make clear findings thereon.  However, despite that in its
    consideration of the issues in this case the First-tier  Tribunal  does
    not properly engage with the evidence relating  to  this  part  of  the
    appellant's claim.

19.  The nearest that it comes to considering the evidence relating  to  the
    pre-January 2009 chapter of  the  claim  is  at  paragraph  31  of  the
    determination.  However, we do not find that this paragraph  adequately
    deals with that part  of  the  claim.   In  particular  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not, in that paragraph, expressly set forth its  position
    as to whether it is accepting or rejecting in whole or in part evidence
    regarding this part of the appellant's claim.   Its  findings  on  this
    issue, if any,  are  opaque.   There  is  reference  to  accepting  the
    Presenting Officer's submission that:

        "The appellant showed that he was not too rigidly bound by the form
        of questions that he was being asked...."

     Mr Avery's position was that paragraph 31 amounted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considering and rejecting in its entirety  that  part  of  the
    appellant's claim which related to the period prior  to  January  2009.
    We do not  believe  that  that  paragraph  can  properly  bear  such  a
    construction.  It appears to us to be reading far too much into what is
    said by the First-tier  Tribunal  at  that  point.   The  rest  of  the
    reasoning contained in the determination concentrates entirely on  what
    happened on the alleged return to Sri Lanka in July 2010 and deals  not
    at all with the chapter of the appellant's case relative to the  period
    prior to January 2009.

20.  Accordingly it appears to us that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed
    to properly consider and to make adequate findings of fact in  relation
    to a relevant issue and accordingly there has been a material error  of
    law.

21.   Turning  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal  in  our  view  there  is
    considerable force in the submissions made on behalf of the  appellant.



22.  We are persuaded that the approach of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
    medical evidence is materially flawed.

23.  The First-tier Tribunal's consideration  of  the  medical  evidence  is
    largely confined to paragraph 32 which is in the following terms:

        "32. We have considered the medical  report  from  Dr.  Toon  which
              confirms that the Appellant bears scars consistent  with  his
              claim to have been the victim of  a  bomb  attack  and  scars
              which the doctor was satisfied were consistent with the claim
              to have  been  burned  by  cigarettes,  although  he  rightly
              recognises that they could have been inflicted by  other  hot
              instruments.  The doctor comments that  cigarette  burns  are
              commonly the results of self-harm but he  suggests  that  the
              Appellant has scars in areas where it  was  "impossible"  for
              him to inflict them, such as on his buttocks.  We have looked
              carefully at the evidence of the siting of the scars but find
              it difficult to accept the doctor's opinion  with  regard  to
              that  impossibility.   In  addition,  the  doctor  gives   no
              indication of the likely age of  the  scars  associated  with
              cigarette burns or, indeed, of the other injuries".


24.  The First-tier Tribunal goes  on  to  conclude  regarding  the  medical
    evidence at paragraph 33:

        "33. ...  We find that the medical report, whilst  very  useful  in
              most respects, does not provide  strong  enough  evidence  to
              overcome the evidence of embellishments and inconsistency  in
              the Appellant's claim."


25.  On  a  fair  reading  of  the  foregoing  sections  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination, when looked at in the context of their  whole
    determination, we conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  has  taken  as
    its starting point when considering the medical evidence this:  it  has
    found the appellant incredible for reasons not relating to the  medical
    evidence and so its presumption is that the cigarette burns  are  self-
    inflicted.

26.  We agree with the submissions made on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that
    given the First-tier Tribunal approached the medical  evidence  in  the
    above way it was effectively holding that the onus was on the appellant
    to rebut that presumption.  Moreover we agree that in  an  asylum  case
    such an approach is inconsistent with a  standard  of  proof  requiring
    only a reasonable likelihood that the facts are true.

27.  Moreover, this approach  to  the  medical  evidence  does  not,  as  it
    should, consider the medical evidence as an aid to the  credibility  of
    the subjective evidence.  Rather on a fair reading of the determination
    the First-tier Tribunal had made up its mind  that  the  appellant  was
    incredible before considering the medical evidence.  The effect of such
    an approach was to give no weight to the medical  evidence  or  at  the
    very least give it materially less weight than it should properly  have
    been given.

28.  The medical evidence was of considerable importance to the  appellant's
    case in that it in particular included the following:

        "Cigarette burns are commonly the result of  self  harm,  but  self
        inflicted injuries are usually found on the flexor  aspect  of  the
        forearms and other accessible  sites.   The  wide  distribution  of
        scars is characteristic of d6arette [sic] burns inflicted  as  part
        of torture. It would be difficult to burn oneself in  many  of  the
        sites where he has scars and impossible to inflict those he has  on
        the buttock on oneself.  Nor is accidental injury to  produce  this
        type of scar on the buttock likely, since it is usually covered  by
        clothing.


        In summary his gross scars and his limp make it obvious that he has
        sustained a major injury, and the scars from  the  cigarette  burns
        make it clear that he has been tortured.


        I am not an expert in the diagnosis of PTSD, but I would agree with
        the prison doctor that the systems he describes are typical of that
        condition and is consistent with the history which he gives."

29.  Given the approach which the First-tier Tribunal  has  adopted  to  the
    medical evidence, the question of the appellant's credibility  was  not
    considered within the  evidential  context  of  the  medical  evidence.
    Overall the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the medical  evidence  is
    seriously flawed and cannot be sustained.

30.  Beyond that we also agree with the submission made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to  take  account  of
    the country evidence as set out within the appellant's submissions.  We
    can identify no point within the determination in which that particular
    part of the country evidence has been given any  consideration  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   We  are  persuaded  that  in  considering   the
    appellant's credibility it had to be considered in the context of  that
    country evidence and the First-tier Tribunal has failed to do that.

31.  We hold for the foregoing reasons  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    materially erred in law in the way that it has approached  the  medical
    evidence.

32.  Finally with respect to the issue raised on behalf of the appellant  to
    the effect that the First-tier Tribunal had required, having regard  to
    the Istanbul Protocol and the guidance given thereon in SA (Somalia)  v
    SSHD, the doctor  to  meet  an  additional  evidential  requirement  to
    comment upon when the wounds were inflicted  we  do  not  believe  that
    there is any merit in this submission.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    saying no more than that they would have found dating evidence  helpful
    in their assessment of the evidence.



Decision

33.  For the above reasons we allow the appeal on both grounds advanced  and
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  We have not thought
    it appropriate to re-make this decision given our concerns relative  to
    the lack of proper findings in fact  and  accordingly  we  remit  to  a
    differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

34.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  Rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
     We believe it appropriate for the case to be anonymised  and  make  an
    order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.






Signed                                  Date


Lord Bannatyne, Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

