
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00327/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2019                  |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                               mr Roberts [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 1 August  2018  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I F Taylor which  refused  the  appeal  of  Mr  [I]
    brought under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    (the EEA Regulations).  The decision refused Mr [I]' appeal  under  the
    EEA Regulations and under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. Mr [I] is a Latvian national born on 19 December 1983.  He came to  the
    UK in 2012.  For the purposes of this decision, it is not disputed that
    he does not have permanent residence and is therefore entitled to  only
    the lower level of protection from expulsion under the EEA Regulations.

 3. Mr [I] was convicted of battery on  2  April  2014  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to a community order and compensation.  Also on 2 April  2014
    he was convicted of  destroying/damaging  property  for  which  he  was
    sentenced  to  a  community  order.    He   was   also   convicted   of
    racially/religiously aggravated harassment, alarm or distress for which
    he received a �210 fine.

 4. On 5 June 2014 the appellant was cautioned for possession of  cannabis.
    On  15  March  2016  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  twelve  weeks'
    imprisonment, suspended for eighteen months and a restraining order for
    a battery on his wife.  This occurred during  a  domestic  argument  in
    which he threw a butter knife at her.

 5. On 1 November  2016  the  appellant  was  arrested  for  breaching  the
    restraining order.  He was sentenced to twelve weeks' imprisonment  and
    his suspended sentence  of  ten  weeks  was  activated.   He  therefore
    sentenced for a total of 22 weeks.

 6. It was following the most recent conviction that  the  respondent  took
    deportation action against the  appellant.   On  12  January  2017  the
    respondent signed a deportation order.

 7. Mr [I] appealed against the decision of the respondent  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  He had an appeal hearing on 4 June  2018  at  which  he
    gave evidence.  By the time of the hearing, it is not disputed that  he
    had separated from his wife and their three children  had  returned  to
    Latvia to live with the appellant's mother in line with a court order.

 8. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  maintained  that  his
    profile did not  show  that  the  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society"
    that  was  required  in  line  with  Regulation  27(5)(c)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations for deportation action to be justified. He also  maintained
    that the decision to deport him was not proportionate with reference to
    the provisions of Regulation 27(5), 27(6) and Schedule  1  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 9. In support of his case that he did not represent a sufficient risk  for
    triggering the exercise of the power to deport, the appellant relied on
    an independent risk assessment report from Ms Rabina Haque dated 14 May
    2018.  The First-tier Tribunal found as follows concerning that  report
    in paragraphs 14 to 20 of the decision:

         "14. The appellant relies upon an independent  risk  assessment  in
             respect of the appellant by Rabina Haque dated  14  May  2018.
             It is apparent that Ms Haque has not had sight of any  of  the
             prosecution papers  which  also  includes  the  victim  impact
             statements.  At 12.4 of the report Ms Haque states that 'it is
             my opinion that he is completely rehabilitated'.  At R10.6  of
             the appendices the risk descriptors are explained.  A low risk
             equates  to  current  evidence  that  does  not   indicate   a
             likelihood of cause or serious harm.  A medium risk  is  where
             there are identifiable indicators of  risk  of  serious  harm.
             The offender has the potential to cause serious  harm  but  is
             unlikely to do so unless there is a change  of  circumstances,
             for example failure to take medication, loss of accommodation,
             relationship breakdown, drug or alcohol abuse.  At the summary
             section R10.4 the expert states:-

                  'It is my clinical assessment that Mr [I] poses  a  medium
                  risk of physical harm to partners in  a  domestic  setting
                  and  emotional  harm  to  children   within   a   domestic
                  [setting].  To reduce the risk of harm in  the  future  Mr
                  [I] must understand the ramifications of  such  behaviour.
                  I therefore assess that his finance and  substance  misuse
                  is a trigger factor to his offending behaviour.'

         15.  I find this hard to square with the expert's opinion that  the
             appellant is completely rehabilitated and therefore presumably
             poses no risk at all.  Furthermore, at 10.2 of the main report
             it states:-

                  'As can be observed in Appendix 1, Mr [I] is  assessed  as
                  presenting  a  low  risk  of  committing  further  violent
                  offences. According to guidelines provided by OGRS  score,
                  this  translates  as  follows;  Mr  [I]  is  assessed   as
                  presenting a 25% chance of  being  convicted  for  further
                  violent offences within a two year period, a 15% chance of
                  being convicted for further violent offences within a  one
                  year period.'

         16.  Again, I find this difficult  to  equate  with  the  appellant
             being completely rehabilitated as what is  suggested  is  that
             the appellant has a one in four chance of being convicted  for
             further violent offences such as those  perpetrated  upon  his
             estranged wife within a two year period  which  again  I  find
             difficult  to  reconcile  with  her  conclusion  that  he   is
             completely rehabilitated.  Furthermore, if he  has  a  one  in
             four chance of committing violent offences within a  two  year
             period this does not  amount  to  a  low  risk  of  committing
             further violent offences and in my view amounts at least to  a
             medium risk of committing further violent offences.

         17.  The findings of low risk and medium risk are very confusing.

         18.  The documentation put before me is complex and very  difficult
             to follow but  in  my  view  I  am  surprised  that  any  firm
             conclusions can be reached when the expert has not seen any of
             the prosecution papers and in  relying  upon  the  version  of
             events of the appellant  there  is  a  strong  possibility  of
             distortion of the evidence.  In fairness  to  the  expert,  as
             stated at 6.1 and elsewhere, in her report  she  has  not  had
             sight of the Crown Prosecution Service documents.

         19.  However, in light  of  the  above  in  my  view  the  expert's
             conclusion should have been much more qualified given that she
             had not seen any of the Crown Prosecution papers.

         20.  In the circumstances, therefore, I can give little  weight  to
             the independent risk assessment."

10. The First-tier Tribunal noted in paragraph 22 that  the  appellant  has
    been helping an organisation assisting addicts to combat drug addiction
    problems, drug addiction having been a factor behind his own offending.



11. The First-tier Tribunal also noted the appellant's  conduct  whilst  in
    detention in paragraph 23:

         "23.  The  appellant  dealt  with  a  number   of   fairly   recent
             disciplinary issues whilst he was in HMP  Dovegate.   He  said
             that on 11 March 2017 he was found with hooch but  there  were
             no disciplinary measures or adjudications.  On 20  April  2017
             he was one of two prisoners who accessed the B4 netting by way
             of a protest concerning their immigration status.  He  accepts
             that the Tactical Firearm Unit was brought in but there was no
             violence, he was sentenced to an adjudication of fourteen days
             in segregation, suspended for six months.  On 8 May 2017 there
             was a similar protest, the appellant was one of four prisoners
             and  again  the  netting  was  accessed  but   the   appellant
             surrendered quietly and was sent to segregation.  His previous
             fourteen days was triggered although some time after  this  he
             was sent to an immigration detention centre at  Harmondsworth.
             On 15 September 2017 the appellant was involved in  a  dispute
             about cell sharing and the appellant made threats that  if  he
             was to have a new cell mate things may start to get aggressive
             and physical and if it did happen he would hold  HMP  Dovegate
             responsible.  On 8 February 2018 a prisoner was  seen  in  the
             corridor to retrieve a note from the appellant.  The appellant
             state (sic) he did not know  what  it  was  but  that  another
             prisoner on his wing had asked him to give  the  note  to  the
             prisoner in question.  It is noted that the  appellant  seemed
             very agitated when challenged about this."

12. In paragraph 26, the first paragraph of the judge's findings, the judge
    confirmed that "the expert's independent risk assessment report is  not
    one that I can attach much weight to", referring back to  the  findings
    in paragraphs 14 to 20.   He went on to find in paragraphs  29  and  30
    that the appellant did represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    His findings were as follows:

         "29. I am also satisfied that the personal conduct of the appellant
             does represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
             threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society
             taking into account the past conduct of the  person  and  that
             the threat does not need to be imminent.   The  appellant  has
             demonstrated that when under the influence of  alcohol  and/or
             illicit drugs, either Class A or Class B, when faced  with  an
             issue to resolve he may well resort to violence.  This applies
             both to his estranged wife  and  also  other  members  of  the
             public including the taxi driver that he had a  dispute  with.
             His prisoner adjudications must also be  taken  into  account.
             However, the person most at risk is his estranged wife who has
             been assaulted twice by the appellant and he has also breached
             the restraining and other orders that were  placed  upon  him.
             The  appellant's  estranged  wife  has  been  put  in  a  very
             vulnerable position because of her own short comings  and  her
             responsibility towards her three children which  has  resulted
             in them being looked after by their  paternal  grandmother  in
             Latvia.   The  appellant  has   demonstrated   that   in   any
             relationship he may have there is  a  real  risk  of  domestic
             violence.  One of the fundamental interests of society must be
             that domestic violence in all its forms must be eradicated and
             people can be confident they are safe in their own  homes  and
             that their children (unlike those of the appellant)  will  not
             be  witnesses  to  domestic  violence  at  home.   I  am  also
             satisfied that the behaviour of the appellant does represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat,  I  am  not
             satisfied that his behaviour would be restricted to  a  single
             individual, rather I am satisfied that there is  a  real  risk
             this may apply to any partner.

         30.  With regard to the person's previous criminal convictions  not
             in themselves justifying the position,  I  am  satisfied  that
             they do manifest a present or future propensity to  act  in  a
             manner contrary to public policy for  the  reasons  as  stated
             above.  Mr  Sellwood  submitted  that  the  offending  of  the
             appellant amounted to a blip, and that there was a low  chance
             that  anything  like  that  would  happen   again.    In   the
             circumstances of this case I have to disagree.  I am satisfied
             that the appellant's behaviour over a period of just over  two
             years, which was largely directed at his estranged wife,  does
             not amount to a blip and I am  confident  similar  attacks  on
             partners of the appellant are likely to happen again.

         31.  I have  also  taken  into  account  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
             Regulations which sets out a number of factors that do  amount
             to the fundamental interests of society.  I note that the list
             is not exclusive and  therefore  other  matters  can  also  be
             considered.  I note that preventing social harm, excluding  or
             removing an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where
             the conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
             caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence  in
             the ability of the relevant authorities to  take  such  action
             are all listed.  Combating the effects of persistent offending
             (particularly in relation to offences, in which  if  taken  in
             isolation may otherwise be unlikely to meet  the  requirements
             of Regulation 27) I am satisfied it is right to  describe  the
             appellant's offending as persistent.

         32.  I have also taken into account Regulation 27(6)  which  states
             as follows:-

                  'Before taking a relevant decision on  grounds  of  public
                  policy and public security in relation to a person (P) who
                  is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must
                  take account of considerations such as the age,  state  of
                  health, family and economic situation of P, P's length  of
                  residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and  cultural
                  integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of  P's
                  links with P's country of origin'.

         33.  I take  into  account  those  identified  by  Mr  Sellwood  at
             paragraph 38 of his skeleton argument.  I also  note  that  at
             Schedule 1(3) it states 'where an EEA national...has  received
             a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the  longer
             the sentence,  or  the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
             greater  the  likelihood  that  the   individual's   continued
             presence in the United Kingdom represents  a  genuine  present
             and  sufficient  serious  threat  affecting  the   fundamental
             interests of society'.  The appellant was eventually sentenced
             to 22 weeks in custody which  in  my  view  is  a  significant
             custodial sentence and I also take into account Schedule  1(4)
             which states that:-

                  'Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an
                  EEA national or the family of the EEA national ...  within
                  the United Kingdom if the alleged  integrated  links  were
                  formed at or around the same time as

                   a) the commission of a criminal offence;

                   b) an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests
                      of society;

                   c) the EEA national or family member of an EEA  national
                      was custody.'

             (a) and (b) apply in this case.

         34.  In relation to Schedule 1(5)  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has successfully reformed or rehabilitated  for  the
             reasons I have set out above.

         35.  With regard to the other factors set out in  Regulation  27(6)
             the appellant is in his mid-30s, in  good  health,  no  longer
             enjoys family life and his residence in the United Kingdom  is
             about six years.

         36.  I am not satisfied that any rehabilitation of the appellant in
             the UK,  which  is  fairly  minimal,  would  not  prevent  his
             deportation.

         37.  I accept that Ms Hunk, the residential  unit  manager  at  HMP
             Dovegate concludes the appellant does not present  a  risk  to
             the public.  How she reaches that conclusion is  not  set  out
             and in any event the risk is more to do with  any  partner  he
             may have.  I accept  the  appellant  has  taken  a  number  of
             educational courses whilst in prison.  It  is  clear  that  he
             does have adjudications and negative reports.  I  accept  that
             he has shown  remorse,  I  am  not  satisfied,  however,  that
             remorse is genuine.  I accept that he has spent a  significant
             period in custody but  not  satisfied  following  that  he  is
             rehabilitated as stated by Ms Haque.

         38.  Overall, and taking into account the EEA Regulations and  case
             law, I am satisfied that the deportation of the  appellant  to
             Latvia is a proportionate one.   I  note  also  that  I  would
             except (sic) he would have access to his children although  at
             the moment bearing in mind his background  and  addictions  he
             may not have physical or one to one contact with them."

13. At the hearing, Mr Sellwood took the challenge set out in  paragraph  9
    of the written grounds first. He referred to the post-decision evidence
    contained in Tab E of the appellant's bundle. This material sets out on
    pages E5 toE8, E12 and E17 to  E27  evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    addressed his drug and alcohol  problems  which  had  been  significant
    drivers in his offending behaviour.  Mr  Sellwood  confirmed  his  back
    sheet was endorsed with a note confirming the agreement of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that material could be provided after the hearing and the
    cover letter to the further materials dated 4 June 2018  (the  date  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal) also refers to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal having permitted post-hearing evidence. Mr Clarke did not
    seek to argue otherwise.

14. The extracts from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal set out above
    show that in paragraphs 29, 34,  36  and  37  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    approached the appellant's risk of reoffending  on  the  basis  of  his
    abuse of drugs and alcohol. It is  unarguable  that  abuse  of  illicit
    substances did play a part in his past offences. What these  paragraphs
    do not do is address the post-hearing material of compliance with  drug
    screening  procedures,  negative  drug  tests  and   courses   attended
    specifically addressing  alcohol  and  drug  abuse.  The  reference  in
    paragraph 37 to "a number of educational courses" is not, in my view, a
    sufficiently clear reference  to  the  substance  of  the  post-hearing
    material which goes beyond attending educational courses  to  voluntary
    compliance with drug testing over the period of detention in  2017  and
    2018. This material was, in my judgment, capable of having  a  material
    impact on the assessment of whether the appellant remained  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious risk where it addressed a change to  a
    key driver to his past offences. That was  additionally  so  where  the
    post-hearing material was  consistent  with  the  appellant's  evidence
    given to the Tribunal and to  the  risk  assessment  expert  of  having
    addressed his drug addiction and problems with alcohol, nothing in  any
    of the materials suggesting that he had relapsed in any way.

15. Albeit the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   sets  out  rational
    reasons for approaching the expert risk assessment  with  some  caution
    and the judge was clearly entitled to take  into  account  matters  not
    considered by the expert, for example the disciplinary issues  set  out
    in paragraph 23 of the decision, it is my  conclusion  that  where  the
    criminal offending at its highest comprised 22 weeks imprisonment,  the
    issue of whether the appellant  had  addressed  his  drug  and  alcohol
    problems was highly material to the assessment of whether there  was  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious risk shown and  also  to  the
    proportionality assessment required if paragraph 27(5) (c) was shown to
    have been met. Put simply, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    paragraph 27(5)(c) and on proportionality cannot  be  maintained  where
    this part of the evidence was not properly addressed.

16. For these reasons, I find that the grounds of  appeal  have  merit  and
    show a material error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal such that it must be set aside to be re-made. The  nature
    of the error of law is such that none of the findings can be  preserved
    and this is therefore an appropriate case to remit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-making de novo.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  20   November
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
