
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00628/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6 October 2016                             |On 29 December 2016           |
|Oral determination given immediately following|                              |
|hearing                                       |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                              MR Mohamed Traore
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Harding Mitchell
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of the Ivory Coast  who  first
    arrived in this country in 2002 using a false French passport.  In  his
    original statement which he signed it was said that he had  arrived  in
    June 2002, but that statement has subsequently been amended and  it  is
    his case that he in fact arrived in February  of  that  year.   Nothing
    turns on this.  He was not  entitled  to  be  here  obviously,  but  he
    remained and he was encountered by police on 13 March 2004 when he then
    claimed asylum two days  later.   He  was  in  custody  at  this  time.
    Following a substantive interview his asylum claim was  refused  on  27
    March.

 2. The day after the appellant's asylum claim had  been  refused,  he  was
    released with reporting restrictions to Croydon  Enforcement  Unit  but
    after 14 July 2004 he stopped reporting.  He then was encountered on  7
    January 2005 when he was arrested for attempting to  open  an  account,
    this time using a false Belgian passport.   He had obtained a bank card
    in a false name.

 3. Following the refusal of his asylum claim the appellant had  lodged  an
    appeal against this decision on 1 April 2004 but this was dismissed  on
    1 July 2004.  The appellant then started  reporting  briefly  again  to
    Croydon Enforcement Unit but stopped reporting on 14 April 2005.   Then
    on 19 May 2005 he was convicted at Croydon Crown Court on two counts of
    possession and use of a false instrument (the offences for which he had
    been arrested in January) for which he was  sentenced  to  ten  months'
    imprisonment and recommended for deportation.   It does not appear that
    he was ever prosecuted for using the false French passport in order  to
    enter the UK although obviously he could have been as this is a serious
    offence.  On 11 October 2005 the appellant was  released  from  prison,
    again subject to reporting restrictions  to  Croydon  Enforcement  Unit
    weekly which were to commence on 17 October 2005.

 4. On 22 May 2006 the appellant was detained and served with a  notice  of
    intention to deport him.  He appealed against this  decision  but  this
    appeal also was dismissed on 26 September 2006.  So by  this  time  the
    appellant had had two unsuccessful appeals.

 5. On 3 October 2006 the appellant sought a High Court review filter which
    was refused on 16 October 2006.  He went on to  lodge  a  further  High
    Court review on 19 October 2006 and on 17 November 2006 he was  granted
    bail and placed on reporting restrictions to Communications House.   He
    was interviewed with regard to obtaining an emergency  travel  document
    on 4 December 2006.  Thereafter on 20  December  2006  the  appellant's
    High Court review was refused and he became appeal rights exhausted  on
    21 December 2006.

 6. Again the appellant did not report as he should but  stopped  reporting
    on 17 January 2007 obviously in breach of his bail conditions.

 7. Then on 2 February 2007 a deportation order was made which  was  served
    to file on 27 September 2007 due to the appellant's non-compliance with
    his reporting condition.  Because he had failed  to  report  eventually
    the appellant was listed as an absconder but on 4  March  2010  he  was
    located as  being  resident  at  a  home  address  to  which  reporting
    restrictions were issued on 1 April 2010.  He was told to report on  14
    April 2010 but he yet again failed to report when asked and  a  warning
    letter was sent to this address.  Then on 6 June 2011  the  appellant's
    previous representatives contacted the department which was tasked with
    tracing and locating people such as him and confirmed that the  address
    at which he had been served was the correct one  following  which  they
    were advised that new reporting conditions would be  issued  but  again
    the appellant failed to report when required to do so.  Then on 14  May
    2013 the respondent received information that the  appellant  had  been
    successfully encountered during an enforcement visit to a  place  where
    the appellant was working and that on initial encounter he had  claimed
    to be one Mohammed Baradji, said to be a French national born on 14 May
    1984.  This was of course a lie.  After the  Home  Office  checks  were
    revealed to the appellant he eventually confessed that he was Mr Traore
    and he was then detained under immigration powers.

 8. The appellant then made further representations through his  solicitors
    applying for the deportation order which had been made  to  be  revoked
    and he was released from detention subject to reporting conditions on 3
    July 2013.  The representations which he made (which had  been  founded
    upon his family life rights under Article 8)  were  considered  by  the
    respondent but in a decision  dated  27  January  2014  the  respondent
    refused to revoke the deportation order.

 9. The appellant subsequently  appealed  against  this  decision  and  his
    appeal was heard before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  sitting  at
    Richmond on 19 November 2014 but in a decision and reasons  promulgated
    on 15 December 2014 Judge Wyman dismissed his appeal.  The basis of the
    appeal was  that  the  appellant  had  a  family  life  with  Ms  Rokia
    Coulibaly, who is a British citizen and they had two children  together
    of whom he was the primary carer.  The couple were said to have met  in
    2002 and had been together (with some gaps) ever since.  He claimed  to
    be the father of a son born on 18 March 2003 and a daughter born  on  9
    December 2009.  At the time of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Wyman  the
    appellant's partner was said to be  pregnant  with  their  third  child
    although it appears that Ms Coulibaly  subsequently  miscarried.  I  am
    told (and I have seen evidence of an ultrasound examination  confirming
    this) that she is now yet again pregnant.

10. Although the respondent in  her  decision  made  in  January  2014  had
    accepted that the appellant was the father of the two  children  as  he
    had asserted Judge Wyman did not accept this but concluded that he  was
    not their father and for this reason did  not  accept  that  there  was
    family life as claimed.  In a decision which I made following a hearing
    on 13 January 2016 I found that that decision had contained an error of
    law which Mr Bramble who had at  that  hearing  been  representing  the
    respondent, accepted was the case.  The appellant had been representing
    himself before Judge Wyman and had asked for an adjournment in order to
    obtain DNA evidence which would prove his paternity if  the  judge  was
    not satisfied that he was the father as claimed.   As  the  appellant's
    case depended upon his being the father of these children and  as  this
    fact had not been in dispute before, I considered the  judge's  refusal
    to allow an adjournment to establish  what  had  not  been  in  dispute
    before to be so unfair as to amount to a material  error  of  law.    I
    considered (at paragraph 7 of my decision) that this issue could not be
    justly determined without at least giving the appellant an  opportunity
    to obtain DNA evidence,  which  as  had  been  established  before  the
    previous hearing before me, would have  shown  that  the  appellant  is
    indeed the father of the two children as he had claimed.

11. It appears that Ms Coulibaly had separated from the appellant  and  had
    subsequently married someone else at around the time  the  first  child
    was born but it seems that the couple have  been  together  now  for  a
    substantial period of time,  certainly  since  about  2006.   In  these
    circumstances it was agreed by Counsel representing  the  appellant  at
    the previous hearing before me that the appropriate course was for this
    Tribunal to remake the decision but acknowledging the paternity of  the
    children.  I should add when dealing with the history  of  this  matter
    that it is common ground that the appellant when registering the  birth
    of his daughter gave a false address and that  he  had  said  that  his
    reason for so doing was to avoid the probability that he would then  be
    apprehended by the respondent - in other words he  lied  yet  again  in
    order to avoid being deported.  It is also accepted  by  the  appellant
    that he was working between 2007 and 2013 which of  course  he  had  no
    permission to do.  However the way in which his case is  now  presented
    is that in particular because of the  condition  of  his  son,  who  is
    autistic, it would now be disproportionate to deport him.



The Hearing

12. Prior to this appeal being listed again before me  today  I  had  given
    directions immediately following the hearing on 13  January  2016  that
    the appeal would be relisted for substantive hearing on 9 February 2016
    and that by no later than Friday 29 January 2016 the appellant  was  to
    file with the Tribunal and serve on the respondent a  paginated  bundle
    containing all the material on which he intended to rely.   Regrettably
    that bundle was not served, as a result of which the hearing had to  be
    adjourned on that date.  At that hearing, it was said on behalf of  the
    appellant by Mr Ly, of Counsel, who was then representing him, that  he
    had been told by his instructing solicitors that the bundle had  indeed
    both been served on the respondent and filed with the Tribunal.

13. At that hearing I gave further directions which  included  a  direction
    that the bundle, whether or not  it  had  been  previously  served  and
    filed, must be re-served and re-filed and the hearing was to be  listed
    for a case management conference before me on 7  July  2016.   At  that
    case management, the Tribunal still did not have a copy of  the  bundle
    and nor did Mr Melvyn who was at that time representing the  respondent
    although again it was claimed on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  this
    bundle had been both served and filed.  At that  hearing  I  then  gave
    further instructions as to the service of this bundle and as to how  it
    had to be served on the respondent.

14. The hearing was then again listed before me to  take  place  today  but
    very close to the hearing an application was made that that hearing  be
    adjourned  because  Counsel,  who  it  was  said  had  represented  the
    appellant throughout, was unavailable.  This application was refused by
    another judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal  who  noted  that  in  fact  the
    appellant  had  clearly  not  been  represented  by  the  same  Counsel
    throughout and indeed had represented  himself  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It was also the case that he had adequate time  to  instruct
    alternative Counsel and in the event happily he has been able to engage
    the services of Ms Daykin who has appeared before the Tribunal today.

15. Unfortunately, and this is certainly not the fault of Ms Daykin in  any
    way again the papers had not been properly served.  It appears that  Mr
    Clarke who today has been representing the respondent did not have  the
    appellant's file and Ms Daykin had not been supplied by her instructing
    solicitors with the core bundle containing the evidence  on  which  the
    respondent seeks to rely. Accordingly the hearing had to be put back to
    enable Ms Daykin to read the material which she had not previously seen
    and to enable Mr Clarke to see the respondent's bundle, but  eventually
    the hearing was able to commence.

16. I heard evidence from the appellant  and  his  partner,  both  of  whom
    relied on the very brief statements which they had made,  and  both  of
    whom had to be asked a number of supplementary questions  in  order  to
    adduce their evidence.  The directions which  I  had  given  throughout
    included a direction that the evidence  to  be  filed  was  to  include
    witness statements in respect of any witness  it  was  intended  should
    give evidence  capable  of  standing  as  evidence-in-chief  which  the
    witness statements filed were not; however Ms Daykin with  the  minimum
    of fuss was able to extract from the witnesses the evidence  which  she
    needed.  Both witnesses were cross-examined by Mr Clarke on  behalf  of
    the respondent.

17. I do not intend to set out in full the evidence which was given and nor
    do I intend to set out in full everything which is contained within the
    bundles but I have had regard to everything which was  said  before  me
    and to all the material contained within the file whether  or  not  the
    same is specifically referred to below.

18. I shall summarise the parties' respective positions.  The appellant  is
    the father of two children and claims to be their primary  carer.   His
    partner, with whom he has been living for the last ten years or so, but
    they were having a relationship for considerably longer because  he  is
    the father of their child who was born in 2003, is their  mother.   The
    evidence which the parties gave, not all of which  was  consistent  and
    not all of which in my judgment, for reasons I will give,  was  honest,
    nonetheless establishes that the appellant does have a real involvement
    in his childrens' lives and I accept that the evidence  does  establish
    that he has a family life with them.   The  evidence  relating  to  the
    older child is that he is autistic.  Although it appears from the  more
    recent reports that there have been some improvements  in  his  autism,
    nonetheless he has a disability which  presents  difficulties  for  any
    family which looks after such a child.  It is  the  case  however  that
    although it would have been open to the appellant, if such evidence was
    available to adduce evidence as  to  specific  difficulties  which  the
    older child has, beyond those suffered by  anybody  with  autism,  such
    evidence was not put before the Tribunal.   Although  it  is  said  for
    example that the child had a particularly close relationship  with  his
    father and that this was noted by the school which the  child  was  at,
    there is  no  independent  evidence  from  the  school  confirming  the
    closeness of the relationship or any particular difficulties which  the
    child suffered.

19. It was said during the  hearing  that  the  appellant  would  take  the
    children to school although the evidence showed rather that the  oldest
    child apparently was just put on the bus at  home,  but  the  appellant
    said he was the one who put him on the bus and was there when  the  bus
    arrived back; he also claims that he takes his daughter to  school  and
    collects her, but he clearly has not been  doing  this  throughout  his
    childrens' schooldays, because certainly up to 2013 he had a job  which
    would have prevented him from being a full-time carer for his children.
     I find that the true situation is that the parties are jointly  caring
    for their children and so while I accept that the appellant has a  real
    role in his children's lives, I do not accept that  he  is  their  sole
    primary carer.

20. I should note that there was one piece of evidence which was  given  by
    the appellant in cross-examination which  I  found  to  be  untrue  and
    deliberately so.  A document was contained within the bundle which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  a  registered  childminding
    contract entered into in July 2011.   Although  this  is  not  a  well-
    drafted document,  it appears on its face to relate  to  both  children
    because for example in respect of the daughter  under  "any  particular
    needs of child" she is said to  be  "ortistique"  (which  she  is  not,
    because only the son is  autistic).   However  when  asked  about  this
    document in cross-examination the appellant claimed  that  this  should
    not have been referred to  as  a  childminding  contract,  but  was  in
    respect of the "nursery" that the children went  to  along  with  other
    children.  When the appellant's partner was asked about this  she  said
    in terms (obviously being unaware of the answer which the appellant had
    previously given) that this childminder was looking after her  children
    only and not any others and that the  childminder  had  said  when  the
    appellant's partner's hours had changed that she could not manage those
    hours.  In my judgment it is overwhelmingly obvious that the  appellant
    gave the answer he gave because he considered that it helped  his  case
    to do so rather than admitting that the children had been looked  after
    at times by a childminder.  I did not form a general view favourable to
    him regarding his honesty but as it is  clear  from  the  evidence,  to
    which I will turn later, that he has throughout his time in the UK been
    prepared to lie in order to facilitate his ability to  remain  in  this
    country, this was not surprising.



The appellant's case

21. Essentially the appellant's case is that because his  son  is  autistic
    the effect on him of his father's deportation would be so severe as  to
    be disproportionate or (if this is the test  that  is  needed)  "unduly
    harsh".  The way in which Ms Daykin advanced her submissions was on the
    basis that now the Rules have been amended  the  test  that  should  be
    applied when considering either whether a deportation order  should  be
    made or one which had been made should be revoked is that currently set
    out in the Rules and that the Rules now "deal with all situations".  In
    her submission this appellant is someone who has neither been convicted
    of an offence for which he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment  or
    more nor has he committed an offence which has caused serious harm  and
    nor is he is a "persistent offender" and for that reason he  cannot  be
    said to be a "foreign criminal" as defined in Section  117D(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by Section 19
    of the Immigration Act 2014).

22. The respondent  having  reconsidered  the  issue  had  made  a  further
    decision on 27 May 2016 in which without reasoning  she  had  said  [at
    paragraph 7] that the appellant's  "deportation  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because in view of the Secretary
    of State their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard to  the  law"  but
    the decision not to revoke the deportation decision previously made was
    unlawful and should be set aside.  Having regard to the guidance  given
    in this Tribunal's decision  in  Chege  ("is  a  persistent  offender")
    [2016] UKUT 00187, it was not for this Tribunal to re-make the decision
    itself but this decision should be set aside.



The respondent's case

23. Summarising very briefly the submissions which were made on  behalf  of
    the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant had committed an
    offence which had caused serious harm (because flouting the Immigration
    Rules in the way that this appellant has done causes great harm to  the
    maintenance of law and order in this country) and what is more  he  was
    also properly to be regarded as a "persistent  offender".   The  public
    interest in removing him was very high and in  these  circumstances  it
    was entirely proportionate to refuse to revoke  the  deportation  order
    which had properly been made.



My Findings

24. I deal first with the law.  There is a potential lacuna in what is  now
    provided within Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  in  circumstances  where  a
    previous deportation order had been made under the old Rules but  where
    the offender cannot now  be  defined  as  a  "foreign  criminal"  under
    section 117C.  Whereas previously deportation could properly have  been
    said to be conducive to the public good for reasons such as maintenance
    of the Immigration Rules and  so  on  there  may  now  be  cases  where
    although a previous  deportation  decision  might  be  sustainable  the
    offender in question would  not  now  fall  within  the  definition  of
    "foreign criminal".  So, for example, somebody whose presence in the UK
    had been lawful for most of the period he had spent here and who  could
    not be said to be either a persistent offender or someone whose offence
    had caused particularly serious harm  might  properly  have  previously
    been the subject of a deportation order  but  would  not  now  fit  the
    definition of "foreign criminal" within Section 117D(2).  Such a person
    would arguably be unable to  rely  on  the  protection  provided  under
    section 117C(5) (which only applies to "foreign criminals"), but  would
    not necessarily fall within the protection of 117B(6)  either,  because
    this provision (whereby  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    removal  of  a  person  who  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child in circumstances  where  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom only
    applies to a person "who is not liable to deportation".

25. In  Ms  Daykin's  submission,  because  this  appellant  had  not  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  twelve  months,  nor
    had he either been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm
    and nor was he a persistent offender, he should no longer  be  regarded
    as a person "liable to deportation" and thus because he has  a  genuine
    and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  in
    circumstances where it would not be reasonable to expect that child  to
    leave the United Kingdom, the public interest no  longer  requires  his
    removal.  In these circumstances this Tribunal should now set aside the
    deportation order because it can no longer be justified.

26. Dealing with this last argument first, in my judgment whatever view  is
    taken as to whether the appellant was a persistent offender or  whether
    the offence of which he  was  convicted  had  caused  serious  harm  he
    nonetheless would not  be  entitled  to  the  protection  of  paragraph
    117B(6) (which provides that "In the case of a person who is not liable
    to deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal where- (a)  the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with  a  qualifying  child,  and  (b)   it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom")  because
    even if he might  not  now  fall  within  the  definition  of  "foreign
    criminal" within section 117D(2) he remains liable to deportation;  the
    order which was made previously to deport  him  was  made  properly  in
    accordance with the Rules which then applied and  indeed  he  lost  his
    appeal against that decision.

27. Dealing now with the provisions of 117D(2) this provides as follows:

         "(2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,


             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and


             (c)  who-


                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least twelve months,


                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or


                  (iii)    is a persistent offender".

28. The appellant has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an  offence
    but has not been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least
    twelve months.  In my judgment, notwithstanding the submissions made on
    behalf of the respondent by Mr Clarke, I do not consider  that  he  can
    realistically be said to have been convicted of  an  offence  that  has
    caused serious harm.

29. The background to the introduction of this provision was that there had
    been cases such as one where a person who had been in the UK unlawfully
    had caused very serious injuries in a road traffic accident which quite
    understandably had outraged the public but (or so it  was  held)  could
    not be deported  under  the  Rules  which  then  applied.   While  this
    provision was enacted in order to deal with this sort of case,  it  was
    not intended in my judgment to apply to every  case  where  an  offence
    could (but in the event did not) have caused  serious  harm.   In  this
    case there is no evidence that serious  harm  was  actually  caused  to
    anyone by the particular offence of which the appellant was  convicted,
    and although immigration offences are serious, Mr  Clarke's  submission
    (which is effectively that all immigration offences cause such  serious
    harm to the maintenance of law and order in this country that they  are
    caught by this section) is clearly unarguable also.

30. I must now however consider whether or not the appellant  can  properly
    be said to be "a persistent offender" for the purposes of  the  Section
    117D(2)(c)(iii) and on this issue Ms Daykin relied upon what  was  said
    (albeit not as the main part of the decision) by this Tribunal in Chege
    as follows, at paragraph 36:

         "36. The  third  limb  of  s.117D(2)  is  not  engaged  unless  the
             individual 'is a persistent offender'.  There was  no  dispute
             that an 'offender', in this context, means a  person  who  has
             committed a criminal offence (proof of which is established by
             a conviction or a caution,  or  a  request  by  him  that  the
             offence be taken into consideration when  sentence  is  passed
             for other offences, which is an admission  that  he  committed
             it).  However, the person  concerned  must  be  a  'persistent
             offender' and the question whether he meets  that  description
             must be answered at the time when the Tribunal is  looking  at
             the matter, not at some earlier time, because the question  is
             whether he 'is' a persistent offender, not whether he 'was'  a
             persistent offender".

31. Ms Daykin's argument is that because the appellant was not convicted of
    any offence other than using the bank card and nor was he cautioned  in
    respect of any other offence,  no  regard  can  be  had  to  any  other
    possible offence the appellant might be thought to have committed  when
    considering whether or not he is a persistent offender.

32. In my judgment, attractively though this argument was  advanced  it  is
    essentially a  technical  one,  and  the  Tribunal  in  Chege  was  not
    considering the facts of a case such as the present.   I  am  satisfied
    that this appellant can properly be defined as "a persistent  offender"
    on the facts of this case.  He arrived in this country  using  a  false
    passport in 2002  and  subsequently  used  another  false  passport  in
    January 2005.  He obtained a bank card in a false name for the purposes
    of avoiding detection  as  somebody  who  had  no  right  to  be  here.
    Subsequently he persistently broke his bail  terms  which  again  is  a
    criminal offence.  He also not only remained in  this  country  without
    leave, and worked without permission but, in order  to  facilitate  his
    continued unlawful presence in this  country,  told  lies  whenever  it
    suited as to where he lived or even, when he was apprehended  in  2013,
    what his name was.  Even at the hearing before this Tribunal  today  he
    chose to lie when he thought it might help his case, when he  tried  to
    pretend that the childminding contract  was  a  contract  to  send  his
    children to nursery.  Unfortunately for him his partner was unaware  of
    the evidence he had given and told the truth regarding the childminder.



33. Accordingly in my judgment he is indeed  a  "persistent  offender"  and
    thus a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of Section 117C of the  2002
    Act and I therefore have to take into account the provisions of Section
    117C of that Act which provides as follows:

         "117C    Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving
                foreign criminals


                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.


                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal ....


                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal  ...  who  has  not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest requires [his]  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.


                ...


                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh".

34. Ms Daykin does not seek to advance the appellant's appeal on the  basis
    either that Exception 1 applies or that the effect on the partner would
    be "unduly harsh" but she does (to the extent that I do not accept  her
    arguments relating to whether or not this appellant  is  a  "persistent
    offender") seek to argue that the effect on the appellant's older child
    would be unduly harsh.

35. It has now been accepted by the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 617 that the decision of this Tribunal in KMO (section  117  -
    unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543 is correct and the previous  decision  by
    this Tribunal in another reported case  of  MAB  (para  399;  "  unduly
    harsh")USA [2015] UKUT 435 was  not  to  be  followed,  and  that  when
    considering whether or not the effect on a child is "unduly  harsh"  it
    is necessary to carry out a proportionality exercise, which I shall now
    do.

36. I should add that even if I am wrong in concluding that this  appellant
    is indeed a "persistent offender" for the purposes of Section  117C  of
    the 2002 Act, because the original deportation  decision  was  properly
    made and  this  appellant  is  therefore  someone  who  is  "liable  to
    deportation" I would still when considering whether or not the decision
    not to revoke that deportation order should be upheld need to  consider
    whether or not in light of all the facts in this case  deportation  was
    still proportionate and the same factors would apply.

37. My starting point has to be both what is provided  at  Section  117B(1)
    which is "applicable in all cases" that "the maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest" and also (to the extent
    that this  appellant  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  "foreign  criminal")
    following what is said in paragraph 117C(1) that  "the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals is in the  public  interest".   Even  if  he  is  not
    properly to be regarded as a "foreign criminal"  for  the  purposes  of
    section 117C, the public interest  in  deporting  this  appellant  must
    still be very high indeed for the reasons which follow.  This appellant
    is a person who having been made the subject of a deportation order has
    sought for the last several years to  avoid  the  consequence  of  that
    order by deliberately lying about his whereabouts  and  even,  when  he
    could, his identity.  If people who are properly made the subject of  a
    deportation order are able without very strong grounds indeed to  avoid
    the consequences of that order in the way in which this  appellant  has
    so far managed to do, involving lies and deceit, then it would be  very
    difficult indeed to maintain a fair and effective system of immigration
    control which the public  is  entitled  to  expect  will  be  operated.
    Accordingly on any view in order for the decision  refusing  to  revoke
    the deportation order to be  one  which  should  be  set  aside  it  is
    necessary for this appellant to show very strong reasons  why,  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, notwithstanding the great public
    interest in maintaining the  original  decision,  his  deportation  was
    nonetheless not proportionate.  In other words,  the  interest  of  his
    older child in particular would have to be so compelling as to outweigh
    the public interest in removing him.  In my judgment the evidence comes
    nowhere near establishing this.

38. I accept, as I have already indicated, that the appellant has a genuine
    relationship with both his children and there is generic evidence  that
    autistic children, like any other child, would generally  benefit  from
    the support and presence of both parents.  However,  there  is  nothing
    which takes this case beyond what will always occur in sad  cases  like
    this where a disabled or otherwise disadvantaged  child  would  benefit
    from the continued presence and support of both parents.  There  is  no
    particular evidence specific to this  case  to  the  effect  that  this
    child, more than any other child with  difficulties,  could  not  cope.
    The family have used childminders before  and  no  doubt  could  do  so
    again.  It is not what they would choose to do and the  best  interests
    of both children considered in isolation would probably be to have both
    parents present, but the circumstances  of  these  children  cannot  be
    considered in isolation.  Their best interests have to be considered in
    light  also  of  the  very  great  public  interest  in  maintaining  a
    deportation decision in respect of somebody who through  a  combination
    of not reporting and lying has so far  managed  to  avoid  capture  and
    deportation ever since.

39. In my judgment there is no factor in this case sufficiently  compelling
    to justify not enforcing the deportation  order  which  has  previously
    been made.  As Lord Justice Sedley said in his very  well-known  dictum
    in A D Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348, at para 27, when  commenting  on
    the tragic consequence that deportation would  have  in  that  case  of
    splitting up a family, "that is what deportation does".

40. It follows that this appeal must again be dismissed, and I so order.



Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman  and  substitute
the following decision:  this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                     Date: 24 December 2016
