
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00448/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2019                      |On 1 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Przemyslaw [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State for the Home Department: Mr T Melvin,
                    Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a citizen of Poland.  His date of birth is 24 January
    1979. I shall refer to him as the Appellant as he was before the FtT.

 2. The Appellant came here in or around September 2016.  The Secretary  of
    State made a deportation order on 5 June 2018  pursuant  to  Regulation
    23(6) of the 2016 EEA Regulations.  The Appellant appealed against this
    decision.  His appeal was allowed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Groom.  Permission was granted to the Secretary of State by Judge  Adio
    on 18 April 2019.  Thus, the matter came before me on 23 July 2019.

 3. The Appellant's criminality is comprehensively set out at  paragraph  4
    to paragraph 10 of the Secretary of State's decision letter.  On 3 July
    1998 at a court in Gorzow Wielkopolski the Appellant was  convicted  of
    offences described as robbery and causing minor bodily injury.  He  was
    sentenced to two years and six months imprisonment.  On 6 February 2001
    at a court in Gorzow Wielkopolski the Appellant  was  convicted  of  an
    offence described as brawl and battery.  He was sentenced to two  years
    imprisonment which was suspended for a period of five  years:  however,
    this was subsequently revoked.  On 13 May 2005 at  a  court  in  Gorzow
    Wielkopolski the Appellant was convicted of  an  offence  described  as
    theft.  He received a sentence of imprisonment  of  one  year.   On  16
    September 2005 at a court in  Gorzow  Wielkopolski  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of an  offence  described  as  brawl  and  battery.   He  was
    sentenced to  ten  months'  imprisonment.   On  10  February  2011  the
    Appellant was convicted at a court in Gorzow Wielkopolski of an offence
    described as unintentional killing and driving under the  influence  of
    alcohol  or  narcotic  drugs.   He  was  sentenced   to   four   years'
    imprisonment.  On 23 April 2015 at a court in Gorzow  Wielkopolski  the
    Appellant was convicted of an offence described as making  threats  and
    violating  physical  integrity.   He  was  sentenced  to  five  months'
    imprisonment.  On 12 February 2016 at a court  in  Gorzow  Wielkopolski
    the Appellant was convicted of an offence of robbery and  sentenced  to
    four months' imprisonment.

The hearing before the FtT

 4. There was no dispute that the Appellant had been convicted of the above
    offences.   In  addition,  the  Secretary  of   State   relied   on   a
    supplementary letter of  22  August  2018.   It  was  stated  that  the
    Appellant had come to the attention of the authorities  for  assaulting
    his ex-partner on 2  September  2017.   It  was  alleged  that  he  had
    breached bail and committed criminal damage on 4 September 2017.  These
    allegations were discontinued.

 5. The judge in his decision directed  himself  on  the  law  at  [5]-[9].
    There is no suggestion that the judge misdirected himself.   The  judge
    identified the evidence at [10] of the  decision.   He  heard  evidence
    from the Appellant and made findings of fact at [16] - [18].  The judge
    expressed  concern  that  the  exact  circumstances  of  the   offences
    committed in Poland and/or the sentencing comments of the judge/s  were
    not available to him.

 6. The Secretary of State relied on evidence that whilst the Appellant was
    in detention (he had been in detention since 10 May 2018) he  had  been
    reproached by IRC staff on eleven separate occasions for  "infractions"
    that had related to incidents of verbal abuse towards  staff  and  non-
    compliance and disputes with other detainees.  The judge at [15] stated
    that the details of these infractions were not provided to him  by  the
    Secretary of State.

 7. The judge considered whether the Appellant presents a genuine,  present
    and serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society having regard to Schedule 1 of  the  EEA  Regulations  and  the
    principles set out in Arranz (EEA Regulations  -  deportation  -  test)
    [2017] UKUT 00294.  The judge  took  into  account  the  Appellant  was
    allowed to enter the UK.  The Secretary of State did not seek  at  that
    time to exercise a power under Regulation 23 of the 2016 Regulations.

 8. The judge took into account that the Appellant's offending was confined
    to when he was in Poland and he had not offended since  he  arrived  in
    September 2016.  The judge found:-

         "Given  that  the  precise  details  of  the  Appellant's  previous
         convictions are not known, it is difficult  to  ascertain  how  the
         Respondent  concluded  that  threat  posed  by  the  Appellant   is
         sufficiently serious".

 9. In  respect  of  the  Appellant's  criminality,  the  judge  said  that
    "Previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves  justify  the
    decision" and:-

         "A decision made on public policy or public security grounds cannot
         be made on criminal  convictions  alone.   All  the  principles  of
         Regulation 27(5)  must  be  taken  into  account.   The  nature  of
         previous offending including the number and seriousness of previous
         convictions should form part of  the  assessment  of  the  person's
         present conduct when considering the overall conduct of the  person
         concerned" (see [17]).

10. The judge at [18] accepted the Appellant's representative's  submission
    that in the absence of definitive evidence as to the precise nature  of
    the offences, the decision of the Respondent insofar as it  relates  to
    the offences of which the Appellant has been convicted is no more  than
    generalisations and speculation.

11. At [22] the judge returned to this point stating that the Secretary  of
    State had made his decision on the basis of  the  Appellant's  previous
    convictions, ...:-

         "As there was no evidence obtained as to the nature of the offences
         involved, or any aggravating or mitigating features which may  have
         reveal (sic) the triggers for offending for example, the Respondent
         did not obtain a sufficiently accurate picture  which  enabled  the
         Secretary of State to conduct a proper  assessment  of  risk  or  a
         propensity to reoffend".

12. In respect of the incidents in 2017 the judge attached weight to  there
    being no criminal proceedings brought against the Appellant.  There was
    no evidence from the Secretary of State about the infractions relied on
    and the  judge  stated  at  [20]  ...  "the  precise  nature  of  those
    infractions was not available for me to assess during the hearing".

13. At [21] the judge said that he had taken into account  the  Appellant's
    personal conduct, age, state of health, family and economic  situation,
    length of residence and social and cultural integration.  The Appellant
    was aged 40 and the judge said that ...:-

         "It was apparent from his oral evidence that he  does  not  dispute
         the convictions against him which were all obtained in  Poland  and
         he was candid on more than once (sic) occasion by stating 'I know I
         am not an angel.'"

    The judge attached weight to the evidence that the  Appellant  has  not
    been convicted of an offence since 2016 and that this "gives weight  to
    his personal conduct whilst in the UK and the level  of  risk  that  he
    poses and propensity of re-offending" (see [21]).  The judge found that
    the Appellant is positive about his extended family network, now in the
    UK, and stated ... "the inference being that it is this family  network
    who offer him stability".

14. The judge found that the Appellant has  ties  to  his  local  community
    taking into account the evidence from a neighbour,  Mr  Steadman.   The
    judge found that the Appellant does not have  family  ties  in  Poland.
    The judge attached weight to the Appellant having previously lived  and
    worked here in 2009 noting that there were no convictions  during  that
    time.  The judge attached weight to a recent  certificate  obtained  by
    the Appellant in decorative design concluding  that  it  supported  his
    assertion that he would wish to take  advantage  of  the  opportunities
    here in the UK.

15. At [22] the judge  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    discharged the burden of demonstrating that the  Appellant  presents  a
    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.

The legal background

         16. "27.-    (1)  In this regulation, a 'relevant decision'  means
             an EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public
             security or public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  in the best interests of the person concerned, as provided
                  for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child  adopted
                  by the General Assembly of  the  United  Nations  on  20th
                  November 1989(1).

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
                  in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ('P')  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.

         (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of  public
             health-

             (a)  a disease  that  does  not  have  epidemic  potential  as
                  defined by the relevant instruments of  the  World  Health
                  Organisation or is not a disease listed in Schedule  1  to
                  the Health Protection (Notification) Regulations  2010(2);
                  or

             (b)  if the person concerned is in  the  United  Kingdom,  any
                  disease occurring after the three month  period  beginning
                  on the date on which the  person  arrived  in  the  United
                  Kingdom,

             does not constitute grounds for the decision.

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).




         ...




         Regulation 27

                                 SCHEDULE 1

          CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
                    FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
             or public security values: member  States  enjoy  considerable
             discretion,  acting  within  the  parameters  set  by  the  EU
             Treaties, applied where relevant  by  the  EEA  agreement,  to
             define  their  own  standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
             extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
             nationality or language does not amount to integration in  the
             United Kingdom; a significant degree  of  wider  cultural  and
             societal integration must be present before a  person  may  be
             regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
             family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

         6.   It is  consistent  with  public  policy  and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including-

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
                  values."

The grounds of appeal

17. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal read as follows:-

         "1.  The respondent  considers  the  appellant's  past  conduct  is
             sufficient to bring him within Regulation 27(5)(c) in order to
             justify deportation, as  it  allows  the  respondent  to  take
             account of past conduct when assessing threat.  The  appellant
             has a prolific offending history in  Poland:  between  1998  -
             2006 he spent only limited time out of prison  as  convictions
             followed soon after each release.

         2.   A 2.5 year gap in offending in the UK does not evidence he  is
             a reformed character given his very long offending history.

         3.   The Judge has allowed the appeal for a lack of detail  of  the
             offending, but where in this case the  appellant  has  a  very
             long string of  offences  for  violence,  theft,  robbery  and
             unintentional  killing  under  the  influence  of  drugs   and
             alcohol, totalling custodial sentences  of  around  11  years.
             Even if there were mitigating circumstances  to  one  or  more
             offence, he still represents a present threat to the UK.   The
             appellant does not dispute the offending.

         4.   It is respectfully submitted that for the above  reasons,  the
             judge has erred in allowing the appeal."

The grant of permission

18. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to the Secretary  of  State.
    The decision of 18 April 2019 reads as follows:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks to permission to appeal in time against a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J P Groom) who in a
             decision  promulgated  on  22nd   March   2019   allowed   the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to deport
             him under EEA Regulations.  To be granted permission to appeal
             the appealing party must show that there is an  arguable  case
             that the judge made an error of law or  conducted  the  appeal
             with procedural unfairness.  In the grounds for permission  to
             appeal the Respondent argues that the Appellant's  conduct  is
             sufficient to bring him within Regulation 27(5)  in  order  to
             justify deportation as it allows the Respondent to  take  into
             account past conduct when assessing threat.  It was noted  the
             Appellant has a prolific offending history in  Poland  between
             1998 and 2006 (should read 2016).  The Respondent  noted  that
             the Appellant only spent a  limited  time  out  of  prison  as
             convictions followed soon after each release.  It  was  argued
             that a 2.5-year gap in offending in the UK does not evidence a
             reformed a character given his long offending history.  I find
             that based on the long offending history of the Appellant  and
             the short period he has stayed in the UK it is  arguable  that
             even if there are mitigating  circumstances  to  one  or  more
             offences the Appellant still represents a  present  threat  to
             the UK particularly as there is no dispute with the offending.
              I find that the judge's decision did not give  enough  weight
             to the points made by the Secretary of State  in  the  grounds
             for permission to appeal.(my emphasis).There  is  an  arguable
             error of law raised by the Respondent."

Submissions

19.      Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton argument of 3 June 2019. He   made
    oral submissions. It was submitted that "the judge  should  have  given
    careful  consideration  to  the  previous  offending,  the  convictions
    themselves, and not look for  evidence  of  aggravating  or  mitigating
    circumstances, and by doing so has materially erred".  Details  of  the
    infractions were set out in the supplementary letter and the arrests in
    2017 were matters going to the overall assessment. The judge failed  to
    assess rehabilitation and integration.   I pressed Mr Melvin to make it
    clear to me where the error lay in the decision of the judge.  He  said
    that there was a failure to  make  findings  on  material  matters.  He
    submitted that the judge ignored that the Appellant  was  eligible  for
    the lowest level of protection only.  It was incumbent on the judge  to
    consider the period of time that the Appellant had  been  here  and  he
    failed to do so. Moreover, the  judge erred in looking  for  mitigating
    circumstances. He said that the grounds do not concern  weight,  but  a
    failure to consider material matters. Ms Easty made oral   submissions,
    relying on the Rule 24 response and her skeleton argument,  the  thrust
    of which is that the grounds are a disagreement with the findings.

Conclusions

20.   The grounds of appeal do not properly identify an  arguable  error  of
    law.  In R (Iran) [2015] EWCA Civ 982 the Court  of  Appeal  considered
    the Tribunal's jurisdiction to correct errors of law and gave at [9]  a
    brief summary of the  points  of  law  that  will  most  frequently  be
    encountered in practice:-

         "i)  Making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or  matters
             that were material to the outcome ('material matters');

         ii)  Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
             on material matters;

         iii) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact
             or opinion on material matters;

         iv)  Giving weight to immaterial matters;

         v)   Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         vi)  Committing or permitting a procedural  or  other  irregularity
             capable of making a material difference to the outcome or  the
             fairness of the proceedings;

         vii) Making a  mistake  as  to  a  material  fact  which  could  be
             established by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the
             Appellant and/or his advisers were  not  responsible  for  the
             mistake, and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a
             mistake was made."

21.  The grounds comprise four paragraphs.  Paragraphs 1-3 do  not  identify
    an arguable error, rather they are a restatement of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case and a disagreement with the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Paragraph 4 is a bare assertion that the judge erred.

22.  I have emphasised the part of the decision  granting  permission  which
    contain the reasons for the grant.  The judge said as follows:-

         "... I find that  based  on  the  long  offending  history  of  the
         Appellant and the short period he  has  stayed  in  the  UK  it  is
         arguable that even if there are mitigating circumstances to one  or
         more offences the Appellant still represents a  present  threat  to
         the UK particularly as there is no dispute with the offending ...".

23. This sentence does not identify an arguable error of  law.  It  is  the
    opinion of the judge granting permission.

24. The grant of permission goes on:-

         "... the judge's decision did not give enough weight to the  points
         made by the Secretary of State in the  grounds  for  permission  to
         appeal.   There  is  an  arguable  error  of  law  raised  by   the
         Respondent."

25. Not giving enough weight  to  points  raised  in  the  grounds  by  the
    Secretary of State is not an arguable error of law, unless of course as
    a consequence it can properly be said that the judge made an irrational
    decision (more recently the Upper Tribunal  gave  guidance  in  Durueke
    (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach) [2019] UKUT 00197.  Irrationality is
    not pleaded by the Secretary of State.

26. The grounds are in truth no more than a disagreement about weight to be
    given to the  different  factors,  namely;  the  Appellant's  offending
    history in Poland, the 2.5- year gap  in  offending  and  the  lack  of
    detail about the offences committed in Poland.  They fail  to  identify
    an arguable error of law. Mr Melvin's skeleton argument expanded on the
    grounds, but it does not identify an error of law in  the  decision  of
    the judge.

27. In oral submissions Mr Melvin identified, for the first  time,  matters
    which are capable of amounting to errors of law; namely, a  failure  to
    make findings on material matters and a failure to  take  into  account
    material evidence. Neither are raised in the  grounds.  Permission  was
    not granted to argue the points. In any event, there is no substance in
    them. The judge was aware that the Appellant was entitled to the lowest
    level of protection (having identified at [3] that he had not  acquired
    permanent residence and referring to what he called the "bottom tier of
    protection" at [8] and [9]). It is unarguable that he ignored that  the
    Appellant was entitled to the lowest form of protection (a  point  that
    was not raised in the grounds or in Mr Melvin's skeleton argument,  but
    for the first time in oral submissions).   The  judge  unarguably  took
    into account the "infractions" and 2017 matters on which the  Secretary
    of State relied and  made  findings  that  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

28. The judge did not seek to go behind the Appellant's criminal offending.
    The judge was aware of the extent of  the  Appellant's  criminality  in
    Poland and that this was a factor which weighed heavily against him. He
    was unarguably aware of the timeline.  He did not look  for  mitigation
    in the absence of evidence  from  the  Appellant,  as  asserted  by  Mr
    Melvin. The judge was entitled to  expect  further  details  about  the
    offences committed in Poland, including the sentencing comments to help
    him to identify causes or triggers to help him assess risk.  Whilst the
    same could possibly have been obtained by the Appellant as suggested by
    Mr Melvin, the burden of proof (properly applied by the judge)  was  on
    the Secretary of State.

29. The judge had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from the  Appellant.
    It is clear that he accepted the Appellant's evidence and found him  to
    be credible.  His evidence is that he is not a threat to  the  UK  (see
    the Appellant's witness statement).   He asserts that he has  not  done
    anything wrong whilst here and he will not commit offences whilst here.
     He did not know what the "infractions" related to but stated  that  he
    feels frustrated whilst in custody.

30. There was adequate consideration of matters relating to integration, in
    so far as they relate to reg 27 (5) ( c).

31. The judge took into account all material  evidence  and  made  adequate
    findings of fact on material matters.  He was entitled to attach weight
    to the Appellant having not committed offences whilst in the  UK.   The
    findings were  open  to  the  judge  and  consistent  with  Schedule  1
    considerations.  What weight to attach to the factors identified in the
    Respondent's grounds was a matter for  the  judge.   His  findings  are
    grounded in the evidence and adequately reasoned. The  conclusions  are
    rational (irrationality is not a ground of appeal, in any  event).  The
    grounds amount to a disagreement with the findings.

Notice of Decision

32. The Secretary of State's application is dismissed.  The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  2016
    Regulations is maintained.

33. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                   Joanna McWilliam                           Date  24
July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
