
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     g w
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman, instructed by Immigration Law Practice
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 18 March 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant on the basis that he is a foreign criminal.  That
    decision was taken in consequence of his conviction on 13 December 2013
    for the possession with intent to supply class A controlled  drugs  for
    which he was sentenced to thirteen months' imprisonment.   There  is  a
    long procedural history to this case, it first having come  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 5 September 2014.  That appeal was  allowed  but
    that decision was subsequently set aside and remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal then came before Judge Herlihy on 26 March  2018.
    She allowed the appeal on 11 April 2018  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    sought permission to appeal against that  decision  also.   It  is  for
    those reasons that the matter then came before me  on  14  August  2018
    when I set the matter aside for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision
    annexed to this decision.

 2. That decision and indeed Judge Herlihy's decision needs now to be  seen
    in the light of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.

Remaking the Appeal

 3. As noted in KO (Nigeria) at [5] there is little difference between  the
    application of the Rules and Section 117C:

         "5.  It is unnecessary to refer in detail to  the  Changes  to  the
         Immigration Rules made at the same time (paragraphs 398-399), since
         it is not argued that any differences are material  to  the  issues
         before us. It is to be noted however that the question whether "the
         effect"  of  C's  deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  (section
         117C(5)) is broken down into two parts in paragraph 399, so that it
         applies where:


             "(a) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and


             (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
             UK without the person who is to be deported."


 4. In addition, the Supreme Court held:

         "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons". That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more.


         ...


         32.  Laws LJ's approach has the advantage of giving full weight  to
         the emphasis on relative seriousness in section  117C(2).  However,
         on closer examination of the language of the two exceptions, and of
         the relationship of the section with  section  117B,  as  discussed
         above, I respectfully take a different view. Once one  accepts,  as
         the Department did at that stage (rightly in  my  view),  that  the
         issue of "reasonableness" under section 117B(6) is focussed on  the
         position of the child, it would be odd to find a different approach
         in section 117C(5) at least without a much  clearer  indication  of
         what is intended than one finds in  section  117C(2).  It  is  also
         difficult to reconcile the approach of Judge Southern  or  Laws  LJ
         with the purpose of reducing the scope for judicial evaluation (see
         para 15 above). The examples given by Judge Southern illustrate the
         point. On his  view,  the  tribunal  is  asked  to  decide  whether
         consequences which are deemed  unduly  harsh  for  the  son  of  an
         insurance fraudster may be acceptably harsh for the son of a  drug-
         dealer. Quite apart from the  difficulty  of  reaching  a  rational
         judicial conclusion on such a question, it seems to  me  in  direct
         conflict with the Zoumbas principle that the child  should  not  be
         held responsible for the conduct of the parent."


 5. The core issue in this case is whether it would be unduly harsh for the
    appellant's children and  partner  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without him if he were deported.  It is I  consider  sensible  at  this
    point to set out the findings set out at paragraphs  [48]  to  [50]  of
    Judge Herlihy's decision which have been preserved:

         "48. I have carefully considered all the evidence of the  witnesses
         and to be credible. I  was  impressed  with  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's stepdaughter  and  his  daughter  Nicole  who  provided
         insight into the effects of  the  Appellant's  detention  upon  the
         family and particularly the Appellant's wife and minor children. It
         is clear from the evidence that when  the  Appellant  was  detained
         that his wife relied very heavily upon the support  of  her  eldest
         daughter Natasha and of the Appellant's daughter Nicole who at  the
         time was herself minor. I note the report  of  social  services  in
         January 2014 which referred to the Appellant as a protective factor
         for  the  children.  The  report  supports  the  evidence  of   the
         Appellant's wife with regard to her own history  and  records  that
         the family were known to  children's  services  initially  in  2001
         following the mother's  overdose.  The  report  also  confirms  the
         mother's diagnosis of bipolar/borderline personality  disorder  and
         that she had been prescribed mood stabilisers and had suffered with
         alcohol dependency and that her  mental  health  had  significantly
         impacted upon her parenting capacity  in  the  past  and  that  the
         Appellant was a key support for her and the  children  during  that
         time. The report records that the Appellant's wife had stated  that
         she feels she would emotionally struggle should the  Appellant  not
         come home and that this was a significant impact  upon  her  mental
         health and parenting capacity and  that  her  previous  assessments
         have noted that the Appellant had been a positive support  for  his
         wife and with her mental health and alcohol abuse. The report  also
         confirms that the  Appellant's  wife  suffers  with  osteoarthritis
         which has a significant impact upon her practical  ability  in  the
         home and that the Appellant's wife and all the children stated that
         the Appellant had been a major source of practical support  in  the
         home and that his absence that had an impact on all of  them  since
         he had been imprisoned. The report recommends  that  the  Appellant
         should be returned to the family home where he continues to have  a
         central role within the family and has a  very  close  relationship
         with all four children and has  been  actively  involved  in  their
         upbringing and that his wife's  parenting  ability  appears  to  be
         significantly impacted on  by  her  bipolar/borderline  personality
         disorder for which she is receiving ongoing  psychiatric  treatment
         and support and by her osteoarthritis


         49.  I fully accept the evidence of the Appellant, his wife and the
         children, that during his period of imprisonment  that  his  eldest
         daughter Natasha provided  significant  care  and  support  to  the
         family (moving back into the family home) as  did  the  Appellant's
         eldest daughter Nicole. I also accept that weekly visits were  made
         by the wife's family and this  is  confirmed  by  the  report  from
         social services. social services also noted that there was  support
         in the form of visits by  the  Appellant's  sister  and  a  cousin.
         However I find that the bulk of the support  was  provided  by  and
         Nicole. I also find that the circumstances have now  changed  since
         the Appellant's release from  detention  and  that  Natasha  is  no
         longer in a position to provide the level of support that  she  did
         previously as she is now married with two very young  children  and
         has moved away from the location of her mother home.  I  also  find
         that Nicole if unlikely to  be  able  to  provide  any  significant
         support given her plans to progress her education and career.


         50.  I have also  carefully  considered  the  current  evidence  in
         respect of the Appellant's wife's mental health. I  note  that  the
         Appellant's wife suffers from  osteoarthritis  which  does  have  a
         practical impact on her ability to physically support and care  for
         her children. I do not find that the  previous  arrangements  which
         relied upon very substantial  help  from  Natasha  and  Nicole  are
         sustainable and I find that in the absence of  the  Appellant  from
         the family unit that there would not be  adequate  arrangements  in
         place for the care of the Appellant's minor children."


 6. Whilst I note that much of the material dates from 2014, equally  there
    is more recent evidence of the appellant's wife's  mental  state  which
    confirms first that she is still in receipt of the same  medication  as
    noted in the report of Dr Ajayi in which, after recording  her  various
    diagnoses including mental and  behavioural  disorder  due  to  use  of
    cannabis, Emotionally unstable personality  disorder,  borderline  type
    ICD10 F60.31 and a history of childhood sexual abuse, he says:

         "I am offering my opinion regarding the impact that  her  husband's
         deportation would have on her.  It is my view that  this  would  be
         yet another stress which is then likely to cause  deterioration  of
         her already unstable mood.  The risk resorting to  chaotic  use  of
         illicit drugs is also heightened by early stressor."


 7. It is also recorded in the letter from the GP  dated  17  January  2018
    that the wife has a complex history of mental and behavioural  disorder
    since  2011;  that  she  is  prescribed  propranolol  for  anxiety  and
    depression, zopiclone for low mood, quetiapine for  management  of  her
    mood disorders as well as promethazine and lamotrigine.

 8. In addition, she is also taking tramadol and co-codamol as a result  of
    pain she suffers from arthritis and osteoarthritis.  It is also of note
    that in the assessment  by  social  services  conducted  by  the  Royal
    Borough of Greenwich that it recommended in 2014 as follows: -

         "Based on the information gathered for this assessment,  I  believe
         that it would be detrimental to the children should  the  appellant
         not return to the family home.  it appears  that  he  continues  to
         have a central role  within  the  family.   He  has  a  very  close
         relationship with all four children and has been actively  involved
         with their upbringing.


         [L]'s parenting ability appears to be significantly impacted by her
         bipolar/borderline personality  disorder  for  which  she  received
         psychiatric  treatment  and  support.   She   also   suffers   from
         osteoarthritis which impacts upon her practical parenting  ability.
         Prior to [G] going to prison he provided  significant  support  for
         the children which helped ensure the children's  basic  needs  were
         taken care of.  L has relied heavily on her children to support her
         during [G]'s absence.  However, given the previous concerns raised,
         this appears to be on a temporary measure  until  [G]  is  able  to
         resume his support.  This is highlighted by a period of  separation
         between L and [G].  During this time G continued to be a protective
         factor for the children and continued to hold responsibilities  for
         their care."


 9. I bear in mind that there are in  this  case  three  children  who  are
    minors.  Whilst the two older are teenagers,  they  are  all  still  at
    school.

10. I bear in mind Miss Holmes' submission that the children are now  older
    and as teenagers there is less need for the "hands on" care.   That  is
    perhaps less so in the case of the middle child who has his own  health
    problems.

11. I bear in mind also that the finding that the  older  children  of  the
    family who have  now  established  their  own  families  would  not  be
    offering no support but I find that any support that they are likely to
    be able to offer is limited and at the expense of looking  after  their
    own children.

12. I consider that deporting the appellant to Jamaica would  have  a  very
    significant impact on the children given the  evidence  set  out  above
    which I find is still relevant and cogent.  I find also that removal is
    likely to have a significant impact on the appellant's wife  given  her
    unstable mental health and significant  physical  ill  health  which  I
    accept causes her significant pain and makes it difficult  for  her  to
    carry out everyday tasks within the  home  and  in  looking  after  her
    children.  I am satisfied on the basis of  the  medical  evidence  that
    there is a real risk of her  deteriorating  rapidly  and  again  having
    recourse to chaotic drugtaking, putting not just her life, but that  of
    the children in her care, at significant risk.  I  consider  also  that
    this significant and rapid deterioration in their mother's  health  and
    ability to parent them would have a significant and serious  impact  on
    the children.  I accept the evidence from the  school  that  there  are
    already beginning to be significant problems  with  the  older  child's
    education.

13. The stark consequence of deportation of this appellant will be to  have
    a precipitated and significant deteriorative effect both  on  his  wife
    and on their  children.   That  is  because  the  day-to-day  emotional
    support provided in particular to the wife will disappear and  this  is
    not something that  could  be  replicated  either  by  social  services
    involvement or by the support of family.  Whilst it may be possible for
    social services to support the family after  things  have  gone  wrong,
    that is after the event.  It would not prevent the damage being done to
    the children nor is it likely that the appellant and his  wife's  older
    children would be in a position to offer the support necessary to avoid
    this.

14. I conclude that the consequences for  both  the  appellant's  wife  and
    their children would undoubtedly be  unduly  harsh.   The  consequences
    are, I am satisfied, severe and bleak.  This is not just  the  severing
    of a close parental relationship but it has the effect also of bringing
    further  damage  and  significant  and  severe  consequences   to   the
    appellant's wife and to their children both in  separation  from  their
    father and in the effect that there would be in their mother no  longer
    being in a position properly to care for them.

15. I bear in mind that there is of course  a  significant  weight  in  the
    public interest to be taken into account of the fact that the appellant
    is a foreign national offender.  Further, the offences of which he  was
    convicted involve the supply of class A drugs and whilst the sentencing
    is at the lower end of the scale  for  such  an  offence,  equally  the
    public interest in the deportation of those involved in such crimes  as
    a supplier of illegal  drugs,  given  their  pernicious  and  insidious
    effects on society.  Nonetheless for  the  reasons  given  above  I  am
    satisfied first that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules  and  second  that  these  are  cases  to  which  the
    exceptions in Section 117C apply.

16. Accordingly, for these reasons and as announced at the hearing I remake
    the decision by allowing the appeal.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.




 2) I remake the decision by  allowing  the  appeal,  albeit  on  different
    grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 August 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Rahman, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy promulgated on 11 April 2018 in which
    she allowed the respondent's appeal against the  decision  made  on  18
    March 2014 make a deportation order against him as a foreign  criminal.
    That decision was taken by the Secretary of  State  consequent  to  the
    respondent's conviction on 13 December 2013 for possession with  intent
    to supply Class A controlled drugs for which he  was  sentenced  to  30
    months imprisonment.

 2. The respondent is married and has  a  number  of  children,  the  three
    youngest of whom have British Citizenship. There are also stepchildren.
     The respondent's wife, LW, has a number of physical and mental  health
    problems; she also has had problems with alcohol and drug abuse.

 3. It is not disputed that the applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his older daughter, N, his  wife  and  their
    three minor children.  The Secretary of State's case was  not  that  it
    would be reasonable for the respondent's wife  and  minor  children  to
    accompany  him  to  Jamaica,  but  that  his  deportation  there,   and
    separation from this family, would be proportionate.

 4. In her decision, the judge found [51] that it would be unduly harsh  to
    expect the children to remain in the United Kingdom without him,  given
    the very specific mental and  physical  needs  of  their  mother;  and,
    having had regard [52] to sections 117B and s117C of the 2002 Act, that
    the public interest in deportation was outweighed.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred:

      i) In failing to identify what would be the unduly harsh  consequences
         for the children if the respondent were deported,  given  that  the
         family had been able to cope in the past,  and  that  support  from
         Social Services might be available;

     ii) In failing to demonstrate that she had given the required weight to
         the public interest.

 6. On 6  July  2018  upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson  granted  permission,
    observing that it was arguable that the judge had at [51] assessed  the
    likely impact on the family in isolation, concluding that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the family to remain with  the  respondent,  and  only
    then at [52] considering separately the  public  interest  rather  than
    balancing the public interests against the effect on family as required
    following MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450

 7. Despite Mr Rahman's submissions to the contrary, I  conclude  that  the
    judge did not  properly  take  into  account  the  public  interest  in
    analysing whether the effect on the children  of  separation  would  be
    unduly harsh. Following MM (Uganda) the expression  "unduly  harsh"  in
    section 117C(5) and Rule 399(a) and (b) requires regard to  be  had  to
    all the circumstances including the criminal's immigration and criminal
    history.

 8. While it is correct that the judge does refer at [53] to  MM  (Uganda),
    that is only after finding that the requirement of paragraph 399(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules was met, and paragraph [52] is worded in  such  a
    way that she considered the public interest as mandated by section 117C
    of the  2002  Act  notwithstanding  that  she  had  found  he  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. It is  thus  apparent  that  the
    judge had not properly factored the public interest into account in the
    assessment under the Immigration Rules but had done so afterward.  That
    is also clear from paragraph [54] where the judge says  "I  have  found
    that it would be unduly harsh for the children  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the [respondent]."

 9. Further, I am satisfied that this error is material as the analysis  of
    article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, in effect carried out  in  the
    alternative  at  [52]  to  [54],  there  is  no  proper  or  sufficient
    explanation given for the conclusion that the effect  on  the  children
    outweighed the strong public interest in deportation.

10. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision did involve  the
    making of an error of law, and must be set aside to be remade.

11. I am, however, satisfied that the  judge's  findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved, and thus it is appropriate for the remaking of the  decision
    to be carried out in the Upper Tribunal.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal

 3. Any additional evidence on which the  parties  seek  to  rely  must  be
    served at least 10 working days before the next hearing.


Signed                                  Date:  15 August 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
