
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00144/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 11 December 2018                         |On: 23 January 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 LIVIU COJAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Weston, instructed by HSR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Romania, born on 18 October  1980.  He  claims
to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2002,  although  there  is  no
evidence of his date of entry. He was issued with an EEA residence  card  as
a non-EEA family member on 17 July 2008 following his marriage to  his  wife
in Romania in September 2007.

The appellant was convicted on 7  January  2009  and  31  December  2009  of
separate driving offences for which he received a fine and  penalty  points.
On 9 October 2014 he was convicted of  two  counts  of  committing  an  act/
series of acts with intent to pervert the course of justice,  for  which  he
was sentenced to 36 months' imprisonment. On 10 February 2015 he was  served
with a liability for deportation notice and on 2 March 2016  the  respondent
made  a  decision  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  regulation  19(3)(b)   and
regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
("the EEA Regulations"). Further to representations made  by  the  appellant
in response to the deportation decision, a supplementary deportation  letter
was issued on 29 June 2016.

In the deportation decision,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the  evidence
produced by the appellant of his employment in  the  UK  was  sufficient  to
demonstrate  that  he  had  acquired  the  right  to  permanent   residence.
Accordingly  consideration  was  given  to  whether  his   deportation   was
justified on serious grounds of public policy.  The  respondent  noted  that
the circumstances of the appellant's offence involved a fatal  road  traffic
collision on 9 November 2012 in which a Renault Laguna pulled  onto  a  dual
carriageway in front of two motorcycles and resulted in the death of one  of
the motorcyclists. The appellant stood trial for causing the  death  of  the
victim, but was acquitted of that offence. However, he was convicted on  two
counts of committing an act/ series of  acts  with  intent  to  pervert  the
course of justice in relation to a payment made to a witness  in  the  trial
to secure their silence and the concealment or destruction  of  the  Renault
Laguna which was seen to have been driven to his garage  premises  following
the collision. It was noted that the appellant was the  owner  and  operator
of garage premises close to where the collision occurred and  that  he  also
operated a  business  exporting  vehicles  to  Eastern  Europe  and  it  was
considered that he had destroyed or concealed the vehicle, so  removing  the
only potential source of evidence which could have identified the driver.

The respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been  found  in  an  OASys
assessment to pose a low risk of harm to the public and a low  risk  of  re-
offending, but considered that the offence for which he had  been  convicted
was a serious one as reflected by the sentence.  The  respondent  considered
that the appellant posed a significant threat to the safety and security  of
the public and that his deportation was  justified  on  serious  grounds  of
public policy. It was considered that the appellant's deportation would  not
prejudice the prospects of his  rehabilitation  and  that  the  decision  to
deport him was proportionate and in accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations.
The respondent went on to consider Article  8,  noting  that  the  appellant
claimed to have a family life in the UK with his two children A and B,  both
of whom were Romanian nationals, and his partner, AC, a  Moldovan  national.
The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant   could   meet   the
requirements of paragraph 399(a) or (b)  of  the  immigration  rules  as  it
would not be unduly harsh for his children and partner to accompany  him  to
Romania or to remain in the UK without him.  The respondent considered  that
the appellant could not meet the criteria in paragraph 399A and  that  there
were no very compelling circumstances outweighing  the  public  interest  in
his deportation for the purposes of paragraph 398. The respondent  concluded
that the appellant's deportation would  not  breach  his  Article  8  rights
under the ECHR.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 28 February 2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Goodrich. The appellant and his wife both  gave  oral  evidence  before  the
judge. The judge noted the basic facts, that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
married in September 2007 in Romania, having met when they were  very  young
as their families lived near each other, albeit on different  sides  of  the
border between Romania and Moldavia. The appellant had a Masters  degree  in
Economics,  acquired  in  Bucharest,  and  his  wife   had   a   degree   in
Jurisprudence (Economic law) from Moldova State University and a Diploma  in
Business Law from the UK. Both  worked  for,  and  were  directors  of,  the
appellant's company, Europe Vans Ltd. They had two children,  A  born  on  8
January 2008 and B born on 31 October  2012,  both  of  whom  were  Romanian
citizens. The appellant's wife had miscarried a third  child  shortly  after
he was sentenced to three years imprisonment.

The judge noted that the version of events given to the offender  supervisor
in the OASys report was not the same as that underpinning  the  verdicts  of
the jury and therefore accorded  little  weigh  to  the  OASys  report.  She
considered that the appellant had very little insight  into  his  crime  and
that  his  expression  of  remorse  and  regret  was  in  relation  to   the
consequences for himself and his family rather than  for  his  actions.  The
judge concluded that there was a real and serious risk  that  the  appellant
would re-offend and cause serious harm and that the appellant represented  a
genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
fundamental interests of society. The judge considered  that  the  appellant
had not established any real integration in the UK until late 2007  when  he
returned with his wife following their marriage in Romania in 2007 and  that
the  second  level  of  protection  applied  to  him.  Having  conducted   a
proportionality assessment,  the  judge  considered  that  the  respondent's
decision was  justified  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  and  was  not
disproportionate.  She  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
Regulations.

The judge then went on to consider  Article  8.  With  regard  to  paragraph
399(a) she noted that only A had lived in the UK for over seven  years.  She
considered that it was in A's best interests to remain in the  UK  with  her
father, but that it would not be unduly harsh for her to live in Romania  or
to remain in the UK without him. With regard to paragraph 399(b)  the  judge
considered that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  appellant's  wife  to
live in Romania or to remain in the UK without  him.  The  judge  considered
that the criteria in paragraph 399A were not met and  that  the  appellant's
deportation would not breach Article 8. She accordingly also  dismissed  the
appeal on Article 8 grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
following grounds: that the  judge  had  applied  the  incorrect  test  when
considering whether the respondent's decision was justified  on  grounds  of
public policy; that the judge had made an incorrect assessment of  the  best
interests of the appellant's children, in particular the eldest child A  who
was over the age  of  seven,  and  had  wrongly  applied  a  test  of  undue
harshness; that the judge had failed to consider the effect  on  the  public
purse of the appellant having to close his  business;  that  the  judge  had
failed to conclude that the imperative grounds applied; and that  the  judge
had failed to give appropriate weight  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
offending did not include drugs or violence.

Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper
Tribunal. However, in a "Cart" challenge to the  Administrative  Court,  the
appellant sought to judicially review the refusal  to  grant  permission  on
the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  had  failed  to
consider the cases of MK (section 55 - Tribunal  options)  [2015]  UKUT  223
and MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT 435 and had  erred  in  their
consideration of the 'unduly harsh' test.

The  grant  of  permission  by  the  High  Court  contains   the   following
observations:

         "The AoS of the SSWP supports a decision by me that remits the
         matter back to the UT.


         It is clear that the FTJ did not consider, let alone apply, the CA
         decision in MM (even though that has since been held by another
         constitution of the CA in MA to be wrongly decided, but should
         nevertheless be followed). This looks like an error of law.


         The consequences of removal would be so momentous for the claimant
         that I can safely say that there is a compelling reason for an
         appeal to be heard"

The reference in the  grant  to  the  acknowledgment  of  service  from  the
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions is, to  say  the  least,  puzzling,
given that the respondent in this appeal is the Secretary of State  for  the
Home Department. We are not aware of any  AoS  having  been  filed  by  that
Secretary of State in connection with this judicial review.

The High Court's bald  statement  of  fact  regarding  the  consequences  of
removal being "so momentous" for the claimant  was  presumably  intended  to
satisfy CPR 54(7). This requires the High Court to grant permission only  if
it is satisfied that either:

         "(i) the claim raises an important point of principle or  practice;
         or


         (ii) there is some other compelling reason to hear it."


In Thakrar v SSHD (Cart JR; Art 8:  value  to  community)  [2018]  UKUT  336
(IAC), the Upper Tribunal pointed out that the mere assertion  by  a  person
that his or her removal  would  violate  Article  8  cannot,  without  more,
satisfy CPR 54.7A(7)(b) because otherwise the intention of the CPR (and  the
Supreme Court) to impose a restriction  on  this  type  of  judicial  review
would be lost. In the instant case, it  is  unclear  what  consequences  the
High Court had in mind and whether these were being taken  entirely  on  the
basis of the appellant's own contentions, or by reference to what the First-
tier Tribunal Judge had found.

Be that as it may, the grant of permission was on a different basis  to  the
appellant's grounds of challenge, namely that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
failed to consider and apply the Court of Appeal decision in MM  (Uganda)  &
Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
617. Since that basis had not featured  in  the  grounds  of  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is difficult to see  how  the  decision  of
the Upper Tribunal, in refusing permission, could have been "wrong in  law",
as required by CPR 54.7A(7(a). In fact, a reading of MM (Uganda) shows  that
case was the antithesis  of  the  arguments  made  in  the  grounds  seeking
judicial review, since MM held that the public  interest  has  to  be  taken
into account as part of the 'unduly harsh' test, contrary  to  the  approach
taken in MAB.

For these reasons, the High Court's grant of permission was,  with  respect,
misconceived.  Nevertheless,  it  led  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's   decision
refusing permission being quashed and permission to appeal being granted  by
the Upper Tribunal on 24 April 2018.

The matter then came before us to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
had erred in law in its decision.

Appeal hearing and submissions

In view of the fact that caselaw  had  since  moved  on,  with  the  Supreme
Court's judgment in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53,  we  decided  it  was  necessary  to
permit Ms Weston to pursue  the  challenge  on  the  basis  of  the  law  as
explained in that case.

It was Ms Weston's submission that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Goodrich  had
erred  in  law  by  adopting  a  global  approach  under  the   heading   of
'proportionality' and then importing that assessment, which was made in  the
context of the EEA Regulations, into the Article 8 analysis.  She  submitted
that the judge had applied  too  high  a  test  when  considering  the  best
interests of A, in particular when considering  at  [84]  whether  A's  best
interests would be 'irrevocably harmed' if she were to go  to  Romania.  She
submitted that the judge had taken  that  wrongful  formation  of  the  best
interests test and weighed it up against the seriousness of the  appellant's
offending, at [86] to [89], contrary to the decision in KO.  The  judge  had
failed to factor in to her consideration of 'unduly harsh' the impact  of  A
being uprooted from her life in the  UK  or  of  being  separated  from  her
father, but had  focussed  solely  on  whether  her  mother  could  function
economically without the appellant. Ms Weston submitted that  [113]  of  the
judge's decision was particularly problematic  as  the  judge  had  directly
imported the previous proportionality balancing exercise  into  her  'unduly
harsh' assessment and it was difficult to see why she  had  found  that  the
appellant's deportation would not be unduly harsh on A. Ms Weston  submitted
that the judge's decision ought accordingly to be set aside and re-made.

Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge's decision was  more  compartmentalised
than the appellant was claiming. The judge had properly  assessed  the  best
interests of the children and had not factored the public interest  and  the
appellant's offending into the unduly harsh  assessment.  In  any  event  it
could not be said, on the facts  before  the  judge,  that  the  appellant's
deportation would be unduly harsh on A, and the finding to that  effect  was
open to the judge.

In response Ms Weston submitted that in the absence  of  any  self-direction
by the judge on the meaning of 'unduly harsh' the  only  indication  of  how
she assessed the matter was the language  she  used,  which  was  the  wrong
language.

Consideration and findings.

We are not persuaded by Ms Weston's arguments and we consider  there  to  be
nothing in the judge's approach to the question of A's  best  interests  and
the unduly harsh test which is inconsistent with the approach  advocated  in
KO.  The  judge's  decision,  as  Mr   Whitwell   submitted,   was   clearly
compartmentalised  and  we  find  no  merit  in  the  suggestion  that   her
consideration of the children's best interests  or  of  the  'unduly  harsh'
matter was infected by a consideration of the public interest.

Turning first to the best interests consideration, we do not agree that  the
judge set too high a bar or applied too high a test or the  wrong  test,  as
Ms Weston submitted. The judge undertook a  detailed  consideration  of  the
best interests of A, at [81]  to  [85],  and  had  regard  to  all  relevant
matters, including friendships,  language,  education,  health,  family  and
culture. The judge's focus was  plainly  solely  on  the  interests  of  the
children, particularly A, with no  regard  to  extraneous  factors  such  as
public interest considerations. The  judge's  reference  at  [81]  to  there
being no evidence that the appellant's wife was  unable  to  cope  with  the
children when  he  was  in  prison  was  a  perfectly  valid  consideration,
contrary to  Ms  Weston's  submission,  as  it  clearly  impacted  upon  the
children. The judge's comment at [84], that A's best interests would not  be
irrevocably harmed if she were to go to Romania, was, likewise, a  perfectly
valid comment. Contrary to  Ms  Weston's  submissions,  such  comments  were
plainly not a test applied by the judge, but were simply observations  about
A's circumstances in the UK and the circumstances in which  she  would  find
herself in Romania if she were to accompany  the  appellant  there.  Plainly
the judge concluded that A's best interests would be to  remain  in  the  UK
with both parents, but that she would equally be able to adjust to  life  in
Romania if the choice was for  the  family  to  relocate  there.  There  was
nothing wrong in such a conclusion and the judge was  entitled  to  conclude
as such.

As for the 'unduly harsh' question, for the purposes  of  paragraph  399  of
the immigration rules, it is clear that the judge's assessment  at  [99]  to
[106] was made solely by reference to the children's  circumstances  and  to
those of their mother, with no regard to the  appellant's  offending  or  to
wider public interest considerations.  The  judge  considered  the  family's
circumstances  "in  the  real  world"  in  which  the  children  lived,   in
accordance with the approach advocated in KO, and took full account  of  the
family's EU rights as part of that consideration, as is  evident  at  [105].
There is no suggestion in the judge's findings that  she  referred  back  to
anything other  than  the  best  interests  assessment  previously  made  in
relation to the EEA Regulations.

At [100], when assessing 'unduly harsh' in the  context  of  A  accompanying
the appellant back to Romania, the judge  considered  the  circumstances  of
the entire family returning there, and the impact on A  in  particular.  The
judge was clearly referring to the findings previously made  in  the  latter
part of [84] in regard to the circumstances A  would  encounter  in  Romania
and how she would cope in  terms  of  friendships,  culture  and  education.
There is nothing in the judge's wording at [100] to  suggest  that  she  was
incorporating any of the findings made at [86] to  [90]  on  proportionality
under the EEA Regulations. The same  applies  to  the  judge's  findings  at
[101].

At [101] the judge considered the concept of 'unduly harsh' in  the  context
of A remaining in the UK and being separated from the appellant.  Ms  Weston
criticised the judge's findings  in  that  paragraph,  submitting  that  the
language used in  the  last  sentence,  namely  "bleak  or  inordinately  or
excessively so" was wrong when considering domestic Article 8 issues. We  do
not agree. The judge was simply applying the wording used  in  the  relevant
caselaw. In MK at [46] the Upper Tribunal considered that ""Harsh"  in  this
context, denotes something severe, or  bleak"  and  clearly  meant  that  to
apply to both limbs of paragraph 399(a), (a) and  (b),  in  the  foreign  as
well as the domestic context, albeit focussing on  the  foreign  element  in
that case. That wording was repeated  in  MAB  where  the  Upper  Tribunal's
headnote at [3] states:

         "The consequences for an individual will be  "harsh"  if  they  are
         "severe" or "bleak" and they  will  be  "unduly"  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh..."

And the Tribunal said at [80]:

         "In our judgment, Judge Holder erred in  law  by  failing  to  give
         adequate reasons and in reaching an irrational conclusion that  the
         impact upon the appellant's children of remaining  in  the  UK  was
         "unduly harsh". Further, in our  judgment,  the  evidence  did  not
         establish  that  the  consequence  of  his  deportation  for   them
         remaining in the UK was "unduly harsh".  Applying  the  meaning  of
         "unduly harsh"  set  out  in  MK  that  it  does  not  equate  with
         "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or  merely  difficult"
         circumstances, we have no doubt that the  circumstances  identified
         by the judge could not be equated to  "unduly  harsh"  consequences
         for the children. It could not properly  be  established  that  the
         effect on  them  of  the  appellant's  deportation  was  excessive,
         inordinate or severe. The only proper finding, and one we make,  is
         that the effect on the children has  not  been  established  to  be
         'unduly harsh'."

The  wording  was  then  referred  to  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO   and
specifically at [33] when considering the case of KO himself,  and  endorsed
at [35]. Given that Judge Goodrich clearly  adopted  the  wording  from  the
relevant jurisprudence we do not understand why Ms Weston takes  issue  with
it. In any event the judge clearly adopted the correct  approach,  and  took
account of all relevant factors  in  relation  to  A.  As  for  Ms  Weston's
submission that the judge had focussed only on welfare and  economic  issues
in relation to A rather than the impact upon her of losing her  relationship
with the appellant, we disagree and note that  the  judge  made  very  clear
reference to the A's close relationship with the appellant  and  the  impact
of separation.

Finally, Ms  Weston  submitted  that  [113]  of  the  judge's  decision  was
particularly problematic as it was clear that the judge  was  importing  her
assessment directly from the proportionality balance  made  in  relation  to
the EEA Regulations, and therefore included  the  public  interest  and  the
appellant's criminality as part of the balancing exercise. However  we  find
that argument to be misconceived as  [113]  was  not  part  of  the  "unduly
harsh" assessment. The judge's findings on "unduly harsh" for  the  purposes
of paragraph 399(a) ended at [101] and her  findings  for  the  purposes  of
paragraph 399(b) ended at [106]. The judge then  considered  paragraph  399A
at [107] to [108].  At [111] and [112] the judge considered  the  equivalent
provisions in section 117C of the NIAA 2002. The  judge's  consideration  at
[113],  whilst  it  could  have  been  more  clearly  expressed,   was   the
"compelling circumstances" consideration in paragraph 398.

The judge's use  of  the  words  "such  as  to  compel  an  outcome  in  the
appellant's favour" was not, as Ms Weston submitted, an importation  of  the
"compelling   circumstances"   consideration   into   the   "unduly   harsh"
assessment, but was in fact the judge's consideration of whether there  were
compelling circumstances over above the unduly harsh and  other  assessments
in paragraph 399 and 399A. That was clearly what  the  judge  meant  in  her
penultimate sentence "So far as Article 8 is concerned  I  do  not  consider
that the impact of the decision on all concerned is unduly harsh or is  such
as to compel an outcome in the appellant's  favour".  Accordingly,  at  that
point the judge was fully and properly  entitled  to  take  account  of  the
appellant's criminality  and  all  other  matters  relevant  to  the  public
interest and was  perfectly  entitled  to  import  into  that  decision  the
findings previously  made  from  [86]  to  [90]  under  her  proportionality
assessment within the EEA Regulations when considering  whether  there  were
such compelling circumstances.  For  the  reasons  properly  given  she  was
entitled to conclude that there were not.

We do not agree, therefore,  with  the  assertion  in  the  grounds  seeking
permission, or in the observations accompanying the grant of  permission  to
bring the judicial review, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to
take into consideration relevant caselaw or relevant  matters  or  that  she
adopted an incorrect approach or more  stringent  test  in  considering  the
best interests of the children, particularly A, and in assessing the  unduly
harsh  question.  On  the  contrary,  the  judge's  approach  was   entirely
consistent with the approach in KO; it took  account  of  the  "real  world"
situation and focussed on the interests of the children,  in  particular  A,
and the judge's conclusions were fully and  properly  open  to  her  on  the
facts and evidence before her.

For all of these reasons we find no errors of law in  the  judge's  decision
and we uphold the decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law  requiring  it  to  be  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
accordingly  dismissed  and  the  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
dismissing LC's appeal stands.


    Anonymity


    The anonymity order previously made is hereby revoked. The principle of
    open justice requires the appellant to be named.


 Signed[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 10 January
2019
