

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00894/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 22nd October 2013                        |On  : 30th October 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                     r g
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Claire Physsas, instructed by Blavo & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Alison Everett of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who is now 41 years old, has been living in  the  United
    Kingdom since he arrived from  Jamaica  in  1999,  and  was  given  six
    months' leave to enter as a visitor.  Just before those six months were
    up,  he  married  a  British  citizen,  MT,  and   thereafter   applied
    successfully for leave to remain as a spouse.  After completing his one-
    year 'probationary period', the appellant was granted indefinite  leave
    to remain in May 2001.

2.   Just one month before that grant, however, the appellant  received  the
    first of a series of sentences for criminal offences, when he was fined
    by Ealing Magistrates for possession of crack cocaine.   The  following
    year, the appellant was  one  of  ten  men  arrested  as  a  result  of
    'Operation Pugsy', aimed at drug-dealing in the Cloak Lane market,  off
    Ealing Broadway.   He was sentenced in March 2003 to a total of 3 years
    and 10 months for a variety  of  offences:  supplying  Class  A  drugs,
    assault, obstructing a police officer, having an offensive  weapon  and
    destroying property.  In 2005 the Criminal Casework Team  at  the  Home
    Office  wrote  to  him,  to  say  that  he  was  being  considered  for
    deportation.  But by that time the appellant had moved from the address
    in  Acton  Vale  where  he  had  been  living  with  his  wife,   their
    relationship having broken down, and it is said that he never  received
    the letter.

3.   In 2007 the appellant received a suspended prison sentence of 8  months
    for assault occasioning actual bodily harm, while in November  2010  he
    was arrested for the more serious offences  of  possessing  a  Smith  &
    Wesson .44 magnum revolver and ammunition, as well as a stun  gun.   In
    February 2011 he was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment, and  is  still
    in custody at the present time.

4.   Mrs MT had a  daughter  from  a  previous  relationship,  MB  (born  in
    November 1996), when she married the appellant, and a daughter, IG, was
    born of the marriage in December 2000.  A son,  KG,  was  born  to  the
    couple in December 2005, by which time the couple had  separated.   The
    separation was apparently caused by a relationship which the  appellant
    had formed with SW, who bore him a daughter, ZW, in  June  2005  and  a
    son, JW, in October 2006.  All five children, like their  mothers,  are
    British citizens.

5.   On 15th March 2013 the Home Office sent pro forma letters to  both  Mrs
    MT and Miss SW, requesting information about  their  relationship  with
    the appellant, who  was  being  considered  for  deportation.   Mrs  MT
    provided the information through Blavo & Co.,  including  letters  from
    herself  and  her  two  daughters.   She   wrote   that,   before   his
    incarceration, the appellant would see the  children  every  week,  and
    would look after them on two weekends each month.  Similarly, he  would
    look after the children during the school holidays, when  their  mother
    was working.  Now that he was in prison, he would  call  them  once  or
    twice a week, and they would visit him whenever possible.   The  girls,
    she said, missed him terribly,  while  her  son,  being  surrounded  by
    females, looked up to him as a man.  In their letters, MB and  IG  both
    emphasize how important their father is in their  lives  and  how  much
    their little brother needs him as a role model.  The stress  is  making
    their mother ill.

6.   Miss SW's reply to the letter of 15th March 2013  was  very  different.
    She said that she had never lived with the appellant, and was  glad  to
    have got out of their relationship four years previously.  He had never
    helped her financially, and had been aggressive and abusive towards her
    in front of the children.  She had let the appellant take the  children
    every other weekend, but he had not looked  after  them  properly,  and
    they would hurt themselves.  She did not regard the appellant as a good
    role model for the children, who were better off without him  in  their
    lives.

7.   Nevertheless, as pointed out in  the  Decision  Letter  of  29th  April
    2013, ZW had been to visit her father in prison  eleven  times  between
    November 2010 and March 2013, while JW had been nine times.  As for Mrs
    MT, she had been 24 times, while IG had been 21 times and MB  18  times
    during the same period.  Consideration of their interests did  not,  as
    the letter stated, preclude the making of  a  deportation  order  under
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, and one was  duly  made.   On
    17th June 2013 an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal came before a panel
    comprising Judge Rowlands and Mr Yates.  They heard oral evidence  from
    the appellant, Mrs MT and a friend, EH, all of whom had  also  provided
    witness statements.

8.   In his statement, the appellant emphasizes his attachment  to  all  the
    children, and how he  shared  child-care  duties  with  each  of  their
    mothers before his arrest in November 2010.  Both sets of children know
    each other, and he has taken them  all  to  Jamaica  on  a  visit.   He
    accepts responsibility, and expresses remorse, for  his  past  misdeeds
    and, building on the courses which he has successfully undertaken while
    in prison, he promises to carry out faithfully his duties as  a  father
    in future.  The drug habit which he had acquired before ever coming  to
    the United Kingdom has been broken.  He denies the accusations levelled
    against him by Miss SW, surmising that her letter was written  "out  of
    anger".

9.   In her letter, Mrs MT confirms that her children  interact  with  those
    of Miss SW, and that  they  have  visited  the  appellant  together  in
    prison.  The children will lose out, she insists, if the  appellant  is
    sent back to Jamaica.  In his  statement,  Mr  EH,  who  is  a  Student
    Services Manager, avers that the appellant  adores  his  children,  who
    would be profoundly affected if he were deported.  Both his son and his
    daughter by Mrs MT would benefit from his continued support, especially
    as the former has a medical condition.

10.  The appellant, Mrs MT and Mr EH  adopted  their  statements  when  they
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, and  in  their  oral  evidence
    they enlarged on the twin themes that the  appellant  had  learned  his
    lesson and that the children needed him as a father.  Nevertheless  the
    appeal was dismissed, and an application was lodged for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with grounds settled by Miss Physsas, who
    had appeared below.  The application was  initially  unsuccessful,  but
    was granted on renewal by Judge Peter Lane, who focused on the  failure
    by the panel to say why they preferred the letter from Miss SW  to  the
    written and oral evidence of the appellant as to how he had behaved  in
    front of their two children.

11.  When  the  matter  came  before  me  today  I  heard  very  cogent  and
    persuasive submissions from both representatives, with whose assistance
    in highlighting the relevant issues I was able to come to a decision on
    'error of law' fairly easily.  The  First-tier  determination  is  not,
    with respect,  well  structured.   It  starts  well  enough,  with  the
    appellant's immigration history and catalogue  of  offences,  and  then
    sets out in full each of the three witness  statements,  with  extracts
    from the oral evidence of each witness tacked on at  the  end  of  each
    statement.  The oddity really starts with the panel's  findings.   They
    find that the appellant's children and step-daughter exist, a  somewhat
    redundant finding given that their existence was not  disputed  by  the
    respondent.  But as far as the relationship between the  appellant  and
    the children is concerned, the panel say at this stage  only  that  the
    visits to the prison by ZW and JW do not  constitute  "much  more  than
    Miss [SW] being compassionate towards her children and the  Appellant."
    That says something about the relationship between  the  appellant  and
    Miss  SW,  but  it  does  not  address  the  relationship  between  the
    appellants and the children,  and  how  that  impinges  upon  the  best
    interests of the latter.

12.  The panel also at this point disbelieve the appellant's expressions  of
    remorse for, and insight into, his offending  behaviour,  their  reason
    for that being the discrepancy between his guilty plea  at  the  trial,
    which meant he must have accepted that a handgun was  on  his  premises
    with his knowledge, and what he told the author of  the  OASys  Report,
    namely that the gun was put into the pocket of a jacket of his, without
    his knowledge, by a guest at his house-warming party.

13.  The panel now announce  that  they  will  take  the  two-step  approach
    adumbrated by the Upper Tribunal in  MF  (Nigeria),  looking  first  at
    Article 8 as confined within paragraph 398 and 399 of  the  Rules,  and
    then at Article 8 in the wider ambit of the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
    But they actually go straight to  the  second  step,  setting  out  the
    factors listed in �ner and Maslov.  This eventually brings them to  the
    best interests of the children.  They draw a distinction  between  Miss
    SW's two children and the other three, it being  doubtful  whether  the
    former will have any more meaningful relationship  with  the  appellant
    than visiting him in prison, given the  hostile  attitude  of  Miss  SW
    towards him.  They  do  not  believe  the  appellant's  denial  of  the
    accusation in Miss SW's letter that the appellant "has been violent  to
    her in the past in front of the  children."   That  goes  some  way  to
    fortifying the panel in their view that "the well being of the children
    does not include contact with the Appellant."  Indeed, if he  is  meant
    to be their role model, "they would be better off with  no  role  model
    than a father who has dealt in Class A drugs and been found  to  be  in
    possession of firearms."

14.  The above passage was what caused Judge Lane to grant leave to  appeal,
    the panel not having explained why they believed what Miss SW  said  in
    her letter, and  disbelieved  what  the  appellant  said  in  his  oral
    evidence.  Miss SW does not actually say that the  appellant  has  been
    "violent" towards her.  She uses the term "abusive", which may well not
    imply physical violence.  At any rate, the panel cite  this  accusation
    and the appellant's criminal offending as entailing the conclusion that
    the best interests of the children do not  include  contact  with  "the
    children."  There are two problems with this.  First, it is  not  clear
    whether all five children are covered by this, or just  Miss  SW's  two
    children.  Secondly, as this is the only  consideration  given  to  the
    best interests of the children, save for adding that it  would  not  be
    impossible for the children to visit  the  appellant  in  Jamaica,  the
    panel make no mention at all of the pleas of MB and IG that they really
    do want and need contact with their father, and the insistence  of  Mrs
    MT that it is in the best interests of all three of her  children  that
    the appellant continues to play a part in their upbringing.

15.  The panel now go through the five questions posed in Razgar,  and  soon
    reach the fifth question, viz  proportionality.   At  this  point  they
    revert briefly to the 'first  stage'  in  terms  of  MF  (Nigeria)  and
    mention that, under the Immigration Rules, the appellant's sentence  of
    five years means that his deportation will  be  proportionate  save  in
    exceptional circumstances.  They then say that "taking into account all
    that we have said concerning this matter", deportation is proportionate
    to  the  legitimate  aim.   This  is  presumably  the   proportionality
    assessment outside the  Immigration  Rules,  although  the  way  it  is
    structured led Miss Physsas to suppose that the panel might  have  been
    searching for 'exceptional circumstances', as under the Rules.

16.  On the question of 'error of law' I  heard  very  thorough  and  cogent
    submissions from both representatives, ranging over many aspects of the
    First-tier determination, but in the end it seemed  to  me  that  there
    were two serious  flaws  in  the  panel's  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children, as summarised at paragraph 14 above.  First,
    it was unclear which children the panel were referring  to.   Secondly,
    the panel did not take account of material factors in considering those
    interests, namely the express views of MB and IG and of  their  mother.
    Miss Everett argued that those flaws were not material,  as  the  panel
    would have come to the same conclusion without them, but it  seemed  to
    me that the flaws were serious enough  to  justify  setting  aside  the
    First-tier determination.

17.  In order to re-make the decision on the appeal, it was  agreed  on  all
    hands that there was no need for me to hear oral evidence.  I  had  all
    the evidence before me  from  the  First-tier  appeal,  and  it  was  a
    question  of  evaluation  rather  than  fact-finding.   So  the  appeal
    proceeded by way of submissions only, and again I was greatly  assisted
    by the lucid and cogent arguments of both representatives.  In our task
    we now had the advantage of consulting the recent judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, which  is  particularly
    relevant to the present  case  for  what  it  says  about  "exceptional
    circumstances" at paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules, without which
    the public  interest  in  deportation  will  not  be  outweighed.   The
    'Criminality Guidance for Article  8  ECHR  Cases'  is  cited  for  the
    explanation  that   'exceptional'   "means   circumstances   in   which
    deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the
    individual  or  their  family  such  that  deportation  would  not   be
    proportionate."   That,  said  the  Court,  meant  that   Home   Office
    caseworkers had to apply a 'second stage' test within the Rules, if the
    criteria set out at paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply, analogous to
    the second stage  test  outside  the  Rules  laid  down  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

18.  The Court accepted a submission on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that "the reference to exceptional circumstances serves the purpose  of
    emphasizing that, in the balancing exercise,  great  weight  should  be
    given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals who do  not
    satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.  It is only exceptionally that  such
    foreign criminals will succeed  in  showing  that  their  rights  under
    Article 8(1) trump the public interest in  their  deportation."   Their
    Lordships went on to say this at paragraph 43 of their judgment :
             "The word 'exceptional' is often used to  denote  a  departure
         from a general rule.  The general rule in the  present  context  is
         that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and  399A
         do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required to  outweigh
         the public interest in deportation.  These compelling  reasons  are
         the 'exceptional circumstances'."

19.  This clarification must inform the  assessment  of  proportionality  in
    the present appeal.  The case for the appellant, put by  Miss  Physsas,
    is that he is a reformed character.  He has broken  free  of  his  drug
    habit, he accepts responsibility  for  his  past  offending,  he  feels
    remorse, and intends to live a crime-free life in future.  He is  ready
    to fulfil the role of father to his  children,  and  has  undertaken  a
    number of courses in prison which will help him  to  find  remunerative
    work on release.  The children need a father in their  lives,  and  his
    son in particular, living in an otherwise all-female household, needs a
    male role model.  The case against the appellant, put by Miss  Everett,
    is that the appellant's optimistic  prediction  of  a  law-abiding  and
    useful life in future must be  viewed  with  some  caution,  given  his
    apparent  reluctance,  at  least  in  the  OASys  Report,   to   accept
    responsibility for the gun being on his premises.  His deportation will
    doubtless have an impact on the children, but he has never  lived  with
    ZW and JW, and has not lived with MB, IG and KG for a number of  years.
    He has  helped  their  mothers  with  child  care,  but  has  not  been
    responsible for their day-to-day  care  or  for  taking  the  important
    decisions in their lives.   Even  if  it  is  in  the  children's  best
    interests for their father to stay, it cannot be said  that  there  are
    "very compelling reasons" in the  present  instance  for  allowing  the
    appeal.

20.  In the light of the recent Court of Appeal guidance,  it  seems  to  me
    that Miss Everett has the better of the argument.  Whether we  come  to
    proportionality via the step-by-step approach of Razgar or through  the
    'second stage' assessment required by the Immigration Rules, in a  case
    of serious criminality, where paragraphs 399 and  399A  do  not  apply,
    very compelling reasons are needed in  order  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.  The conviction which triggered a  deportation
    order was not a one-off,  but  the  most  serious  of  several  serious
    offences.  As Lady Hale remarked at  paragraph  33  of  H(H)  v  Deputy
    Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2012]  3  WLR  90,  "sometimes  the
    parents' past criminality may say nothing at all about  their  capacity
    to bring up their children properly", and in the present  case  it  may
    well be that the appellant would have a useful role to play in  helping
    to bring up his children, were he allowed to stay.  The two  girls  who
    have given their views will certainly miss him, and so will Mrs MT who,
    as the appellant mentioned at the hearing, is an  only  child  and  has
    derived great benefit in the past from having  the  appellant  to  help
    with child-care.  All in all, I think it would be in the best interests
    of the children if their father were allowed to stay in this country.

21.  But the circumstances of the children are not such as  to  furnish  the
    "very compelling reasons" which would outweigh the public interest.  In
    another recent judgment, SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550, Lord Justice
    Laws put it even more forcefully when he said that the pressing  nature
    of the public interest in a case like this means that  deportation  can
    only be resisted successfully "by a very  strong  claim  indeed."   The
    circumstances of the present case simply do not reach  this  threshold.
    The facts of the  case,  sadly,  admit  of  only  one  conclusion  ~  a
    conclusion prefigured to some extent in the grant of leave itself.



     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           26th October 2013



