
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00356/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  14 March 2013                             |On 7 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                Sharif ahsan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M. Hashim, Counsel, instructed by East London Law
Chambers
For the Respondent: Ms A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, who claims  to  have  been
       born on 10 February 1977, although the respondent refers to  a  date
       of birth of 1 February 1964. He arrived in the UK on 24  March  2005
       with entry clearance as a visitor. In November 2009 he  applied  for
       indefinite leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  but  that
       application was refused.

    2. On 6 January 2011 he pleaded guilty to three counts of possession of
       false identity documents and was sentenced on 10  February  2011  in
       the Crown Court  at  Snaresbrook  to  a  total  term  of  18  months
       imprisonment.  In May 2012 (no date is given on the decision letter)
       there was a decision to make a deportation order under the automatic
       deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The  appellant's
       appeal against that decision was dismissed by a Panel of the  First-
       tier Tribunal consisting of First-tier judge P.J.M. Hollingworth and
       Mr G.H. Getlevog after a hearing on 18 July 2012.  The  appeal  came
       before the Upper Tribunal following a grant of permission to  appeal
       by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal referred to an earlier determination  of  an
       asylum appeal by the appellant,  whereby  Immigration  Judge  Jhirad
       dismissed his appeal after a hearing on 11 July 2011. The  Panel  in
       this appeal rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk on  account
       of his political activity and  rejecting  the  documentary  evidence
       adduced on his behalf. The Panel concluded that his return would not
       amount to a disproportionate interference with his private life.

Submissions

    4. On behalf of the  appellant  it  was  submitted  that  a  number  of
       witnesses had appeared at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
       but  they  had  not  been  interviewed  by  those  representing  the
       appellant, partly because of the  issue  of  funds.  The  First-tier
       judge had said that the witnesses' statements were not in the proper
       form. Mr Hashim said that what the witnesses said in those documents
       needed to be verified, and he, Mr Hashim, was not  willing  to  call
       them without further enquiries into their evidence which  needed  to
       be investigated. The solicitors had told  him  that  they  were  not
       aware of the witnesses but they were told to attend in any event.

    5. I enquired as to who the witnesses were and where  their  statements
       were. Mr Hashim informed me that he did not have the bundle that was
       before the First-tier Tribunal. He was then  able  to  identify  the
       witnesses from that bundle which I provided to him. It was then said
       on behalf of the appellant that those letters were not  adequate  as
       evidence.

    6. So far as the documentary evidence was concerned, the  Secretary  of
       State had not suggested that they were false. The application for an
       adjournment for further translations was  refused.  There  was  some
       confusion on the part of the appellant as to what was  the  original
       newspaper report. The appeal was prepared whilst the  appellant  was
       in custody.

    7. On behalf of the respondent reference was made to  the  reasons  for
       deportation letter in  terms  of  adverse  credibility  points  made
       against the appellant. There was inconsistency in  relation  to  the
       claimed death of the appellant's  mother.  Even  if  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had been wrong to refuse to adjourn the appeal,  any  error
       of law in that respect was not material. Furthermore,  the  question
       arises as to whether he would need to return to his  home  area  and
       there is nothing to indicate that anyone  would  know  that  he  had
       returned.

    8. Nevertheless, for the sake of justice being seen  to  be  done,  the
       Panel should have granted the adjournment even though  the  evidence
       of the witnesses appears to be flimsy.

My assessment

    9. Notwithstanding that it appears to have been conceded on  behalf  of
       the respondent before me that the Panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       ought  to  have  adjourned  the  hearing  at  the  request  of   the
       appellant's representative, I am not satisfied that  there  was  any
       error of law in the failure to adjourn. It is clear  that  witnesses
       attended the hearing but were not called to give evidence. It  seems
       that they had written letters but not made  witness  statements.  At
       the hearing before me  it  was  eventually  ascertained  that  those
       witnesses' letters are to be found at pages 28, 29, 32 and 34 of the
       appellant's bundle.

   10. In refusing the application for an adjournment, at  [11]  the  Panel
       referred to the appellant's history, and the  time  he  has  had  to
       prepare for the appeal, as well as to the failure to  have  made  an
       earlier application for an adjournment. However, most  important  of
       all in my view is the fact that the Panel indicated that it was in a
       position to hear from the witnesses. It seems from  the  submissions
       put before me that the decision not to  call  those  individuals  as
       witnesses was a purely forensic decision on the part of counsel. The
       foundation for their evidence  was  in  their  letters,  which  were
       themselves admissible in evidence. Given  that  the  witnesses  were
       available at the hearing to give evidence, there was no error of law
       on the part of the First-tier Tribunal in  refusing  to  adjourn  to
       allow for full witness statements to  be  obtained  or  for  further
       enquiry in relation to their evidence to be undertaken.

   11. Similarly, the Panel was entirely justified in refusing the  renewed
       application for an adjournment which appears from [27] to have  been
       on a different basis,  namely  to  undertake  further  enquiries  in
       relation to documents submitted by the appellant.

   12. In dismissing the appeal, the Panel stated at [42] that it  took  as
       its starting point the determination of  Immigration  Judge  Jhirad,
       she having found the appellant not credible.

   13. The Panel  rejected  the  documentary  evidence  relied  on  by  the
       appellant, that documentary evidence including statements or letters
       which, on the face of them, provide varying degrees of  support  for
       his claim. At [39]  of  the  determination  the  Panel  stated  that
       evidence  before  them  was   either   untranslated   or   otherwise
       unaccompanied by certificates of translation "in proper  form".   At
       [41] it was concluded that the only admissible appellant's  evidence
       before the Tribunal was that of the appellant himself.

   14. At [45] it was concluded that the only documentation that  had  been
       adduced subsequent to the determination of Judge Jhirad  was  either
       inadmissible or carried no weight. There then followed  an  analysis
       of the documentary evidence.

   15. As regards several documents, the Panel stated that  there  were  no
       certificates of translation.  Those documents are identified at [48]
       and [49] of the determination. The first is a document at pages 8-10
       of the appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is
       said to be from members of the  BNP  attesting  to  the  appellant's
       political activities and the problems he  is  said  to  have  faced.
       Although  the  Panel  stated  that  there  was  no  certificate   of
       translation, at the  top  of  page  8  is  the  line  "True  English
       Translation".  At the bottom of page 10 is the name and signature of
       the person said to have done the translation.

   16. The Panel further concluded that the document starting at page 8 has
       an original seal which does not appear on the  untranslated  version
       at page 12. However, that  seal  appears  to  be  the  seal  of  the
       translated document, to which the seal  relates.  The  seal  on  the
       untranslated document is in fact translated on page  10.  A  further
       example of a seal appearing on a translation is to be found  on  the
       document at page 15 of the appellant's bundle.

   17. The document at page 15 is also said to be from the BNP and relating
       to the appellant's political activities. It is stated at the top  of
       the page to be a true translation and the name and signature of  the
       person translating is given. Two other documents that  are  referred
       to in the determination do not have certificates of  translation  in
       any form (pages 13 and 18) as the Panel pointed out.

   18. Rule 52 of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005 refers to the requirement for documents to be accompanied by  a
       translation into English signed by the translator  to  certify  that
       the translation is accurate (rule 52(1)(b)).  Rule  52(3)  uses  the
       phrase "certified translation." However, beyond  that  there  is  no
       description of any particular form of  certification  required.  The
       documents to which I have referred at pages 8-10 and 15  are  in  my
       view certified translations. They are  stated  to  be  true  English
       translations and the translator has  signed  the  translations.  The
       First-tier Tribunal was wrong therefore to have attached  no  weight
       to those documents purely on the basis that in its  view  they  were
       not accompanied  by  certified  translations.  The  other  basis  of
       rejection of the document (referred to at [16] above with regard  to
       the "seal") is unsustainable.

   19. In its approach to that documentary evidence I am satisfied that the
       First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   20. At [50] the Panel referred to the various letters in the appellant's
       bundle from pages 24 to 30. It stated that "We attach no  weight  to
       any letter, certificate or document appertaining  to  the  political
       history of the Appellant from any potential witness who has  not  in
       fact been  called  to  give  evidence"  (my  emphasis).  It  is  not
       necessary for me to set out the detail of those letters. Suffice  to
       say that to varying degrees some of them refer  to  the  appellant's
       political activities in Bangladesh. The dates of them would, on  the
       face of it, suggest that they were not documents  that  were  before
       Judge Jhirad, except to say that I note that at page 28 is a  letter
       from Mohammed Mukarrim and Aysha  Mukarrim,  and  at  [5]  of  Judge
       Jhirad's determination she refers to a witness before her,  a  Mr  M
       Mukerrim.

   21. I have referred at [9] above to the witnesses that are said to  have
       attended before the First-tier Tribunal who were not called to  give
       evidence but whose letters were before the First-tier Tribunal. As I
       have indicated, it was the appellant's representative who  made  the
       decision not to call them as witnesses. However, whilst  the  First-
       tier Tribunal would have been perfectly entitled  to  conclude  that
       less, or even little, weight  should  be  attached  to  the  written
       evidence of witnesses whose  evidence  was  not  tested  before  the
       Tribunal, it was an error of law for the Panel to attach  no  weight
       to any of their evidence simply because the evidence was in  written
       form only.

   22. I have considered whether the errors of law I  have  identified  are
       such as to  require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.  As  I  have
       indicated,  some  documents  which  are  said  not  to   have   been
       accompanied by certified translations are of potential relevance  to
       the appellant's claim that he was involved in political activity  in
       Bangladesh. Some of the letters from witnesses who were  not  called
       have the same potential relevance. At [52] the  Panel  purported  to
       look at the position in the event that it was wrong to  reject  "any
       of the corroborative documentary evidence" for the reasons it  gave.
       It stated that in that circumstance "we  reject  that  documentation
       having treated it in the round having rejected  the  credibility  of
       the Appellant."

   23. The difficulty with that approach to  the  documentary  evidence  is
       that  it  suggests  a  rejection  of  the  documents   because   the
       appellant's credibility had been rejected. The use of the expression
       "in the round" is not sufficient to dispel the indication,  in  that
       alternative scenario, that the appellant's credibility was  rejected
       before the documents had been considered.  The  Panel's  alternative
       approach is not a basis for concluding that the errors  of  law  are
       not material to the outcome of the appeal.  I would have come to the
       same view even had [52] been expressed in a way that was not open to
       the criticism that I have made, such is the comprehensive  rejection
       of the documentary evidence.

   24. I have also considered whether the other adverse credibility  points
       are such that the rejection of the documentary evidence  could  have
       had no bearing on the outcome of the appeal. I do not consider  that
       this could be said however. There  are  several  credibility  issues
       that arise in the determination  but  the  documentary  evidence  is
       potentially relevant to an overall  assessment  of  the  appellant's
       claim.

   25. I note that at [27] and [40] it was apparently agreed on  behalf  of
       the appellant that no new admissible evidence had been adduced since
       the last determination (of Judge Jhirad), counsel having stated that
       the evidence "had not been checked over thoroughly". Notwithstanding
       that apparent concession however, the Panel did go  on  to  consider
       the documentary evidence and  for  the  reasons  I  have  given  its
       assessment of it was flawed. In addition, looking at [31] it is  not
       the case that counsel for the appellant  withdrew  reliance  on  the
       documentary evidence, certainly not in relation to the letters  from
       potential witnesses.

   26. Judge Jhirad's determination was plainly not  determinative  of  the
       appeal before  the  Panel.  Notwithstanding  the  other  credibility
       issues that arise in relation  to  the  appellant's  account,  I  am
       satisfied that the  errors  of  law  are  such  as  to  require  the
       determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  set  aside.  That
       conclusion applies in relation to the asylum  ground  of  appeal  as
       well as that in relation to Article 8, the two being inter-related.

   27. The question then arises as to whether the decision  should  be  re-
       made in the Upper Tribunal or remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       Mr Hashim suggested that it was appropriate to remit, Ms Holmes said
       that she resisted that  suggestion  "to  some  degree",  citing  the
       appellant's lack of credibility.

   28. I have considered the September 2012 Practice Statement at paragraph
       7.2. I am satisfied that the nature and extent of the judicial  fact
       finding necessary is such  that  having  regard  to  the  overriding
       objective in rule 2, it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted
       to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo.   None  of  the
       findings of fact, other  than  uncontentious  matters  such  as  the
       appellant's immigration history, can be preserved.

   29. It is appropriate to observe that the hearing before the  First-tier
       Tribunal was less than adequately prepared by those representing the
       appellant.  This  much  is  clear  from   the   First-tier   judge's
       determination and what was said by the appellant's representative at
       the time. It has to be said that I did not get the  impression  that
       the representatives were fully prepared for the hearing  before  the
       Upper Tribunal either, counsel for example  not  having  the  bundle
       that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

   30. The re-hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  adequately
       prepared for by those representing the  appellant;  that  should  go
       without saying. There must be a  complete,  paginated,  indexed  and
       comprehensive bundle of documents and those that are not in  English
       must be accompanied by a  certified  translation.  It  is  also  the
       appellant's  responsibility  to  ensure  that  his   representatives
       prepare properly for the appeal.

   31. Finally, I noted at the hearing  before  me  that  the  letter  from
       Mohammed Abdus Salam at page 42 of the bundle that  was  before  the
       Upper Tribunal has the same  address  as  that  of  the  appellant's
       representatives. The author of the letter describes himself  as  the
       ex-General Secretary of the BNP-UK  and  gives  an  account  of  the
       appellant's political activities, and says that he  is  at  risk  in
       Bangladesh. The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
       that on the application for permission to appeal give  the  name  of
       the solicitor having conduct of the appeal as Mohammed Abdus  Salam.
       It appears to me that there is a clear conflict of interest  in  the
       solicitor having conduct of the appeal also being a witness  in  the
       proceedings. This is a matter that the appellant's  solicitors  will
       clearly have to consider in terms  of  the  future  conduct  of  the
       appeal.

   32. Having consulted the listing  department  at  Hatton  Cross  hearing
       centre, the appeal will be listed in the first instance for a CMR on
       the date indicated in the directions.

Decision

   33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       reconsideration.



                  DIRECTIONS

    1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with
       Practice Statement paragraph 7.2 to be heard de novo by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. None of the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
       its determination promulgated on 2 August 2012 are to  stand  except
       as indicated at [28] above.

   2.         The appeal will be listed at Hatton Cross hearing  centre,  in
       the first instance for CMR on Monday 1 July 2013.

   3.         The appeal is to be heard by a judge or panel other than First-
       tier Tribunal Judge P.J.M. Hollingworth and non legal member Mr G.H.
       Getlevog.

   4.         Further directions as to listing may be left to the discretion
       of the First-tier Tribunal but are likely to  include  consideration
       of the question of the appellant's representation,  the  filing  and
       serving of an appellant's bundle and for the respondent to file  and
       serve the appellant's asylum and screening interviews.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 6/06/13
