
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00359/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 March 2019                     |On 12 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                                  LORD UIST
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    K A G
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:              Ms Alice Holmes, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the respondent:        Mr Taimour Lay, counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless  the  Upper  Tribunal
or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
publication thereof shall identify the original appellant, whether  directly
or indirectly. This order applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant  against  his
   decision to make a deportation order against him pursuant to  section  32
   of the UK Borders Act  2007,  following  the  claimant's  conviction  for
   robbery in 2010 which resulted  in  a  3-year  custodial  sentence.   The
   appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago.

Background

2. The claimant was born in Trinidad in 1983.   The  claimant  met  his  now
   wife, who is a British citizen, when she was on holiday  in  Trinidad  in
   2004 and they had an off-and-on relationship between 2006 and  2009.  The
   claimant's wife had a number of holidays to Trinidad, none longer than  2
   weeks, and was not familiar with its customs or culture.

3. In 2008, the claimant came to the United Kingdom as a visitor.  He  would
   have been 25 then.  He returned to Trinidad at the end of  his  visit  in
   2009, but he entered the UK again on a visit visa in 2009 and  this  time
   he did not embark. In 2009 his now wife joined him in the United  Kingdom
   and he moved in to her Council maisonette in London.

4. On 18 August 2010 the claimant committed the index  offence  of  robbery,
   in which he was convicted of being one of a group of 10 men who  attacked
   a lone man on his way home, stealing a bag containing 5 passports  and  a
   mobile phone from him.  The man was on his mobile phone  and  distracted;
   the judge regarded him as vulnerable. He was 'attacked and  hit,  punched
   and robbed in a very nasty and unpleasant way' by the group of  men,  and
   the claimant was later identified by clothing he wore at the  scene,  and
   found to have the 5 passports which had been stolen in the attack.

5. The appellant was a man of previous good character,  but  the  sentencing
   judge took a very serious view of the offence. He noted that the claimant
   had defended the case and therefore  received  no  credit  for  an  early
   guilty plea. He found the robbery to be at level 2, with a starting point
   of 4 years, and a range of 2-3 years.  He  imposed  a  3  year  sentence,
   noting that 'this was a very nasty incident and probably occurred because
   you were without money and footloose, and  had  attached  yourself  to  a
   gang'.

6. On 4 February 2011 the Secretary of State  served  the  claimant  with  a
   minded to deport letter.   In reply, the  claimant  made  representations
   based on his family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.  At that  time
   he had one child from a former relationship in the  United  Kingdom,  and
   one in Trinidad and Tobago, also from a former relationship, as  well  as
   his relationship with his  then  partner,  now  his  wife,  who  had  two
   children of her own.  They were not married and had no children together.



7. The claimant and his wife are in a  committed  relationship,  after  some
   initial difficulties. They married  in  June  2013.   Duncan  Lewis  made
   further representations  in  2011,  2013,  and  twice  in  2014,  so  the
   Secretary of State would have been aware that the  claimant  had  married
   his wife and that she was pregnant with their first child.

8. On 30 January 2014 the Secretary of State made a deportation  order,  and
   it was served on the claimant on 14 February 2014.

9. The following six children are potentially  affected  by  the  claimant's
   circumstances:

     i) The claimant's 15 year old son from a former relationship, born  in
        2003, who lives in Trinidad with  his  mother  and  her  other  two
        children.  They speak by telephone or Skype every week and  he  has
        visited the United Kingdom at Christmas 2012 for two weeks to spend
        time with his step-siblings and his United Kingdom extended family.



    ii) The claimant's nine year old son, born in 2010 from a  relationship
        with  a  woman  in  the  United  Kingdom  during  2009/2010.   That
        relationship is over, but he sees the child, who will now  be  nine
        years old. Both mother and child are British citizens.

   iii) The claimant's wife's two children from a former relationship:  her
        20 year old daughter born in 1999 and her 14 year old son  born  in
        2004.  Their father is in the United Kingdom and his consent  would
        be needed if the son, still a minor, were to travel to Trinidad and
        Tobago and live there.  Both of the  wife's  children  are  British
        citizens.

    iv) The claimant's children with his wife: their four year old daughter
        born in the United Kingdom in January 2015 and their one  year  old
        son born in June 2017, who is  now  nearly  two  years  old.   Both
        children are British citizens.

10. The claimant and his wife,  and  all  four  of  the  children  in  their
   household, are Catholics and worship  locally  at  St  Ignatius  Catholic
   Church.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. On 22 September 2014 First-tier Judge Canavan (as she then was)  allowed
   the claimant's appeal, both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
   amended) and Article 8 ECHR.

12. The judge made the following relevant findings of fact and  credibility.
    She found that  the  claimant  had  regular  contact  with  his  son  in
   Manchester from a previous relationship;  that  he  was  present  in  the
   child's life, provided him with emotional support and  was  an  important
   influence as a father; that the boy spends time with  the  claimant,  his
   wife and their children at weekends and in the school holidays  and  that
   his wife buys the boy toys and other items when she can.  The judge found
   that it would be important for this child to  maintain  regular  personal
   contact with his father and that it would be in  his  best  interests  to
   remain in the United Kingdom and for the claimant, his father, to  remain
   here and continue to provide him with  ongoing  practical  and  emotional
   support.

13. The judge found that the claimant had been living in the same  household
   as his step-children for four years, that he saw them on a  daily  basis,
   but they had very limited and sporadic contact with their natural father.
    She accepted that the claimant had taken on a de  facto  role  as  their
   father.

14. The Secretary of State accepted that it was likely to  be  in  the  best
   interests of all three of these children, the boy in Manchester  and  the
   step-children, his wife's children, to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
   in the care of their respective mothers.  They were all British  citizens
   and it was in their best interests to be brought up  by,  or  in  contact
   with, the claimant. There was another child on the way, but at that  date
   the couple had no children together yet.

15. The judge found that the claimant presented a low risk  of  reoffending,
   noting a letter from his Offender Manager  confirming  that  he  complied
   with the conditions of his supervision and 'presented with a positive and
   respectful attitude'.  The judge did not have  the  OASys  report  before
   her, but considered that its absence indicated that he was not considered
   a sufficient risk for an OASys report to be  prepared.  We  do  have  the
   OASys report and will consider its contents.

16. The judge found that it would be unduly harsh on the wife  and  children
   for the family to be fractured on a long-term basis  by  his  deportation
   from the United Kingdom and that his  removal  would  breach  the  United
   Kingdom's international obligations under Article 8 ECHR.  At [39] in her
   decision, she wrestled unsuccessfully with the new section  117C  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)  and  how  that
   related to paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.  She accepted that the
   claimant was a foreign criminal under  sections  32  and  33  of  the  UK
   Borders Act 2007 but found that he had brought himself within one of  the
   Exceptions in section 33(2) thereof and that  automatic  deportation  was
   not required.

17. The judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human
   rights grounds.

Permission to appeal

18. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal, arguing that  the
   First-tier Tribunal had not properly balanced the public interest against
   the claimant's circumstances, relying on  SS  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and  arguing  that  the
   claimant had not shown that there were very compelling circumstances over
   and above the circumstances set out at Exception 1  and  Exception  2  in
   section 117C and/or paragraphs 399 and  399A  of  the  Rules,  such  that
   paragraph 398 was triggered.  The public  interest  outweighed  the  best
   interests of all three children, two of  whom  were  not  the  claimant's
   natural children, and the other one did not live with him.

19. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the First-tier  Judge
   had not identified the  very  compelling  circumstances  referred  to  in
   paragraph 398.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Upper Tribunal hearing [2015]

20. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was heard by Mrs Justice Carr  DBE  and
   Upper Tribunal Judge Conway.  In their decision, sent to the parties on 6
   January 2015, they found no material error of law in the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal.  They noted that it was accepted that  the  claimant
   could not bring himself within paragraph 399 or 399A (and  therefore,  at
   least by implication, Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C).

21. They considered that the judge had applied the correct legal  principles
   and  reached  a  sustainable  conclusion,  for   proper   reasons,   that
   deportation would be a disproportionate interference with the  claimant's
   family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

22. The Upper Tribunal dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal and  upheld
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appealed
   to the Court of Appeal.

Court of Appeal

23. On 30 May 2017 Jackson LJ, with whom Rafferty LJ and Kitchin LJ  agreed,
   gave judgment  allowing  the  appeal.  The  neutral  citation  for  their
   judgment is KG (Trinidad) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
   [2017] EWCA Civ 789. The Court of Appeal considered that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had fallen into error in failing to apply the test  set  out  as
   Exception 1 or Exception 2 in section 117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and  paragraph  398  of  the
   Immigration Rules:

         "24. ...the judge simply did not apply  that  test.   Instead,  she
         applied the less stringent test set out in the previous version  of
         the  Rules.   The  judge  carried  out  a  freestanding  Article  8
         analysis.  She had placed on one side of the scales the high public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals.  She placed on  the  other
         side of the scales the personal circumstances of the claimant,  his
         wife and the children.  She did not focus on the  question  whether
         there were 'very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. ...

         26.  ...both before the First-tier Tribunal and  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, the  claimant  conceded  that  he  did  not  fall  within
         Exceptions 1 or 2.  That issue was therefore  not  the  subject  of
         evidence  or   argument   before   those   Tribunals.    In   these
         circumstances, I do not believe that this Court on hearing a second
         appeal can reopen that question.  On the other hand, if  we  decide
         to remit this case to the Upper Tribunal for a re-hearing, at  that
         stage the claimant certainly should be permitted  to  withdraw  the
         concession. ...

         29.  In my view, it does not follow from the findings of fact  made
         by the judge that the test set out in the statute and the Rules had
         been satisfied.  I do not propose to comment on the specific  facts
         in any detail because I have come to the conclusion that there must
         be a re-hearing with evidence. ...

         31.  In those circumstances, if my Lord and  my  Lady  agree,  this
         Court will allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal  and  direct  as
         follows: (1) this matter should be remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal
         with a direction that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  apply  the
         correct statutory test; (2) the Upper Tribunal is  to  rehear  [the
         claimant's] appeal against the deportation order.   That  rehearing
         should proceed on the basis of such further evidence as the parties
         wish to adduce; (3) at the remitted hearing, the claimant  will  be
         at liberty  to  withdraw  his  concession  that  he  falls  outside
         Exceptions 1 and 2.  No doubt Counsel will be  able  to  agree  the
         precise wording on the basis of the substance  which  I  have  just
         outlined."

   The Court of Appeal  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
   directed a rehearing of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

24. The Court of Appeal specified that  it  was  open  to  the  claimant  to
   withdraw his concession that he could not  bring  himself  within  either
   Exception 1 or Exception 2 in section 117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and/or  paragraphs  399  and
   399A of the Immigration Rules.

Upper Tribunal proceedings [2017-2019]

25. The appeal was listed before Upper Tribunal  Judge  King  on  23  August
   2017, but the claimant was unable to attend the  hearing  as  three  days
   earlier, on 20 August 2017, he had received a stab wound and was not well
   enough to attend.  The wound was not deep, but it had required treatment.



26. The hearing of the appeal was adjourned to  17  April  2018,  and  panel
   directions were given.  The claimant made a legal aid application but did
   not receive a response until 12 December 2017;  there  were  issues  with
   expert evidence which were not resolved  until  February  2018,  and  the
   selected independent social worker was unable to offer an appointment  to
   see the children until 19 May 2018.

27. On 9 April 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson  reluctantly  adjourned  the
   hearing again, directing that the claimant file a statement of  case  and
   indicate whether he did wish to withdraw the section  117C/paragraph  399
   and 399A concession, and a number of other matters.

28. The appeal was heard on 11 July 2018 before Mr Justice  Goss  and  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Kopieczek, who dismissed the appeal. However, pursuant  to
   rule 45 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  [as
   amended], on 15 February 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  set  aside
   that decision in the light of the judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
   (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]
   UKSC 53, and invited representations thereon.

29. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing (27 March 2019)

30. At the hearing before us, there was no  further  oral  evidence  but  we
   received statements of case from both parties and admitted into  evidence
   the following documents: an OASys report, up to date to April  2012;  the
   report of Alison Tyrell, who describes herself as an  independent  social
   worker; and witness statements from  the  claimant,  his  wife,  her  two
   children and from her grandmother, who brought the wife up  and  to  whom
   she and the claimant refer as her mother.

31. We have had regard to all these documents, and to the evidence to  which
   our attention was drawn at the hearing, as well as the parties' oral  and
   written submissions.

OASys report November 2011 (reviewed post-release April 2012)

32. The OASys assessment is up to date to 11 April 2012.   The  claimant  is
   recorded as having maintained that he had no direct  involvement  in  the
   offence, despite his conviction as a participant.  He  admitted  that  he
   had been keeping bad company, with a group of 10 or so much  younger  men
   with whom he played football in the park, but had severed all links  with
   that group of  friends  now.   He  enjoyed  drinking  alcohol  on  social
   occasions but did not consider  that  he  had  an  alcohol  problem.  One
   evening, the gang attacked an unknown man and stole from him a bag  which
   contained five passports and a mobile telephone.  The  claimant  knew  it
   was not the first time they had done this kind of thing;  the  author  of
   the OASys report considered that raised some concerns,  as  the  claimant
   had continued to associate with the group,  although  he  knew  of  their
   previous criminal activities.

33. The victim was very distressed: he was a man with an  Eastern  European-
   sounding name, who spoke only broken English.  He had a  deep  cut  above
   his right eye and needed medical treatment for his injuries. The claimant
   felt sorry for the victim and said that his only involvement was to  have
   ridden his bicycle around the park, taken back the bag with the passports
   in it and gone looking for the man to return them  but  without  success.
   The claimant was arrested later, in possession of the  passports,  mobile
   telephone and bag, which  looked  bad  and  that  was  why  he  had  been
   convicted despite his not  guilty  plea.  We  note  that  the  sentencing
   remarks say that at court the claimant denied that the bicycle was his.

34. The claimant said he was  brought  up  in  Trinidad  but  completed  his
   education in the United  Kingdom.   He  had  no  qualifications  and  had
   difficulty finding a job.  He had previously worked as a barber, and  had
   been working part time as a handyman for a  year  before  his  arrest  in
   2010.  In prison, he had worked as a wing cleaner, and completed a  first
   aid course. In Trinidad, the claimant had been a qualified electrician, a
   job he left to visit his now-wife in the United  Kingdom.   The  claimant
   said that the reason he overstayed in 2009 was that he had lost  his  own
   passport, and that he had never previously been  in  trouble.   They  had
   known each other for eight or nine years but only got  together  in  2010
   and married in 2013.  He had lost his passport in 2009 so he could not go
   back to Trinidad and was totally reliant on  his  fianc�e  for  food  and
   lodgings.   He was not struggling with his finances  before  his  arrest,
   and had no debts.  He said  that  there  was  no  resentment  within  the
   relationship at his inability to work and provide for his family. At  5.6
   the claimant said 'he would like to return to Trinidad as can resume work
   as electrician there, and his wife intended to  move  as  well  (she  has
   family there as well)'.

35. The risk prediction scores were very  low  indeed:  4-7%  in  the  first
   year, 8-13% in the second year.  We take note that the  claimant  was  of
   previous good character and has not re-offended in the seven years  since
   his release.

Independent Social Worker's report

36. The claimant relies  on  an  independent  social  worker's  report  from
   Alison Tyrell, BA (Hons) Social Work, dated 14 April 2018.  Ms Tyrell  is
   employed as a social worker in adult social  care,  as  a  best  interest
   assessor.  She has also undertaken independent social worker reports  for
   various courts and tribunals since 2012.  She says in her report that she
   has experience of assessing people with no recourse to public  funds  and
   unsettled immigration status, including those  who  are  HIV-positive  or
   have experience of trauma, torture, sexual,  physical  and  psychological
   abuse.

37. Ms Tyrell's report was based on a two hour meeting  with  the  claimant,
   his wife, the claimant's step-children (his wife's adult daughter and 14-
   year-old son) and their two young children, now aged four years  and  one
   year old. She approached her task  principally  on  the  basis  that  the
   claimant would be deported to Trinidad  and  Tobago  without  his  family
   members.

38. Ms Tyrell did not have any  contact  with  the  natural  father  of  the
   wife's children, although apparently he is in  the  United  Kingdom,  nor
   with those children's paternal siblings and relatives.  She was not given
   contact details for the claimant's two previous partners in Trinidad  and
   Manchester, nor the sons he has by each of them.   She did not  speak  to
   any of the wife's relatives: the grandmother and grandfather  who  raised
   her, her uncle and aunt in London, who are more like siblings to her,  or
   her mother, her mother's new partner, and the two half-siblings the  wife
   has from her mother's  current  relationship.   Ms  Tyrell  did  see  the
   witness statement from the claimant's former partner in Manchester  which
   described the relationship between the claimant and her son, and  between
   the boy and the rest of the extended family.

39. Ms Tyrell's report notes that the claimant's wife had a  complex  family
   history, having been brought up by her grandparents, because  her  mother
   could not care for her adequately,  having  lifelong  mental  health  and
   substance misuse issues.  The wife's  mother  had  become  pregnant  very
   young and handed the claimant's wife over to be brought  up  by  her  own
   parents when she was six months old.  The wife's mother left her parents'
   home when the wife was an infant; she is involved with another addict and
   the  wife's  contact  with  her  natural   mother   is   'sporadic'   and
   'unreliable'.

40. The wife's natural father was not really involved in  her  childhood  or
   her adult life, but her mother had gone on to have three  more  children,
   two of whom survived, while one died in infancy.  One, now  age  21,  had
   grown up in care but was now in independent living arrangements in  south
   London. The wife had contact with both of them.

41. The claimant's wife also had four other uncles and aunts, with whom  she
   was brought up as a sibling.  One had gone to live in  America;  one  had
   died; but she had contact with both of the others, who  live  in  Enfield
   and Hatfield, and with their children.

42. The claimant's wife's grandparents, who had brought  her  up,  were  now
   elderly and were estranged from each  other,  though  they  still  shared
   accommodation.  Her 76 year old grandmother was no longer working and had
   some mobility difficulties, but she was able to have the 14-year-old  boy
   at least four evenings a week after school, and would cook meals for  the
   claimant's wife to take home, and  generally  support  the  wider  family
   arrangements.

43. Ms Tyrell assumed that if the claimant's wife accompanied  the  claimant
   to Trinidad and Tobago, she would lose contact with her grandparents, her
   two surviving siblings, and her uncle and aunt in London and all of their
   children.  Ms Tyrell asserted, without any detailed  reasoning,  that  in
   Trinidad the claimant's wife would suffer a decrease in her mental health
   and well-being as she was used to the stability and  security  which  her
   efforts had achieved for the family.

44. The claimant's wife expected  to  have  financial  difficulties  if  she
   remained in the United Kingdom without him.  Childcare costs in the  area
   were prohibitive. The claimant's wife had been able  to  accommodate  and
   provide financial security for herself and the children, giving them  the
   emotional and practical support they needed to succeed, but  it  was  not
   clear to Ms Tyrell whether she could replicate this for the  children  if
   she moved with the claimant to Trinidad and Tobago.  Her 14 year old  son
   was about to start his GCSE  examinations  and  his  education  would  be
   disrupted if he left.

45. Ms Tyrell understood that  the  claimant's  step-children  regarded  the
   claimant as their 'father' but her elder child, the daughter, was already
   an adult.  She had work, studies and friends in the  United  Kingdom  and
   some extended family members here.  The  younger  child,  a  son,  had  a
   father in the United Kingdom whose consent for him  to  live  abroad  was
   regarded as unlikely, suggesting that he does still have  a  relationship
   with his father. Both children saw  their  natural  father  and  paternal
   siblings only infrequently but if they went with the claimant to Trinidad
   and Tobago that opportunity for direct contact would be lost.

46. If the claimant's wife were to move to  Trinidad  and  Tobago  with  the
   younger two children, neither of whom is yet of  school  age,  Ms  Tyrell
   considered that there would need to be  a  referral  to  social  care  in
   respect of the 14-year-old boy.  She did not interview his natural father
   or his paternal siblings.  Nor did she investigate whether he could  live
   with his mother's grandmother, two streets away, who already has him four
   or more evenings a week after school and cooks for the extended family.

47. As regards accommodation and finances, Ms Tyrell noted that  the  family
   lived in a ground floor Council maisonette, with two bedrooms for the six
   of them.  The wife's grandparents  lived  close  by,  just  a  couple  of
   streets away.  The claimant had moved in with his now wife  during  2009.
   The natural father of the  elder  two  children  in  the  house  paid  no
   maintenance and the claimant was not permitted to work, so  finances  for
   the family depended on the claimant's wife and her  adult  daughter.  The
   claimant found  that  difficult  and  undignified;  he  would  rather  be
   working, and if he did the wife hoped that she could work less and  spend
   more time with the children.

48. The claimant's  wife  worked  as  a  Health  Records  Library  Clerk  at
   Moorfields Eye Hospital in London, having returned early  from  maternity
   leave following the birth of her youngest child, for  financial  reasons.
   The household finances were based on her  income  from  that  job,  child
   benefit for her three minor children, and child tax  credit.   Her  elder
   daughter was also working at the Moorfields Library, and contributing  to
   the family income.

49. The care for the younger children was provided  by  the  claimant.   The
   claimant's wife considered that she would need to pay  for  70  hours  of
   childcare per week if the claimant were not available  to  help;  if  she
   could not afford childcare, she would have  to  stay  home  and  live  on
   benefits.  We note that there was no  investigation  by  the  independent
   social worker as to what the extended family might be able to do to  help
   her.

50. If they all went to Trinidad and Tobago, the claimant said that his  own
   parents  and  siblings  would  not  offer  them  financial   support   or
   accommodation, even in the short term.  His son in Manchester  would  not
   be allowed by his mother to come and live  with  him  in  Trinidad.   The
   claimant and his wife did not feel that it was realistic to relocate  the
   family to Trinidad, but if the wife  remained  behind  without  him,  she
   would have financial difficulties and would lack the physical,  emotional
   and practical support which the claimant gave her.

Claimant's witness statement [8 June 2018]

51. The claimant relied on his witness statement of 8 June  2018,  in  which
   he emphasised his closeness to  all  his  children  and  extended  family
   members in the United Kingdom.   He  said  that  his  wife's  grandmother
   helped by cooking  regularly  for  the  family  and  providing  financial
   support when needed. The claimant washed the clothes, did  the  vacuuming
   and took the youngest child to nursery.  They  were  a  family  unit  and
   separation was unthinkable. The family in the United Kingdom needed  him;
   his son in Manchester could not come to Trinidad and Tobago as his mother
   would not allow it; his step-children were settled, one in work  and  one
   at school; and his younger children were too young to do without him.

52. The claimant's mother and father still lived in Trinidad and Tobago,  in
   the family home, and were still married. When  he  had  lived  there  the
   claimant worked odd jobs and lived at home, with his  parents'  financial
   support. They had a 3-bedroom house but  they  were  letting  the  unused
   rooms for additional income and would not be able to give  him  financial
   support if he returned.  He considered that if he returned, he would find
   it difficult to get work as he would not know people and would be treated
   as a tourist after 10 years in the United Kingdom.

53. Trinidad and Tobago was not a safe country  and  the  claimant  did  not
   want to raise his children there.  When his wife visited  for  a  holiday
   years ago, before they were married,  she  developed  a  heat  rash.   He
   thought that his family would not be  able  to  adjust  to  the  culture,
   leaving behind their lives and their education: everything was different,
   the weather, the food, bathing with a bucket and cup, and so on.

Claimant's wife's evidence

54. The claimant's wife had also provided a witness  statement,  which  said
   that she was born in London, the only child of a troubled mother who  has
   mental health and  drug  addiction  problems.   She  was  raised  by  her
   grandparents, along with her four other uncles and aunts.  The claimant's
   wife has lived all her life in the United Kingdom and  her  76  year  old
   grandmother is here, as are  her  work  and  her  friends.   She  has  no
   immediate family in Trinidad.

55. The  claimant's  wife's  grandfather  is  a  self-employed  electrician,
   separated from her grandmother but still sharing a house with her; he  is
   neither able nor willing to look after her grandmother.  Her  grandmother
   takes care of all the household expenses with her pension; the claimant's
   wife is her carer, for whatever she needs on a daily basis, and they live
   only two roads apart.

56. The claimant's wife met the claimant on a visit  to  Trinidad  in  2004,
   returning in 2006 for a two week holiday, when their relationship  began.
   The claimant came here on a   six  months  visit  visa  in  August  2008,
   returning to Trinidad and Tobago in February 2009.  The claimant was then
   living with his previous partner, but they also  continued  to  be  in  a
   relationship. Between 2006 and 2009,  they  continued  to  meet  both  in
   Trinidad and the United Kingdom, the relationship becoming  exclusive  in
   2009, when the claimant moved in to her Council  flat.   The  couple  got
   engaged in July 2010, but waited  three  years  to  marry  as  they  were
   unaware that they did not need permission from  UKVI  to  marry.   It  is
   clear that the claimant's wife knew he was here irregularly from at least
   2010 (see [2] of her statement).   They  did  nothing  about  his  status
   'because [the claimant's wife] was scared'.

57.  While  the  claimant  was  detained  pending  trial  and   during   his
   imprisonment,  the  claimant's  grandmother  helped  with  the  children,
   picking them up from school and so on.  She is more  fragile  now,  since
   2012 when he came out of prison, and she calls  on  the  claimant's  wife
   whenever she needs anything.  During the claimant's  pre-trial  detention
   and imprisonment, his wife told his step-children that he had returned to
   Trinidad for a while to sort out a few  things.   The  children  did  not
   question the explanation, but they found it  difficult  to  cope  without
   him.  The claimant had then been their father  figure  for  just  over  a
   year.   The claimant would send cards  and  letters,  and  call  when  he
   could, but it was not enough.

58. The claimant was not released until 21 March 2012,  his  licence  having
   begun on 18  February  2012,  but  that  was  followed  by  a  period  of
   immigration detention.  For the next two years, until their  first  child
   together was born, the claimant's wife worked full  time  in  retail  and
   supported the family.  For the last part of 2014 she was  unemployed  and
   claiming benefits to support the family. She began to work at  Moorfields
   Eye Hospital in December 2014, for just three months before her maternity
   leave began in February 2015, but returned to work after  two  months  as
   her maternity pay was not enough to support the family financially.   She
   is still working.

59. The claimant undertook full-time care of the baby  girl,  who  was  just
   two months old when his wife returned to  work  in  February  2015.   The
   family could not function without him; it would  break  them  emotionally
   and physically, and Skype or  other  technology  was  no  solution.   The
   claimant's wife  considered  that  it  was  not  her  eldest  -daughter's
   responsibility to care for her own  brother  and  her  step-siblings;  it
   would be unfair on her and stop  her  working,  and  she  was  only  just
   establishing a life for herself.

60. The 14-year-old had a strong bond with the claimant,  who  would  attend
   parents' evenings for  both  his  step-children,  accompany  the  boy  to
   football practice, and spend time going swimming or bike riding with him.
    When the claimant's son who lives in Manchester came to stay on weekends
   or holidays, they would all do family activities together.

61. The claimant's wife said that she would not feel safe if  she  relocated
   with the children to Trinidad, due to the crime rates there.  The son  in
   Manchester and the claimant's wife's elder daughter would  not  come,  in
   any event.  She did not think that her elder son's father  would  consent
   to him leaving the United Kingdom, although their contact  was  sporadic.
   The claimant's wife would have to choose between  her  marriage  and  the
   children.  She loved the claimant with all her heart and did not want  to
   be separated from him or their children.

Other witness statements

62. The  bundle  contains  witness  statements  from  the  claimant's  step-
   daughter, who says she would miss him and  that  he  is  a  great  family
   figure.  She does not want the family to break up and is not  willing  to
   live in Trinidad.

63. The claimant's step-son says that he only sees his natural  father  very
   rarely and that the claimant is a good father, always there when  needed,
   supportive of him, and giving him good advice.   He  particularly  enjoys
   the claimant watching him play football: they have 'boy time'  afterwards
   and go for something to eat.  He has repeatedly asked his natural  father
   to come and watch him play, but 'he never turns up'.

64. The Manchester-based mother of the claimant's 10-year-old son says  that
   father and child have regular contact and have a  lot  of  fun  together.
   The claimant is his only father figure; he keeps his promises  and  never
   lets the boy down.  If the claimant  were  to  be  removed,  journeys  to
   Trinidad would be prohibitively expensive and they would not be  able  to
   go often.   The relationship would start to fade, and the boy was just of
   an age when he was beginning to really need fatherly support and advice.

65. A witness statement from the claimant's wife's grandmother says he is  a
   very  good  husband  and  father,  willing  to  help  whenever  possible.
   Whenever she called him, he always came, and he put his family  first  at
   all times, wanting the best for them.  Her own children (the wife's uncle
   and aunt) were jealous of  the  bond  she  had  with  the  claimant.  The
   claimant had grown up  and  matured;  she  was  very  proud  of  him  and
   considered him her son.  The two of  them  helped  the  grandmother  with
   shopping and household tasks.  She would  be  unable  to  visit  them  in
   Trinidad and Tobago as she was old and had mobility difficulties.





Upper Tribunal hearing

66. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, we had the benefit of skeleton  arguments
   for the respondent from both Ms Holmes and Ms  Rhona  Petterson,  another
   Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.  The claimant relied on a skeleton
   argument prepared for the July 2018 hearing, from which it is clear  that
   he had withdrawn his concession that he could not  bring  himself  within
   either Exception 1 or Exception 2 in section 117C.

67. We have had regard to both the oral and written submissions,  which  are
   a matter of record, and to all the documents to which our  attention  was
   drawn.

Legal framework

68. Section 117C so far as relevant is as follows:

         "117C    Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,
             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

69. We have regard to KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 and we remind ourselves  of  the  need  to
   take a 'real world' approach to the situation,  on  the  basis  that  the
   public interest requires the claimant's removal, and then to consider the
   best interests of the children and the effect upon them of  his  removal.
   We are also guided by the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  RA  (s.117C:
   "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC),  handed
   down on 13 February 2019, in which the judicial headnote is as follows:

         "(1)    In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of State for  the Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the Supreme Court of the
         test of "unduly harsh"  in  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, formulated by the  Upper  Tribunal
         in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), does not mean that the test includes the way
         in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to the facts of
         the case before it.

         (2)    The way in which a court or tribunal should approach section
         117C remains as set out  in  the  judgment  of  Jackson  LJ  in  NA
         (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

         (3)     Section  117C(6)  applies  to  both  categories  of foreign
         criminals  described  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  paragraph  20  of  KO
         (Nigeria);  namely,  those  who  have   not   been   sentenced   to
         imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those  who  have.  Determining
         the seriousness of the  particular  offence  will  normally  be  by
         reference to the length of sentence imposed and what the sentencing
         judge had to say about seriousness and mitigation; but the ultimate
         decision is for the court  or  tribunal  deciding  the  deportation
         case.

         (4)    Rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear  material  weight in
         favour of a foreign criminal."

70. We turn first to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  NA  (Pakistan).
   This claimant is a 'medium offender' as defined at [14] in  the  judgment
   of Lord Justice Jackson, who gave  the  judgment  of  the  Court.  Medium
   offenders can escape deportation  under  the  Rules  if  they  can  bring
   themselves within the safety nets in paragraph 399 or paragraph  399A  of
   the Rules.  Only paragraph 399 is potentially  applicable  here.  In  the
   amended statutory scheme,  medium  offenders  need  to  bring  themselves
   within Exception 1 or Exception 2 (in this case,  only  Exception  2  has
   been argued).  The current version of paragraph 398 of the Rules provides
   for 'very compelling circumstances' over and  above  the  Exceptions,  on
   Article 8 proportionality grounds (see [27] in NA (Pakistan)).

71. At [32]-[34], the Court of  Appeal  found  that  such  'very  compelling
   circumstances' must be more than, say, ageing parents in poor  health  or
   the natural love between parents and children, and that although the best
   interests of children carry great weight,

         "...it is a consequence of criminal conduct that  offenders may  be
         separated from their children for many years, contrary to the  best
         interests of those children.  The desirability  of  children  being
         with both parents is a commonplace of family  life.   That  is  not
         usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high
         public interest in deporting foreign criminals."

72. At [36], the Court of Appeal tells us how to proceed:

         "36.  In relation to a medium offender, first see whether he  falls
         within Exception 1 or Exception 2. If he does, then the  Article  8
         claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next stage is to  consider
         whether there are "sufficiently compelling circumstances, over  and
         above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". If  there  are,  then
         the Article 8 claim succeeds. If there are not, then the Article  8
         claim fails. As was the case under the 2012 rules (as explained  in
         MF (Nigeria)), there is no room for a general Article 8  evaluation
         outside the 2014 rules, read with sections 117A-117D  of  the  2002
         Act."

73. With this guidance, we proceed to examine the facts of this appeal.

Analysis

74. We approach this appeal on the basis that the error of law decision  has
   been made and that it is our task to remake the decision  on  deportation
   and Article 8 ECHR, starting from the findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge
   Canavan, but having regard to the new evidence advanced by the  claimant.
   We begin with section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002 (as amended).  We note  that  the  appellant's  concession  that  he
   cannot meet Exception 1 or Exception 2 has been withdrawn as the Court of
   Appeal suggested.

75. In this case, the claimant is a foreign criminal and his deportation  is
   in the public interest.  The offence in question was undoubtedly serious.
    We note the very low risk of future harm in the OASys  report  and  that
   the claimant had no previous offences and has not offended again  in  the
   seven years since his release.  That is to the claimant's credit, but not
   dispositive of  the  appeal.  The  appellant  has  not  acknowledged  his
   responsibility for the offence of which he was convicted,  without  which
   there can be no rehabilitation: in any event, applying RA, rehabilitation
   is unlikely to avail him.

76. The claimant received a sentence of three years for his offence,  making
   him a medium  offender.   Under  section  117C(3),  the  public  interest
   requires his deportation unless he can bring himself within  one  of  the
   Exceptions.  The claimant has been in the United Kingdom only since  2009
   (ten years) and is now 35 years old.  Exception 1 does not avail  him  as
   he has not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of  his
   life.

77. We turn, therefore, to Exception 2.  It is accepted  that  the  claimant
   has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife,  who  is  a
   qualifying partner as she is a British  citizen,  and  with  all  of  his
   British citizen children, and his step-children,  who  also  are  British
   citizens.  The question for the Upper Tribunal is whether the  effect  of
   his deportation on his wife and those children would be unduly harsh.

78. We accept, as did the First-tier Tribunal, that  there  is  family  life
   between the claimant, his wife, her children, and his three  children  in
   the United Kingdom.  We accept that the wife does not  wish  to  live  in
   Trinidad and Tobago and that she will find it  difficult  if  he  leaves,
   both financially and emotionally.  We are not as  much  assisted  by  the
   independent social worker report as we had hoped, due to the narrow focus
   which the social worker applied, interviewing  only  the  primary  family
   group and none of the extended family,  not  even  the  grandmother,  who
   lives so nearby.

79. What is apparent is that the claimant's wife has worked  extremely  hard
   to blend her complicated family ties and to allow  all  the  children  to
   know each other and to feel welcome in her home.  She  has  made  contact
   with her uncle and aunt in the United Kingdom  and  their  children,  and
   kept up contact, albeit with difficulty, with her own mother and her step-
   siblings, and she is close to, supportive of, and  supported  by  her  76
   year old grandmother, who brought her up, has one of the  children  after
   school, cooks for her and lives just two streets away in rather difficult
   domestic circumstances.  There is no investigation  in  the  social  work
   report as to whether the claimant's wife, if he is removed, could combine
   forces with her mother, or receive support from her uncle or her aunt  in
   London, to assist her with the younger children, nor, indeed, whether her
   elder daughter could assist.

80. There is also no evidence that the effect  on  the  claimant's  children
   and step-children would be more than 'duly harsh' as  the  Supreme  Court
   put it in KO (Nigeria).  The Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) found  that
   the desirability of children being with both parents was 'not  usually  a
   sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high public interest
   in deporting foreign criminals'.  We consider  that  the  'unduly  harsh'
   test in Exception 2 is not met.

81.  We  ask  ourselves,  therefore,  whether  there  are  any   exceptional
   circumstances over and above Exception 1 or Exception 2, which  make  the
   claimant's removal a breach of the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
   Article 8 ECHR.   We do not find that there are: the evidence  before  us
   concerns the familial network and its operation and that has  been  taken
   into account already in the consideration of Exception 2.

82.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  strong  public  interest  in   the
   deportation of foreign criminals outweighs the family life in this appeal
   and that the claimant's appeal must be dismissed.

DECISION

83. For the foregoing reasons, our decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   We set aside the previous decision.  We remake the decision by dismissing
   the claimant's appeal.



Date:         3 May 2019                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


