
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00307/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                            |On 31 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     PK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rashid, instructed by Burton & Burton
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I
make an anonymity direction.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

This is the appellant's appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Tully promulgated on 17 October 2019, dismissing on all grounds his appeal
against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 1 June 2019 to deport
him to Poland pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (the
Regulations).  First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan refused permission to
appeal on 14 November 2019.  However, when the application was renewed to
the Upper Tribunal Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? granted permission to appeal
on 10 December 2019.

Error of Law

For the reasons set out below, I find no material error of law in the
making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to
be set aside.

The deportation decision followed the appellant's conviction for an offence
of wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm for which he was sentenced to a
term of twelve months' immigration imprisonment.  The judge accepted that
the appellant was entitled to permanent residence under the Regulations
and, therefore, that he qualified for the intermediate or middle level of
protection against removal so that he could only be removed on serious
grounds of public policy or public security.

In granting permission to appeal, Judge Keki? considered it arguable that
the conflict in evidence arising between the appellant's evidence to his
OASys case manager identified at paragraph 34 of the decision as well as
other discrepancies set out at paragraph 29 of the decision should have
been put to the appellant,

"particularly as it led the judge to reject the report as unreliable and to
find that the appellant's father could assist with support and
rehabilitation in Poland.  It is also arguable that the judge failed to
properly consider the appellant's remorse and his good government since the
offence."

At paragraph 29 of the decision the judge noted that the OASys Report
author stated that the appellant was at low risk of reoffending but
represented a medium risk of harm to both his victim and other members of
the public if he did reoffend.  However, the judge had serious concerns
about the weight that could be given to this low risk assessment, because
the appellant presented to the author of the report a rather different
account of the encounter with the victim than the basis on which he was
sentenced.  He told the caseworker that the meeting in which the assault
took place had been initiated by the victim, that he was not aware of the
purpose of the meeting, and that his assault was a "pre-emptive strike",
because he feared being hit by the victim.  From the sentencing remarks, it
is clear that it was the appellant who had sought the meeting and who
insisted that the victim attend.  When the victim put forth his hand to
shake that of the appellant, the latter punched him in the face with a
series of vicious blows, entirely unprovoked. These facts were highly
relevant to any risk assessment. The assessment does not address the
version of events in the sentencing remarks. It follows that only limited
weight could be given to the risk assessment.

The sentencing judge concluded that the attack had been planned by the
appellant and his demand that the victim attend served to aggravate the
seriousness of the assault.  In those circumstances, the Immigration Judge
was entitled to conclude at paragraph 28 that the appellant had been guilty
of a serious and vicious attack that was pre-planned and caused serious
injury to his victim.  Understandably, at paragraph 29 the judge did not
accept that the appellant had been entirely truthful with the caseworker
preparing the OASys Report, nor, given that he blamed the victim in part
for his actions, that he had in fact accepted responsibility for the
offence, contrary to what was opined in the report at 2.1.  All that was
highly relevant to the assessment of risk which was part of the judge's
task in assessing this case and in respect of which the OASys report was
only one element. Given the above facts, only limited weight could be given
to the report. At paragraph 30 the judge rejected the assessment of low
risk of reoffending and at paragraph 31 did not accept that the appellant
was not at a risk for future offending, finding that he was at such a risk
and that if he did reoffend the impact on any person he attacked could be
very serious.

At 34 of the decision the judge also noted that the appellant told the
caseworker that he had a very good relationship with his father but the
judge found that this was inconsistent with the evidence of the appellant's
mother, which was to the effect that he had not seen his father since the
divorce of his parents some eight years earlier.  This discrepancy was put
to the appellant's mother in evidence, but the judge did not accept her
apparent speculation that perhaps he had gone to see his father when he
visited Poland with his girlfriend.  The judge was entitled to conclude
that the appellant and his mother had sought to disguise the relationship
with his father in order to manufacture a distance between them for the
purpose of the appeal.  The judge found it likely that the appellant was
still in fact in contact with his father and that, therefore, the latter
would support him in returned to Poland.  Those findings were entirely open
to the judge on the evidence and are supported by cogent reasoning.

The grounds also complain that the judge had made no findings in respect of
the appellant's alleged remorse or that the offence was a one-off and out
of character and therefore unlikely to be repeated.  It is also pleaded
that the decision showed no proper assessment of the appellant's good
government since the incident leading to the conviction over a year later,
and only considered his behaviour since release from imprisonment.
However, at paragraph 27 the judge adopted the sentencing remarks, which
took account of these factors, as an authoritative summary of the
assessment of the offence and did not need to repeat them in full. At
paragraph 31, the judge took into account that the appellant had not
reoffended since release but was entitled to note that he was on probation
with a risk of being recalled to serve the balance of the sentence for any
act of violence.

At paragraph 39 of the decision the judge confirmed that all the evidence
had been taken into account and gave a summary of the findings leading to
the conclusion at paragraph 40 that the appellant's behaviour represented a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
fundamental interests of society, namely the prevention of crime or
disorder. Accepting that the burden of proof was on the respondent, the
judge nevertheless concluded that the viciousness of the attack, the risk
of reoffending, and the impact on the victim combined with the impact on
any future victim, was so significant as to meet the higher threshold of
strong grounds.  Having considered the matter in the round, I do not find
any error of law on the basis that relevant factors were not taken into
account.  It is not necessary for the judge to set out every fact. In
Budhathoki [2014] the Upper Tribunal stated that:

"It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier Tribunal
judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This leads
to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is not a proportionate
approach to deciding cases.  It is, however, necessary for judges to
identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and
brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they have
won or lost."

There is no definition of what amounts to 'serious grounds'. In MG and VC
(Ireland) [2006] UKAIT 00053 the Upper Tribunal said that:

"Where Regulation 21(3) applies to an individual because he is an EEA
national with a permanent right of residence he may be removed as
previously on the grounds that there is a risk of his committing further
offences, with the proviso that the risk of harm must constitute serious
grounds of public policy for his removal."

In BF (Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 923 the appellant, a citizen of
Portugal, arrived in the UK in 1999 and had acquired permanent residence.
He was convicted of battery against his partner and sentenced to 42 months'
imprisonment.  He could only be removed on serious grounds of public policy
or public security.  The Court of Appeal held that the Tribunal first had
to determine the claimant's relevant personal conduct; secondly, whether
the conduct represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat;
thirdly, whether that threat affected one of the fundamental interests of
society; and fourthly, whether deportation would be disproportionate in all
the circumstances.  The Tribunal noted the evidence that the claimant had a
high propensity to reoffend against the same victim and any new partner but
went on to find that the Secretary of State had failed to prove that there
were serious grounds of public policy or security which made deportation
proportionate.  In remitting the appeal, the Court of Appeal said that the
Tribunal should have reached a conclusion as to whether the threat which
was clearly present at the time of the offence was still present at the
hearing.  The Tribunal had to decide whether there was a present serious
threat and if so, the extent of that threat. That was the task that the
First-tier Tribunal in the present case addressed.

In Batista v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 896 the issue was whether there were
serious grounds of public policy for expulsion.  The appellant had numerous
convictions culminating in a sentence of eight years for GBH.  The Court of
Appeal held that the Tribunal was entitled to conclude that the appellant's
record showed a propensity to renewed violence such as to satisfy the
relevant test.

The primary issue raised in this case is whether the judge's assessment of
the OASys Report and the weight given to it was something that should have
been put to the appellant for his comment, to put in the evidence for him
to make comment before the judge made the findings supporting the decision.
 Mr Tan points out that the OASys Report was but one factor taken into
account and it is not necessary for the judge to set out each and every
factor.  As Mr Rashid agreed, the weight to be given to evidence was a
matter for the judge.  In large part, as I pointed out to him, Mr Rashid's
submissions were effectively a plea litigation, listing a wide-ranging list
of mitigating factors which were to the appellant's credit, or which
otherwise reduced the alleged seriousness of the offence.

However, I have to consider whether the judge's conclusion to give limited
or little weight the OASys Report's assessment that the appellant was at a
low risk of offending was justified without that matter having been raised
with the appellant during the hearing.  I bear in mind in this regard that
the OASys Report was produced by the appellant and put before the Tribunal
at the appellant's request.  Before the Tribunal were also the judge's
sentencing remarks. It is clear and obvious from those two documents that
they inhabit separate factual worlds that could only be explained by the
fact that the appellant had presented a version of events to the case
officer different to and inconsistent with the judge's view of the offence
as set out in the sentencing remarks.  That obviously undermined the weight
that the judge could give to the OASys Report.  However, it is not the case
that the judge rejected the OASys report entirely. It is clear that some
parts of the report were relied on, and it is also clear from a reading of
the decision that the judge had given careful consideration to the report.
For example, at paragraph 30 of the decision the judge noted that the
appellant had not yet expressed an understanding of the emotional and
psychological harm he had caused, as set out at 2.5 of the report, and
noted that the appellant was recorded as having a lack of attitude
supportive of violence, which was a factor that contributed to his risk of
offending. After considering all the evidence in the round, at the end of
paragraph 30 of the decision, the judge stated: "I do not accept that the
assessment that he is at low risk of reoffending is reliable and given the
facts and the very serious nature of the offence and the triggers
highlighted in the report."

A further telling point made in Mr Tan's submissions, is that even if the
discrepancies between the OASys Report and the sentencing remarks had been
put to the appellant, he could not gainsay them, except by further
undermining the report.  He would either have to assert he said no such
thing, which was not Mr Rashid's submissions to me, or accept that he had
given an inaccurate account to the author of the report.  In reality, the
point raised in the grounds has no materiality as there is no benefit to be
gained by the appellant even if he had been given an opportunity to address
the discrepancy.  As Mr Tan suggested, anything he could say would likely
further undermine the weight to be given to the OASys Report.

It is also important to note in considering the grounds of appeal that they
make no criticism as to the threshold identified by the judge of strong
grounds or any part of the judge's definition of what might amount to be
strong grounds. At paragraph 39 of the decision the judge properly set out
the test and the factors that undermine the assertion that the appellant is
integrated into society.

Considering the matter carefully, I do not accept that the judge fell into
error in attributing limited or little weight to the OASys Report in
relation to the risk of reoffending. The judge justified the approach taken
by cogent reasoning set out in the decision. I do not accept that it was
necessary for the judge to put these inconsistencies to the appellant any
more than it would be necessary for the judge to do so before giving
limited weight to an expert medical or country background report. The
discrepancies or inconsistencies were evident on the face of the documents
put before the court and the appellant had had every opportunity to address
the issue of risk. It was not necessary for the judge to point out the
obvious. I also note that if the submissions on behalf of the appellant on
this point are correct, it would require almost every Tribunal judge to
recall the parties for a further hearing to air the likely findings and
invite further submissions before the decision is made. This is not the
case of a novel issue, not previously identified, being raised by the judge
but not relied on by either party, or the judge introducing new evidence or
background material gained through post-hearing research. The judge was
entitled to carefully consider the evidence in the round and reach findings
and conclusions on that evidence, provided that cogent reasoning open on
the evidence can be discerned from a reading of the decision. I am
satisfied that it can.

The other grounds of application for permission to appeal are in reality
mere disagreements with the decision and, as I have stated, an effective
plea in mitigation as to factors which are in the appellant's favour.
Ultimately, Mr Rashid accepted that his submissions could be summarised as
being that the judge made an error as to the weight to be attached to the
OASys Report.  I am satisfied that weight is a matter for the judge and
that on the facts of this case the judge was entitled to attach limited
weight to the report, for the clear reasons given.  In the circumstances, I
find no material error in relation to that ground.

Mr Rashid also made points in submission about the content of paragraph 34
of the decision and the judge's conclusions as to whether the appellant had
a relationship with his father in Poland, which was obviously relevant to
his ability to resettle there.  I find no merit in these grounds as they
are no more than a disagreement with the decision.  The judge set out at
paragraph 34 the evidence that had been given and the reasons why the
evidence was not accepted. That was entirely within the province of the
judge and discloses no error of law.

I accept that a different judge may have reached a different conclusion as
to whether on these facts there were in fact 'strong grounds' justifying
removal, but that is not the issue raised in the grounds or before the
Upper Tribunal.

In all the circumstances, I find that the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal disclosed no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law such as to require the decision to be
set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal remains
dismissed on all grounds.



                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 January 2020



To the Respondent
Fee Award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 January 2020


