
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00093/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 24 October 2016                            |On 23 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                         jamshid dasvar dolat-shahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Buley, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal has had a very lengthy history indeed.   The  appellant  in
    this case who is an Iranian national was born on 22 September 1949  and
    he entered this country in  August  1972  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    student.  He is a professional man who studied  mechanical  engineering
    and trained as a petrol chemical engineer.  The following year  he  met
    Mary Fahey and they began a relationship.  He returned to  Iran  for  a
    brief period of about two to three months in 1978  following  which  he
    returned to the UK.  He married Ms Fahey in August 1979.  Ms  Fahey  is
    an Irish national who has been working in the UK.  It will be necessary
    for the Tribunal  to  consider  in  a  little  more  detail  below  the
    circumstances in which she was in the UK and  precisely  what  she  did
    while she was here.

 2. In February 1981 the appellant was granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in his own right and in May of that year his daughter Leila was born in
    the UK.  Leila is a British national.  The appellant had a business but
    the details are not relevant for the purposes of this decision.

 3. In March 1990 the appellant and his wife's second child,  a  son  Sean,
    was born in the UK.  The following year the  appellant  separated  from
    his wife but they remained on good terms and the  appellant  had  close
    contact with both his  children.   It  is  not  disputed  that  at  all
    material times thereafter, although they were separated, both  of  them
    continued to reside in this country.  It is said in the chronology that
    was prepared on the appellant's behalf for these  proceedings  that  it
    was about this time that the appellant began to use drugs.

 4. In 1999 the appellant's mother died and he visited Iran briefly for her
    funeral but he returned shortly thereafter to this county.

 5. In January 2004 the appellant was  arrested  and  subsequently  charged
    with the possession of a  class  A  drug  with  intent  to  supply  and
    possession of criminal property, being �20,000.   This  was  presumably
    believed to be the proceeds of his drug  dealing.   He  was  bailed  in
    respect of this charge and applications were made to seize the cash.

 6. Then on 28 April 2005 he was arrested for possession of heroin.  He was
    interviewed and again, possibly somewhat surprisingly, he was bailed to
    return to the police on 15 July 2005.  Before then in May 2005  he  was
    convicted of possession of a class A drug with  intent  to  supply  and
    also possession of criminal property and again he was released on  bail
    pending sentence.  In  June  2005  he  was  sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment for each offence to run concurrently but then in September
    2005 he was charged with possession of a class A drug  with  intent  to
    supply in relation to his arrest in April 2005, when  he  had  been  on
    bail  for  the  earlier  very  serious  offences.   He  was  eventually
    convicted of this offence in August 2006 for which he was sentenced  to
    42 months' imprisonment to run consecutively to  the  earlier  sentence
    which means that in total he had been sentenced  to  around  8�  years'
    imprisonment.  What is obviously a particularly serious  feature  about
    this case is that not only are the  offences  themselves  very  serious
    offences but even after being bailed  having  being  charged  with  the
    first serious offence he continued to offend.

 7. In March 2008 the appellant and his wife formally divorced and then  on
    3 December 2009 the respondent issued a deportation order  pursuant  to
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 which the appellant  submitted
    was unlawful because it was in breach of his Article 8 rights.  If this
    is  right  then  by  Section  33  of  that  Act  automatic  deportation
    provisions should not have been applied.

 8. The appellant's appeal against deportation was dismissed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal sitting at Cardiff on 3 March  2010  and  at  that  stage
    permission to appeal was refused by both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the Upper Tribunal.  Then on 8 October 2010 the appellant  applied  for
    judicial review of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal.  By this time the appellant had completed his criminal sentence
    but he remained detained under Immigration Act powers  and  he  was  to
    remain in detention until February 2014.  The  appellant's  application
    was pre the decision of Cart  in  the  Supreme  Court  and  after  that
    decision had been handed down in July 2011 he  filed  amended  grounds.
    Subsequently, about fifteen months later, permission was refused on the
    papers and the application was renewed to an  oral  permission  hearing
    and eventually, on 24 January 2013, which is some four years after  the
    deportation order had been made and some three years or  so  after  the
    decision being challenged, the  appellant  was  granted  permission  to
    proceed with his judicial review  application  at  an  oral  permission
    hearing.  He still remained in immigration custody for a  further  year
    until being released from detention on 11  February  2014  to  his  ex-
    wife's address, the couple having rekindled  their  relationship  while
    the appellant was in prison and subsequently immigration custody.   The
    following month the Upper Tribunal granted the appellant permission  to
    appeal against the original decision at Cardiff which had been made now
    some four years earlier in light of the decision of the  Administrative
    Court to quash the earlier refusal of permission to bring his  judicial
    review proceedings.  In November 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  King  found
    that there  had  been  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and that that decision should be set aside and  re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal.  The hearing was then listed to  come  back
    before this Tribunal in June 2015 when it was unable to take place  and
    it was re-listed for 21 September 2015 before me when I heard  evidence
    and  very  lengthy  but  well-argued  submissions  on  behalf  of   the
    appellant.

 9. The basis of the case advanced to the Tribunal at that hearing was that
    notwithstanding that the appellant had been convicted of  what  on  any
    view were very serious offences, nonetheless there were very compelling
    reasons why he should not be deported, the primary reason being that he
    no longer had any real connection with Iran and his whole life was  now
    in this country.  I heard evidence from his former wife who is now  his
    current partner and also his children and it is fair to  say  that  had
    the offences of which he had been convicted which  were  now  very  old
    been less serious, in particular if the sentence  of  imprisonment  had
    been less than four years, I might have been able on that  occasion  to
    find that it  would  not  be  proportionate  to  deport  him  to  Iran.
    However, I formed the view from which I do not resile that  absent  the
    matters to which I will refer below, his deportation while  very  harsh
    in the sense that it would mean sending a man in  his  60s  back  to  a
    country with which he had very little connection now,  was  nonetheless
    proportionate.  The reason I would have so found is because there is an
    enormous public interest  in  deterring  others  from  committing  such
    serious crimes as this appellant had been convicted of and particularly
    of continuing to deal in heroin when on bail  for  precisely  the  same
    offence.  There is also the considerable revulsion felt rightly by  the
    public towards people who commit this kind of offence.  For this reason
    I would have considered that very compelling reasons indeed would  have
    been required to make such a decision disproportionate and while  there
    were strong factors in his  favour  they  were  not  sufficient  in  my
    judgment to allow the Tribunal to find other than that the decision  to
    deport him was proportionate.  It is fair to say that that decision was
    not an easy one to take but nonetheless I did not find it  in  the  end
    even very finely balanced.  On the evidence before  the  Tribunal  this
    was the right decision for the Tribunal to take.

10. At the hearing on 21 September  one  of  the  factors  which  had  been
    advanced on behalf of the appellant by Mr Buley who has represented him
    at all the hearings before me is that if he was  deported  to  Iran  he
    would effectively be destitute because he would be unable to obtain the
    pension which otherwise he would be in receipt of in this  country.   I
    expressed some doubt as to whether or not this was correct and  because
    this might have a  bearing  on  the  outcome,  Mr  Buley  undertook  to
    research this issue and inform the Tribunal by email as to  whether  or
    not this submission could in fact be maintained.  In the event Mr Buley
    did research this and subsequently sent an email  to  the  Tribunal  in
    which  he  accepted  that  the  reservations  which  I  had  originally
    expressed were well-founded and that in fact his pension would be  paid
    to him in Iran.  This was a matter which I took into consideration when
    finding that his deportation to Iran would be  proportionate.   However
    in this email Mr Buley also raised a further matter which not only  had
    not been argued before me but which in the many  years  in  which  this
    appeal has been before one court or  another,  has  never  been  raised
    before.  That is that by virtue of his marriage to his former wife  and
    as I have said current partner which was not dissolved  until  2008  he
    may have acquired a right of permanent residence in this country  under
    EU law such that he could only be removed on "serious grounds of public
    policy" in accordance with the  provisions  of  Regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  This is because  his  ex-wife  Mrs
    Dolat-Shahi is, as I have already indicated above,  an  Irish  national
    and was therefore at the relevant times an EU national and  if  and  to
    the extent that this appellant acquired a right of permanent  residence
    prior to the divorce, he could only be deported on serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security (see  Regulation  21(3)  of  the  2006
    Regulations).  Under Regulation 21(5) "where  a  relevant  decision  is
    taken on grounds of public policy  or  public  security  it  shall,  in
    addition to complying with the preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,
    be taken in accordance with the following principles -

      a) The decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

      b) The decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
         the person concerned;

      c) The personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

      d) Matters isolated from the particulars of the case which  relate  to
         considerations of general prevention do not justify  the  decision;
         [and]

      e) A person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision."

11. By Regulation 21(6), before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds
    of public policy or public security in relation  to  a  person  who  is
    resident in the United Kingdom, the decision-maker must take account of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of the person, the person's length of residence in the United
    Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration into  the  United
    Kingdom and the extent of  the  person's  links  with  his  country  of
    origin.

12. The relevance of these Regulations is that if indeed  they  apply  with
    regard to this appellant then the main reasons why this Tribunal  would
    otherwise have considered that deportation was  proportionate  arguably
    fall away because the Tribunal is not then permitted, save possibly  in
    exceptional circumstances which in my judgment do  not  apply  in  this
    case, to have regard to questions of deterrence and revulsion.  That is
    quite clear from what is provided within Regulation 21(5)(c).

13. Were the dates somewhat different the appellant would not even have  to
    establish that he had acquired a right of permanent  residence  because
    Regulation 21 applies to all decisions which are made  under  the  2006
    Regulations.  However in order for these Regulations to  apply  if  the
    appellant had not acquired a right of permanent residence he would have
    had to show that at the time of  the  deportation  decision  he  was  a
    member of the EU national's family.  I will below set out  the  precise
    basis upon which that right is acquired by reference to  the  Directive
    of the European Union to which the 2006 Regulations  give  effect.   In
    this case for reasons which will  appear  below  save  insofar  as  the
    appellant might have a right of permanent residence in this country the
    EU  Regulations  would  not  apply  because  as  at  the  date  of  the
    deportation decision which was made in December 2009 he was no longer a
    family member of an EU national, having been divorced  some  21  months
    earlier.  Accordingly, in order to acquire any rights  under  the  2006
    Regulations he would have had to  have  acquired  permanent  rights  of
    residence before then.

14. These submissions were as I have indicated made very late  in  the  day
    indeed and no doubt must have embarrassed Mr Buley when he made them as
    he had by then been representing this appellant for  some  considerable
    period of time.  However, as I would have expected,  his  embarrassment
    was not  a  factor  that  entered  into  his  consideration  but  fully
    accepting that the fault was his own,  he  nonetheless  argued  in  the
    email that his client should not be prejudiced by any mistake which  he
    might have made.  As I said at paragraph 7  of  a  note  which  I  made
    following the hearing of 21 September 2015 after  having  received  the
    email -

         "Although this is an unusual application, and the  argument  should
         have been advanced earlier, I accept that any fault in not  raising
         this argument earlier cannot be said to be that  of  the  appellant
         personally, and to the extent the fault is Mr Buley's,  as  he  now
         concedes it was, he has acted with the utmost integrity in  raising
         the issue now in the way that he has".

15. Because this issue was so important to this case  even  though  it  was
    raised very late indeed I considered that it was  right  to  allow  the
    application to be amended in order that this  argument  be  before  the
    Tribunal.  I subsequently, following a case management conference on 10
    June 2016, gave the appellant permission to amend his  grounds  and  to
    adduce such further evidence as he was advised to do (and in particular
    directed to establishing that  his  former  wife  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights in this country) and that evidence  and  amended  grounds
    were filed and served in accordance with the order  which  I  made.   I
    also in those directions at paragraph 6 stated as follows:

         "6.  For the avoidance of doubt, the issues to  be  determined  now
             are:

             (1)  whether the appellant had acquired a permanent  right  of
                  residence such that Regulation 21 of the Immigration (EEA)
                  Regulations 2006 apply; and

             (2)  whether, if the EEA Regulations do apply, the appellant's
                  deportation can still be justified on serious  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security."

16. At the  case  management  conference  the  appellant  as  he  had  been
    throughout the proceedings before me was represented by  Mr  Buley  and
    the respondent was represented by  Mr  Wilding  who  has  continued  to
    represent the respondent today.

17. Accordingly the issue today has been restricted to consideration  first
    of  whether  or  not  Mrs  Dolat-Shahi  did  herself  come  within  the
    definition of a worker such that she became entitled to the  rights  of
    permanent residence but more importantly whether or  not  her  husband,
    the appellant himself acquired a right of permanent  residence  through
    her.



The 2004 Directive

18. The 2006 Regulations were brought into force in order to give effect to
    Directive 2004/38 entitled "General Rule for Union Citizens  and  their
    Family Members",  Article 16 of which provides as follows:

         "1.  Union citizens who  have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in the host Member State shall  have  the
             right of permanent residence there.  This right shall  not  be
             subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter 111.

          2. Paragraph (1) shall apply also to family members who  are  not
             nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with  the
             union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period
             of five years.

          3. Continuity of residence shall not  be  affected  by  temporary
             absence if not exceeding a total of six months a year,  or  by
             absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service,
             or by one absence of a maximum of  twelve  consecutive  months
             for  important  reasons  such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,
             serious illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in
             another Member State or a third country.

          4. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be  lost
             only through absence from the host Member State for  a  period
             exceeding two consecutive years."

19. It is the appellant's case that Mrs Dolat-Shahi had been  working  more
    or less consistently since the 1970s, certainly up to and including the
    1990s and probably for some period of time  after  2000.   It  is  only
    necessary for the purposes of considering whether Article 16 will apply
    to this appellant that there is within this period a continuous  period
    of five years.  It is accepted  on  behalf  of  both  parties  (and  in
    particular it is not suggested on behalf of the respondent this is  not
    the case) that jurisprudence has consistently made it clear  such  that
    there is no need to set out specific authorities for  this  proposition
    that reference within Article 7.2 to family  members  legally  residing
    "with" the union citizen in the host Member State, only  requires  both
    parties to have been present in the host Member State for the period in
    question.  It is not suggested on behalf of the respondent  that  there
    is a requirement for the couple to have continued residing in the  same
    household because there are numerous examples where courts  have  found
    that the wording of the Directive does not require  this.   Accordingly
    the first issue which the appellant has to establish is that Mrs Dolat-
    Shahi had been exercising treaty  rights  within  the  UK  during  this
    period.  In his very eloquent written submissions the first point taken
    on behalf of the respondent by Mr Wilding is that the appellant had not
    set out within the representations made on his behalf  the  basis  upon
    which he claimed that the appellant had in this case been  residing  in
    this country in accordance with the Regulations.  I shall refer to this
    aspect of this case below.

20. It is right to say that as at the time when the appellant  is  said  to
    have been residing continuously for five  years  as  a  member  of  his
    wife's family he could not then have acquired the  right  of  permanent
    residence.  This was acquired, he says, on 30 April 2006 when the  2006
    Regulations which had been drafted in order to  comply  with  the  2004
    Directive took effect.  The submission advanced on  his  behalf  by  Mr
    Buley is that on that date all  that  had  to  be  shown  was  that  in
    accordance with Article 7.2 the appellant had "legally resided with the
    union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period of  five
    years".  Mr Buley then submits that because as at that  date,  although
    at that time he was in  prison  and  had  been  since  June  2005,  the
    appellant was then (and it is not suggested on behalf of the respondent
    that he was not)  technically  still  a  member  of  Mrs  Dolat-Shahi's
    family, he was entitled to be deemed on that date to have acquired  the
    right of permanent residence which he had earned because of his  period
    of five years or more in which he had continuously been a member of the
    family of an EU resident exercising treaty rights in this country.

21. On behalf of the respondent Mr Wilding submits that the appellant could
    never have acquired this right on that date because at that time he was
    in custody and he relies in particular on the very recent  decision  of
    the Supreme Court which was handed down on 27 July this year in SSHD  v
    Vomero (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49, which was the appeal from the 2012 Court
    of Appeal decision which at that time had been referred to as FV.   The
    Supreme Court did not allow Mr Vomero the anonymity which the Court  of
    Appeal had.  The argument with regard  to  these  submissions  will  be
    considered below.

22. The third area  which  might  have  caused  some  potential  difficulty
    concerned whether or not the appellant could be said to have  lost  any
    rights he may have had by reason of his permanent residence  by  reason
    of having spent in the  event  something  approaching  eight  years  in
    custody being a combination of serving his criminal sentence  and  then
    followed by a further period of immigration custody.  In the event, for
    reasons which will be set out below, this is not a  matter  with  which
    this Tribunal will now need to be concerned at this stage.   It  should
    be noted that in his  original  written  submissions  Mr  Wilding  also
    argued that even if the appellant was held to have acquired  the  right
    of permanent residence  nonetheless  his  deportation  could  still  be
    justified under Regulation 21 and he relied on a very  lengthy  extract
    from the Court of Appeal decision in SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ
    1245.  It is fair to say however that Mr Wilding did  not  pursue  this
    particular argument with any great force at the hearing before  me  and
    for reasons which I will give below I do not consider that on the facts
    of this case this argument could succeed.

23. Before dealing with the evidence it is right to record that during  the
    hearing Mr Buley put before  the  Tribunal  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Order 1994, which was  one  of  the  relevant  statutory
    instruments  (subsequently  enacted  for  the   most   part   in   2000
    Regulations) and then again superseded by the  2006  Regulations.   The
    relevant parts are paragraph 2 dealing with interpretation, paragraph 4
    dealing with the right  of  residence  and  paragraph  6  dealing  with
    qualified person.  I shall set out the relevant parts of this order  as
    follows:

         "2-(1)   In this order - ...

              'Family member' in relation to an EEA national means -

              (a) that national's spouse...

         Right of Residence...

         4-(1)    A qualified person shall be  entitled  to  reside  in  the
              United Kingdom, without the requirement for leave  to  remain
              under the 1971 Act, for as long as  he  remains  a  qualified
              person.

           (2)    A family member of a qualified person shall be entitled to
              reside in the United Kingdom, without the requirement of such
              leave, for as long  as  he  remains  a  family  member  of  a
              qualified person...

         Qualified Person

         6-(1)    In this order 'qualified person' means an EEA national who
              undertakes in the United Kingdom the activities of -

              (a) a worker;

              (b) a self-employed person...".

24. For all relevant purposes although as Mr Buley puts it this order  does
    not contain the "bells and whistles" of the 2006 Regulations, they  are
    sufficiently identical to establish that there is no  difference  which
    is  material  for  these  proceedings.   Having  considered  the   1994
    Regulations, Mr Wilding did not seek to maintain the contrary.



The Evidence

25. On behalf of the appellant I then heard evidence from Mrs  Dolat-Shahi,
    the appellant's former wife  and  current  partner,  through  whom  any
    rights that he may have acquired are derived.  What was essential  from
    his point of view for his case even to get off the ground was that  she
    demonstrate on the balance of probabilities through her  evidence  that
    effectively she had been a "worker" during  the  period  when  she  had
    undoubtedly been present in  the  United  Kingdom.   Unless  she  could
    demonstrate that during a period when the appellant was  still  married
    to her and they were both in  this  country  she  had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights, then his case could not possibly succeed.

26. It is right to record at the outset when considering Mrs  Dolat-Shahi's
    evidence that I was and remain  entirely  satisfied  that  she  was  an
    entirely truthful witness.  I do not intend to set out her evidence  in
    full.  I do not believe that Mr Wilding on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    sought to impugn Mrs Dolat-Shahi's integrity in any way and so I  shall
    only  refer  below  to  such  of  her  evidence  as  is  necessary  for
    considering whether or not  she  was  exercising  Treaty  rights.   The
    reason  why  I  am  so  satisfied  and  well  beyond  the  balance   of
    probabilities that she was attempting to tell  the  truth  was  because
    there were instances where had she expressed more certainty about dates
    and so on which could not really have been challenged on behalf of  the
    respondent, this would have assisted the appellant's case, but the fact
    that she deliberately chose not to say she was  certain  about  matters
    where she was not demonstrated that notwithstanding her wish to  assist
    her former husband's  case  she  was  not  prepared  to  embroider  her
    evidence in order to do so.  However, I have been assisted also by  her
    national insurance record which she  was  able  to  explain  and  which
    showed that throughout the 1990s certainly and for other periods  also,
    although she did not pay national insurance, nonetheless  she  was  not
    required to make good any  shortfall  for  pension  purposes  which  is
    evidence that she was earning over  the  minimum  that  she  needed  to
    become entitled  to  pension  rights  in  due  course  without  earning
    sufficient to cause her to have a liability to make national  insurance
    payments.  This aspect of  her  evidence  was  not  challenged  by  the
    respondent.  It is fair to  say,  having  heard  her  evidence  in  his
    closing submissions Mr Wilding accepted that this was almost a paradigm
    case of the  balance  of  probabilities  and  that  this  Tribunal  was
    entitled to find, on the balance of probabilites, that Mrs  Dolat-Shahi
    could be properly defined as someone who  was  at  the  relevant  times
    exercising Treaty  rights.   Having  considered  all  of  the  evidence
    carefully, including Mrs Dolat-Shahi's own recollection of the jobs she
    had had and the periods when she had been working,  I am satisfied that
    she has established on the balance of  probabilities  that  she  was  a
    "worker" and thus exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country  for  a
    continuous period of considerably more than 5 years while the appellant
    remained married to her.



Discussion

27. The remaining areas of issue in this case  are  first  whether  or  not
    because the appellant was in prison when the new Regulations came  into
    effect  he  could  properly  have  acquired  any  rights  of  permanent
    residence and secondly even if he had whether these subsequently  would
    have been lost by the period he had spent in custody after such  rights
    had been acquired.

28. With regard to the first issue which is whether or  not  the  appellant
    actually "acquired" a right of residence Mr Wilding on  behalf  of  the
    respondent put his submissions as follows.  As a matter of law  neither
    Mrs Dolat-Shahi nor the  appellant  could  have  acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence until 30 April 2006 because that is when  the  2006
    Regulations took effect and before then there was no provision (and the
    Directive did not require there to be a provision)  whereby  either  an
    EEA national who had been exercising Treaty rights or a member  of  his
    family could have acquired a right of permanent residence.  As a matter
    of law neither Mrs Dolat-Shahi nor her husband could have acquired  any
    right of permanent residence prior to 30 April 2006 which was when  the
    2006 Regulations came into effect and the  Directive  did  not  require
    this country to enact these Regulations before then.  Accordingly, what
    matters is what the appellant's status was on 30  April  2006.   It  is
    clear says Mr Wilding that the time spent in  custody  does  not  count
    towards any qualifying period and there  can  be  no  question  of  any
    rights being  acquired  after  the  appellant's  release  from  custody
    because by that time he was divorced so unless he  acquired  rights  of
    permanent residence in April 2006 he has never  acquired  such  rights.
    It is the respondent's case that he could not  have  so  acquired  such
    rights and the respondent relies  on  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in
    Vomero to this effect.  In particular Mr Wilding relies  on  paragraphs
    8, 9 and 12 of this decision which are as follows.

          "8.                   In this connection,  it  is,  now  at least,
         clear that no right of permanent residence could in law be acquired
         before 30 April 2006: see article 40 of the Directive, Secretary of
         State for Work and Pensions v Lassal (Case C-162/09) [2011] 1  CMLR
         31, para 38 and Secretary of State for Work  and  Pensions  v  Dias
         (Case C-325/09) [2011] 3 CMLR 40, paras 40 and 57. To acquire  such
         a right, the respondent therefore required, as at 30 April 2006  or
         at some later date, to  "have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
         period of five  years"  in  the  UK.  As  at  30  April  2006,  the
         respondent had been in prison for over five years, and he  remained
         so for a further two months. By the time of the decision to deport,
         he had been out of prison for less than nine months.

         9.                   Second, in Onuekwere the Court of Justice held
         on 16 January 2014 that under the terms of  article  16(2)  of  the
         Directive  "periods  of   imprisonment   cannot   be   taken   into
         consideration for the purposes of the acquisition  of  a  right  of
         permanent residence for the purposes of that provision"  (para  22)
         and further that articles 16(2) and (3)  "must  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that continuity of residence is interrupted by  periods  of
         imprisonment in the host member state" (para  32).  The  same  must
         necessarily apply in respect  of  a  Union  citizen  under  article
         16(1). ....

         12.              It follows from paras 8 and 9 above  that,  as the
         Secretary of State rightly submits, the respondent had not acquired
         any right of permanent residence before the date of the decision to
         deport him. The respondent's case on this basis has to be that this
         is irrelevant, and that a Union citizen with no right of  permanent
         residence may nevertheless acquire a right to  enhanced  protection
         under article 28(3)(a)."

29. The facts in  that  case  can  be  set  out  relatively  briefly.   The
    applicant in that case had undoubtedly been  exercising  Treaty  rights
    (or would have been regarded as having exercised  Treaty  rights  under
    the 2006 Regulations) prior to being sentenced to imprisonment in 2001.
     He remained in prison until after 30 April 2006 and at the time of the
    deportation decision had only been at large after his imprisonment  for
    some nine months.  As the Supreme Court records, as at 30 April 2006 he
    had been in prison for over five years.  Reliance is placed on  the  EU
    decision in Onuekwere in which the  court  had  held  that  periods  of
    imprisonment could not be taken into consideration for the purposes  of
    the acquisition of the right of permanent residence "for  the  purposes
    of that provision" and then because at paragraph 12 the  Supreme  Court
    had found that "it follows from paragraphs 8  and  9  above"  that  the
    respondent had not acquired any right of permanent residence before the
    date of decision to deport him, it is said that in this case  again  no
    right of permanent residence could have been acquired.

30. In response to this submission Mr Buley refers  this  Tribunal  to  the
    decisions of the European Court in  Lassal  (European  citizen)  [2010]
    EUECJ C-162/09 and Dias (European citizenship)  [2011]  EUECJ  C-325/09
    which were the decisions which were being  considered  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Vomero.  In Lassal the facts were that the applicant  in  that
    case who was a French national had been a "worker" for the purposes  of
    EU law from January 1999 to February  2005  but  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom to visit her mother in France, where she  had  stayed  for  ten
    months.  She  had  returned  in  December  2005  and  sought  work  and
    therefore came into the category of worker and was in this category  in
    April  2006.   The  relevant  part  of  this  decision  in  Mr  Buley's
    submission is at paragraph 57 where it is found as follows:

         "57. It follows that Article 16(4) of Directive 2004/38 is to apply
             to continuous periods of five years' legal residence completed
             before  30  April  2006  and  in   application   implies,   in
             particular, that absences from the host Member State  of  less
             than two consecutive years occurring after the 5-year  periods
             of continuous residence but before 30 April 2006 are not  such
             as to affect the link of integration of  the  citizen  of  the
             union concerned."

31. The appellant also relies on the following paragraph, as follows:

         "58. Accordingly, absences from the host Member State of less  than
             two consecutive years which occur before  30  April  2006  but
             following a continuous period of five years'  legal  residence
             completed before that date do not affect  the  acquisition  of
             the right of permanent residence pursuant to Article 16(1)  of
             Directive 2004/38."

32. There is no reason why whatever applies with regard to Article 16(1) in
    this regard should not also apply to the  position  of  family  members
    under Article 16(2).  The position in Dias was similar  save  that  the
    facts in that case did not concern somebody who had  been  absent  from
    the UK but somebody who had not been working for a  particular  period.
    The applicant in that case was  a  Portuguese  national  who  had  been
    either working or on maternity leave from January 1998  to  April  2003
    and it was accepted by the court  that  these  periods  amounted  to  a
    continuous period of over five years such that she would be treated  as
    having acquired a right of  permanent  residence  subject  to  the  one
    matter which had to be considered which was that for a period  of  just
    over a year between April 2003 and April 2004 she had not been working.
     The issue before the court was whether or not the gap of a year  after
    2003 was  such  that  she  would  have  lost  her  right  of  permanent
    residence.  The court in this case was clear that she did not lose that
    right.  While it was the view of the  Tribunal  that  for  someone  who
    might under the 2006 Regulations now be said to have acquired  a  right
    of permanent residence even if they cease working altogether would have
    lost that right before 2006 if they had ceased work  for  a  period  of
    over two years, nonetheless this right would only be lost if the period
    in which the person had been absent was over two years.   At  paragraph
    66 of Dias the court found as follows:

         "66. It follows that periods of less than  two  consecutive  years,
             completed on the basis solely of a  residence  permit  validly
             issued pursuant to Directive 68/360,  without  the  conditions
             governing entitlement to any right of  residence  having  been
             satisfied, which occurred before 30 April  2006  and  after  a
             continuous period of five  years'  legal  residence  completed
             prior to that date, are not such as to affect the  acquisition
             of the right of permanent residence  under  Article  16(1)  of
             Directive 2004/38."

33. It is Mr Buley's submission that the Supreme Court's decision in Vomero
    can only be understood when one appreciates that  what  the  court  was
    dealing with in this case was what was intended by the  European  Court
    in the decisions in  Lassal  and  Dias.   Mr  Buley  submits  that  the
    important paragraphs in this decision are paragraphs 10  and  11  which
    provide as follows:

           "10.                Under  article  16(4)  a  right  of permanent
         residence acquired in the past may be lost  "through  absence  from
         the host member  state  for  a  period  exceeding  two  consecutive
         years". The thinking behind article 16(4), as explained  in  Lassal
         (Case C-162/09) paras 53-58, is that  a  two-year  absence  affects
         "the link of integration" with the host member state of  the  Union
         citizen concerned.  In  Dias  (Case  C-235/09)  this  thinking  was
         developed in a more complex situation. A Union citizen had  resided
         legally in the UK for a five-year period from January 1998 until 17
         April 2003 (not yet therefore  acquiring  any  permanent  right  of
         residence since this five-year  period  ended  prior  to  30  April
         2006). She had remained thereafter in the  UK  for  a  period  from
         April 2003 to April 2004 during which she did not work  or  satisfy
         any other condition  entitling  her  to  reside  in  the  UK  under
         European Union law.  From  April  2004  to  March  2007  (when  she
         asserted that she had a permanent right  of  residence)  she  again
         worked. The Court of Justice  held  that  the  rule  laid  down  in
         article 16(4) regarding absences must  be  applied  by  analogy  in
         relation to the period when she had not been  working.  Since  this
         was for less than two years, it did not affect her acquisition of a
         permanent right of residence as from 30  April  2006.  The  Supreme
         Court considers it clear (and understood Mr Raza Husain QC for  the
         respondent  to  accept)  that  the  Court  of  Justice   was   here
         identifying a bright line rule relating to  the  acquisition  of  a
         permanent right of residence.

         11.              Even a period  out  of  work  exceeding  two years
         cannot affect a right of permanent residence acquired from or after
         30 April 2006. The point of a permanent right of residence is  that
         it is no longer necessary to work or to fulfil  any  of  the  other
         residence  qualifications  applicable  under  article  7  to  Union
         citizens who have not acquired a permanent right of  residence.  By
         analogy with absence, it might, however, seem logical if  a  period
         exceeding two years spent in prison were to lead to the loss of any
         right of permanent residence acquired on or after  30  April  2006.
         The parties were  not  however  agreed  on  this,  and  it  is  not
         necessary to consider it further on this appeal."

34. Where in my judgment Mr Wilding's submission falls  down  is  where  he
    says that because one leaves out of account any period spent in custody
    for the purpose of "acquiring" permanent residence it follows that if a
    person is in custody as at 30 April 2006 he cannot as a matter  of  law
    acquire permanent residence.  In my  judgment  this  is  not  what  the
    Directive says.  It is important to have regard to  the  precise  words
    used within Article 7.1 and 2 of the 2004 Directive which provides that
    someone who has resided legally for a continuous period of  five  years
    in the host Member State shall have the right  of  permanent  residence
    there (7.1) and that paragraph 1 shall apply also to  "family  members"
    not nationals of an EU state who "have legally resided with  the  union
    citizen in the host Member  State  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years".  What is absent from this definition is a requirement that  the
    period at 30 April 2006 has to be part of any  such  period.   In  this
    case it is accepted on behalf of the respondent that  as  at  30  April
    2006 this appellant was a family member of Mrs  Dolat-Shahi  and  as  I
    have found that the appellant had legally resided with Mrs  Dolat-Shahi
    in the host Member State for a continuous period of five  years,  on  a
    normal and obvious construction of these words he must fall within  the
    definition provided within the Regulations.

35. Article 16 of the  2004  Directive  is  mirrored  to  all  intents  and
    purposes in Regulation  15  of  the  2006  Regulations  whereby  it  is
    provided as follows:

         "Permanent right of residence

         15-(1)   The following persons shall aquire the right to reside  in
              the United Kingdom permanently -

              (a) An EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period
                  of five years;

              (b) A family member of an EEA national who is not himself  an
                  EEA national but who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom
                  with  the  EEA  national   in   accordance   with   these
                  Regulations for a continuous period of five years....".

36. In other words, this has the same effect as Article 16.1 and 2  of  the
    2004 Directive.  Accordingly what the appellant has to show in order to
    establish that he has acquired  the  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom permanently is that on 30 April 2006 he was a family member  of
    an EEA national (which it has been accepted on behalf of the respondent
    he was), who had (because the wording is "who has resided") in the past
    lived with (that is lived in the same country as) that EEA national who
    had been exercising treaty rights in accordance  with  the  Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years.

37. I accept Mr Buley's submission that what is said by the  Supreme  Court
    at paragraphs 8 and 9 of Vomero cannot properly be divorced  from  what
    is said at paragraphs 10 and 11, because the court  was  there  setting
    out what had been decided by the European Court  in  Lassal  and  Dias,
    which was (see paragraph 10 of Vomero) that "the Court of  Justice  was
    here identifying a bright line rule relating to the  acquisition  of  a
    permanent right of residence".  The Supreme Court had said little about
    this because (in Mr Buley's words) "since [the period when this had not
    been exercised in Dias] was for less than two years, it did not  affect
    her acquisition of a permanent right of  residence  as  from  30  April
    2006".  That seems very clear.  The relevance of the gap if  more  than
    two years is that this would prevent the  acquisition  of  a  permanent
    right of residence as from 30 April 2006.  Absent a gap of two years or
    more prior to that  date  the  acquisition  of  a  permanent  right  of
    residence would not be prevented.

38. The relevance of Vomero is that in that case by 2006 the applicant  had
    been in custody for five years and so in light of the guidance given by
    the European Court in Lassal and Dias his right of residence  had  been
    lost.  That is not authority in my judgment for the proposition that he
    did not acquire a right of residence because he was in  custody  as  at
    that date.  It follows that so long as I am satisfied that  Mrs  Dolat-
    Shahi had been exercising treaty rights to the extent that  she  was  a
    worker for five years or more, under Article 16.2 of the  Directive  as
    enacted in Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations, this  appellant
    would have acquired the right of permanent residence in the  UK  as  at
    that date.  As I have already indicated I am satisfied that Mrs  Dolat-
    Shahi had been exercising treaty rights at that time.  I have  in  mind
    the definition of treaty rights which includes part-time  work,  allows
    periods of up to six months in any year  where  the  person  exercising
    treaty rights is not working and also allows for a period of  up  to  a
    year when that person is absent for medical reasons;  on  the  evidence
    which I have heard in  this  case,  although  I  cannot  be  absolutely
    certain, nonetheless, as I  have  already  indicated  at  paragraph  26
    above, I am entirely satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities  (and
    having heard the evidence Mr Wilding did not seek to dissuade  me  from
    this view)  that  she  was  exercising  treaty  rights  such  that  the
    appellant (subject to the submission made by Mr Wilding  which  I  have
    rejected for the reasons  I  have  given)  did  acquire  the  right  of
    permanent residence.

39. I deal now very briefly with the other challenge made on behalf of  the
    respondent initially which is that that right could be lost  by  reason
    of the long period spent in custody  prior  to  the  deportation  order
    being made which it was said initially  was  sufficient  to  break  the
    integration  that  otherwise  it  could  be  said  this  appellant  had
    attained.  I bear in mind that in this regard even if that argument was
    open to the respondent Mr Buley would have wished  to  submit  that  in
    light of the 35 years or so in which the appellant  in  this  case  had
    been building up his links to this country, even that length of time in
    custody would not have broken these links, but for  the  reasons  which
    follow I do not have to consider this argument.   While  Mr  Buley  was
    advancing his argument that this was  not  a  tenable  proposition  for
    reasons which he was about to present to the Tribunal, Mr Wilding  very
    properly referred the Tribunal to a decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    which he had just unearthed and which the  Tribunal  then  had  printed
    namely AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1249 in which this  argument
    was specifically considered but rejected.  I am  very  grateful  to  Mr
    Wilding for advancing so promptly  before  the  Tribunal  an  authority
    which undermined the proposition he had otherwise sought to make  which
    was of course the perfectly proper course which he  as  an  experienced
    advocate of great integrity was obliged to follow.   Having  regard  in
    particular to what is said from paragraph 25 onwards of  that  judgment
    it is accepted on behalf of the respondent that  this  argument  cannot
    now be advanced.

40. I should at this stage refer  to  the  observation  that  was  made  at
    paragraph 11 of its judgment in Vomero by the Supreme Court  which  was
    to the effect that this point might be said still to be an open  point;
    the Supreme Court stated in terms that the parties were not  agreed  as
    to whether or not a period exceeding two years spent  in  prison  might
    lead to the loss of a right of permanent residence acquired on or after
    30 April 2006 but said that "it is not necessary to consider it further
    on this appeal".  As Mr Buley rightly observed, while this might be  an
    open question so far as the Supreme Court is concerned  such  that  the
    Supreme Court might wish to revisit it at some time in the  future,  so
    far as this Tribunal is concerned it remains bound by decisions of  the
    Court of Appeal of  which  AA  (Nigeria)  is  a  relevant  and  binding
    authority.

41. There is one further argument which  was  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to which I alluded earlier which  was  that  notwithstanding
    Regulation 21 it is at least arguable that this case  falls  within  an
    exception to the general rule that a  court  may  not  have  regard  to
    factors  such  as  the  need  to  deter  criminals.   In  his   written
    submissions Mr Wilding sought to rely on the Court of  Appeal  decision
    in Straszewski of which a large part  of  the  judgment  was  contained
    within the submissions.  Having set out how serious the offences  were,
    and in particular (as I  have  already  noted)  that  the  second  very
    serious offence was committed whilst the appellant was on bail for  the
    first,  Mr  Wilding  submitted  (at  paragraph  18   of   the   written
    submissions) that "there are certain types of case in which the offence
    itself is that serious that the genuine and present threshold is  met".
    I take this  as  meaning  that  it  is  important  for  society  in  an
    exceptional case to have regard to the possibility that lawlessness  in
    general might be increased by the failure to deport  an  applicant  and
    that this in itself would justify the deportation  of  this  appellant.
    In my judgment on the facts  of  this  case,  even  if  this  might  be
    arguable in a really extreme case, this argument  cannot  succeed  with
    regard to this appellant.

42. As I have already indicated I  have  already  reached  the  conclusion,
    having considered much oral and written evidence on 21  September  last
    year and in particular the OASys Report that at  worst  this  appellant
    represents only a very small risk of future offending.  In my  judgment
    he does not  come  within  the  definition  set  out  within  paragraph
    21(5)(c) which is that deportation can only be justified with regard to
    a person who is entitled to the benefit of the 2006  Regulations  where
    his  personal  conduct  "must  represent   a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society".  I do not consider on the facts of  this  case  that  this
    appellant represents a sufficiently serious threat at present that  his
    deportation can be justified under the 2006 Regulations.

43. Further and in any event if one leaves out  as  this  Tribunal  now  is
    obliged to do the deterrent effect of deporting this appellant and  the
    need to assuage the revulsion felt by society as a whole  for  offences
    of this kind, I do not consider that it can any longer be said that the
    removal of this appellant who has now been in this country  for  nearly
    44 years would be proportionate.

44. It follows that although had I not had to take account  of  the  rights
    conferred on this appellant by the 2006 EEA Regulations  I  would  have
    considered that  his  deportation  was  proportionate  and  would  have
    dismissed his appeal, as I have  found  that  he  is  entitled  to  the
    benefit of these Regulations his appeal must be allowed and I so find.







Decision

The appellant's appeal is allowed under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
2006.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                Dated: 20 December 2016
