
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00117/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Nizar Alamin Muhamad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant as they appeared respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, Nizar Alamin Muhamad, was born on 1 January 1974 and  is
    a male citizen of Sudan.  It appears that he entered the United Kingdom
    in or around September 2003.  The appellant made  a  series  of  asylum
    applications which were refused  as  were  subsequent  appeals  to  the
    Tribunal.  In April 2008, the appellant made a fresh asylum claim.   In
    December of the following year,  he  made  further  representations  as
    regards Article 8 ECHR and in January 2012 he sought leave to remain on
    the ground of  marriage  to  a  British  citizen.   As  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Chambers/Doctor Okitikpi) noted at [6]:
         "All of this was considered by the respondent.  On 9  January  2014
         the respondent again made the decision  to  refuse  asylum  and  to
         deport the  appellant.   [The  appellant  had  been  convicted  and
         sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment having been  convicted  of
         attempting to leave the United Kingdom on a false  passport].   The
         appellant once again appealed  against  that  decision.   Thus  the
         matter comes before us.  On the day of the  hearing  the  appellant
         had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  well  over  a  decade.   The
         appellant seems always through the use of legal  representation  to
         have had some sort of further application in  with  the  respondent
         [sic] the result of which he was  awaiting  or,  if  not  awaiting,
         appealing.  In that way more than ten years has gone by."

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  His asylum appeal was dismissed  and  his  application
    for permission to appeal against that decision  ultimately  refused  in
    the Upper Tribunal (Judge Macleman) on  31  July  2014.   However,  the
    First-tier Tribunal did allow the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.
    The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  against  that  decision,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. In her grounds of appeal, the Secretary of State records that the First-
    tier Tribunal found that the appellant's wife (a British  citizen)  may
    be at risk in Sudan of discrimination [42].  She had  recently  visited
    the country in order  to  see  her  mother  and  had  done  so  without
    suffering "adversity."  The Tribunal found that  the  appellant's  wife
    would lose her career in the United Kingdom if she were  to  return  to
    the Sudan but, the Secretary of State submits, had not  considered  the
    possibility of employing her skills as an interpreter in that  country.
    The Secretary of  State  also  argues  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed
    properly to assess the public interest concerned with  the  appellant's
    removal.  The Tribunal had also failed to consider the  possibility  of
    the appellant seeking revocation of the deportation order following his
    removal (Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048) and to factor that possibility  into
    its analysis.  The appellant could apply,  in  due  course,  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse of a British citizen.

 5. The Tribunal had no doubt as to the  genuineness  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his British wife.  The Tribunal recorded that
    the appellant and his wife had been trying to have a  family  [44]  but
    that the wife had suffered a nervous breakdown following the  death  of
    twins born to the couple in June 2013.  The wife had been born in Sudan
    but had "bad memories of living  there."   [42].   The  Tribunal  noted
    that, in order to preserve her relationship  with  the  appellant,  the
    appellant's wife would  have  to  travel  to  Sudan  with  him.  Having
    considered the evidence, the Tribunal  found  that  such  a  course  of
    action would have "unjustifiably harsh" consequences for the  appellant
    and sponsor.  The Tribunal observed  [46]  that  "the  appellant  after
    deportation could not apply to come back for settlement" and appears to
    have failed to consider the possibility of the appellant applying,  out
    of country, for revocation of the deportation order.  Having said that,
    the Tribunal was right to find that in the short  and  medium  term  at
    least, there would be no possibility of the appellant returning to  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. It is also the case that the Tribunal at [47] found that the  interests
    of the appellant and his wife "in light of her life history here and in
    Sudan" outweighs the public interest  but  they  reached  that  finding
    without specifying in any detail what  the  public  interest  concerned
    with the removal of the appellant may be in this instance.  I note  the
    grounds of appeal also make no attempt to define the  public  interest.
    Given that the Tribunal was considering a  deportation  appeal,  it  is
    reasonable to assume that it considered the public interest, in general
    terms, to be both  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control  and  the
    prevention of crime and disorder.

 7. It is also the  case  that,  at  [43],  the  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    appellant's wife had developed a successful career  as  an  interpreter
    and she would "lose [that career]  if  obliged  to  return  to  Sudan."
    However, there is no reason why the appellant's wife could not transfer
    her professional skills, acquired in the  United  Kingdom,  to  similar
    work in Sudan although it is also  true  to  say  that  the  particular
    career that she has developed in this country  would  be  lost  if  she
    returned with her husband.  I consider that this is an appeal which was
    finely balanced before the First-tier Tribunal.  The matters raised  in
    the grounds of appeal by the respondent  and  which  I  have  discussed
    above are legitimate but so are the reasons given by the  Tribunal  for
    deciding that the appeal should be allowed on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.
    In my opinion, none of the points raised by the respondent on appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal are of such consequence that the  reasoning  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is so seriously undermined that its decision should
    be set aside.  The First-tier Tribunal was required to consider all the
    relevant evidence to reach a judgment as regards proportionality in the
    Article  8  ECHR  appeal.    Its   conclusion,   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate for the appellant and his  British  born  wife  to  be
    separated possibly for many years if not permanently by deportation  or
    for the British wife to  be  required  to  leave  the  country  of  her
    nationality to return to a country from which she had fled in order  to
    live permanently there, was hardly perverse.  The  Tribunal  has  given
    clear and cogent reasons for finding the appellant's deportation to  be
    disproportionate and,  whilst  another  Tribunal  may  have  reached  a
    different result on the same facts, I can identify no reason to justify
    the Upper Tribunal  interfering  with  that  outcome  reached  by  this
    Tribunal.  The points raised by the Secretary  of  State  are  arguable
    but, ultimately and if we accept that the  outcome  was  not  perverse,
    they amount to little more than a series of disagreements with findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State's  appeal  is,
    therefore, dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
