
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01372/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JULIAN PALMER-RHODES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Dickinson of Fursdon Knapper Solicitors


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this appeal, the Secretary of State appeals against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Britton) allowing the appeal  of  Julian
    Palmer-Rhodes (hereafter "the claimant") against a decision to  make  a
    deportation order under s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  on  the
    basis that the claimant's deportation to the United States  of  America
    is conducive to the public good.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the USA who was born on 9 June  1983.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 19 September  1990  with  twelve  months'
    leave as a student.  He was at that date aged 7 years.  He subsequently
    obtained extensions of leave as a student until 31 December  2003  when
    his leave expired and he overstayed.  On 15 December 2009,  he  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain  on  long  residence  grounds  based  on
    fourteen years' residence in the UK.  That leave  was  granted  to  the
    claimant on 18 March 2010.

 3. On 12 April 2012, the claimant was convicted at the Bristol Crown Court
    of  three  offences:  possession  with  intent  to  supply  a  Class  B
    controlled drug, namely cannabis; supplying a Class B  controlled  drug
    namely cannabis; and possession of a Class A  controlled  drug,  namely
    MDMA.  In respect of the first two offences the claimant was  sentenced
    to four months' and eight  months'  imprisonment  respectively  to  run
    consecutively making  a  total  of  twelve  months'  imprisonment.   In
    respect of the third offence, the claimant was  sentenced  to  fourteen
    days to run concurrently.

 4. On 29 May 2012, the claimant was served with notice of his liability to
    deportation.  That notice appears to have been erroneously based on the
    premise that the claimant was  subject  to  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.  That was in fact not  the  case
    since the claimant was not a "foreign criminal"  as  he  had  not  been
    sentenced to at least twelve  months  without  aggregating  consecutive
    sentences  (see  s.32(2)  read  with  s.38(1)(b)).   That   error   was
    subsequently corrected by the Secretary of State who in her decision of
    9 July 2014 recognised that the power  to  deport  the  appellant  fell
    within  the  conducive  deportation  provisions  in  s.3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  As a result, on 9 July 2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State made  a  decision  to  deport  the  claimant  to  the  USA  under
    s.3(5)(a).

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Britton,
    following a hearing on 4 December 2014, allowed the  claimant's  appeal
    on the basis that s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 (the "NIA Act 2002") applied such that the claimant's  deportation
    was not in the public interest.

 6. Sections 117C(3) and (4) of the NIA Act 2002 state that:

         '(3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated into  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.'

 7. Judge Britton appears to have  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life.   Indeed,  that  was
    accepted before me by both  representatives.   Further,  Judge  Britton
    found that as a result of having lived in the UK for over twenty  years
    the claimant was "socially and culturally integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom."

 8. Finally, the judge found that there were "very  significant  obstacles"
    to the claimant's "integration" into the USA if he were deported there.

 9. As a result, Judge Britton allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    claimant's deportation breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the  judge's  finding  under  s.117C(4)  was
    unsustainable in law.  In essence, the judge's finding  was  irrational
    and he had failed to take into account  that  the  claimant  was  a  US
    citizen, an independent adult and could settle, work and  live  in  the
    country of which he was a national.

11. On 25 March 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Simpson)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came  before
    me.

Discussion

12.  At  the  hearing,  it  became  clear  that  there  were  a  number  of
    difficulties with Judge Britton's approach to the appellant's case:  in
    particular, the structural approach he had adopted.

13. First, the judge was required to apply first the relevant Rules dealing
    with deportation,  in  particular  paras  398,  399  and  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Secondly, if the claimant could not  succeed  under
    those Rules dealing with Art 8, then the judge should have gone  on  to
    consider Art 8 outside the Rules and, in the language of para 398:

         'The public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
         other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

         (See, e.g. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and  Singh  and
         Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.)

14. The first issue for the judge was, therefore, to apply para  398  which
    is in the following terms:

         '398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
                  in assessing that claim will  consider  whether  paragraph
                  399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
                  interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
                  factors where there are very compelling circumstances over
                  and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

15. The claimant did not fall  within  para  398(a)  as  he  had  not  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years.   Neither
    did paragraph 398(b) apply because  although  the  appellant  had  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  twelve  months  but
    less than four years it was not as a result of being "convicted  of  an
    offence for which" he had  received  a  sentence  of  at  least  twelve
    months.  He had been convicted of a  number  of  offences  but  for  no
    single offence had he been sentenced to a period  of  at  least  twelve
    months.

16. Consequently, the issue was whether para 398(c) applies  on  the  basis
    that the appellant's offending "has caused serious harm" or  he  was  a
    "persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard  for  the  law".
    The latter was  clearly  not  applicable  since  the  claimant  was  of
    previous good character and these were the  only  convictions  he  had.
    The issue was, therefore, whether his  offending  "has  caused  serious
    harm".

17. In her decision letter  (at  page  4  of  7)  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the nature of the appellant's offending  was  such  that
    paragraph 398(c) applied.

18. Judge Britton, however, proceeded on the basis that the  claimant  fell
    within para 398(b).  At para 12 of his determination he said this:

         "The respondent refers to paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules.
         The appellant would come under the category of 398 (b)  because  he
         was sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  of  12  months.   The
         respondent referred to the Immigration Rules, that where a person's
         deportation is conducive to the public good because in the view  of
         the Secretary of State, he has caused serious harm.   In  assessing
         the claim that deportation would be  contrary  to  Article  8,  the
         Secretary of State will consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
         applies, and the respondent  says  that  neither  applies  in  this
         case."

19. It is unclear why Judge Britton was under the erroneous impression that
    the Secretary of State considered that the claimant  fell  within  para
    398(b).  It is clear from the decision letter of 9 July 2014  that  the
    Secretary of State  (correctly)  did  not  consider  that  para  398(b)
    applied  but  considered  rather  that  para   398(c)   applied.    One
    explanation may be that the only copy of the decision  letter  that  is
    contained within the Tribunal's file consists of the odd numbered pages
    between 1 and 7 and the consideration of para 398(c) is contained on an
    even numbered page namely page 4 of 7.  It is clear from the claimant's
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal that it was  contested
    whether the claimant's offending given its nature  and  the  punishment
    imposed fell within the category covered by para 398(c).  Judge Britton
    gave no consideration to that.  Consequently,  he  failed  properly  to
    consider whether the claimant came within the terms of the  Immigration
    Rules applicable to deportation.

20. Secondly, if, in fact, the claimant fell within para 398(c) then  Judge
    Britton was required to consider whether he fell within either para 399
    or para 399A of the Rules.  Paragraph 399 is not relevant but para 399A
    reflects the terms of s.117C(4).  The judge dealt  with  the  issue  of
    whether there were  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  claimant's
    integration to the US principally in para 28 of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "However, I find that there are very significant obstacles  to  his
         integration into the United States.  I accept he will not have  any
         language problems but he came to this country at the age of  7  and
         has ever returned to the United States.  To  a  great  extent,  his
         mother has abandoned him.  She would come at Christmas for  3  days
         but certainly did not want him to return to her life in the  United
         States.  The appellant has become part of the Kirkwood  family  and
         the witnesses have spoken highly of the appellant.  I find that  he
         is part of the Kirkwood family and is treated  by  both  Laura  and
         Edwin as their brother, and when she was alive  by  Carole  as  her
         son.  He used to call  her  'Mum'.   He  has  committed  a  serious
         offence  but  since  his  release  from  prison  has  rehabilitated
         himself.  He is at present doing his Master's  degree  at  Plymouth
         University  that  finishes  in  September  2015.   He   would   not
         necessarily have the same job opportunities in  the  United  States
         and would have difficulty raising finance as he no  credit  rating.
         His mother may or may not help with any finance but what  is  clear
         is that she does not want the appellant as part of her life."

21. Like para 398, ss.117C(3) and (4) of the NIA Act 2002 only  applied  if
    the claimant is a "foreign criminal".  Again a single  sentence  of  at
    least 12 months was required or, by  virtue  of  s.117D(2)(c)(ii),  the
    individual must be a person who has "been convicted of an offence  that
    caused serious harm".  Without a finding by the  Judge  in  respect  of
    that issue it is impossible to say whether paras  398(c)  and  399A  or
    ss.117C(3) and (4) of the NIA Act 2002 applied in principle.

22. Whilst the substance of the Secretary of State's  ground  focused  upon
    the judge's finding that there were "very significant obstacles" to the
    claimant's integration in the USA, it was conceded before me  that  the
    judge's decision was flawed in law.

23. I agree with that concession on the basis that  in  the  absence  of  a
    finding whether the claimant's offending had caused "serious harm",  it
    cannot be said whether the judge approached the issue  of  whether  the
    claimant's deportation was lawful or not on a proper basis applying the
    correct legal structure.  That, in my judgment, is a significant  error
    in his approach and his decision overall is as a consequence flawed and
    cannot stand.

24. In saying that, I do not consider that his finding in para 28 can, as a
    result, stand in isolation either.  I accept  Mr  Richard's  submission
    that, as set out in para 4 of the grounds, the judge has failed to take
    into  account  all  relevant  matters  in  reaching  his  finding.   In
    particular, the judge has failed to take into account that the claimant
    would return to a country of which he is a national, his education  and
    his ability to seek employment as a US citizen despite his absence  for
    a considerable period of time from that country.

25. Although both representatives invited me to remake the decision, in  my
    judgment that is not the appropriate course given that  the  judge  has
    failed to consider the  proper  application  of  para  398  and  s.117C
    including, but perhaps not necessarily  restricted  to,  s.117C(3)  and
    (4).   The  judge's  factual  findings  are  not,   in   my   judgment,
    sufficiently clear or focused for me to remake  the  decision.   In  my
    judgment, the proper course is that the appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full evidential hearing and in order that the judge
    on remittal can consider and make appropriate factual  findings  as  to
    the applicable deportation regime to the claimant.

Decision

26. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law  and  is  set
    aside.

27. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  re-
    hearing before a judge other than Judge Britton.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
