
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01913/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                             JAMA IBRAHIM AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. H. Mallick, Counsel instructed by Asghar & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant entered the UK on 01 January 1992 with Indefinite  Leave
    to Enter as the dependent of a refugee. He was 16 years old on  arrival
    in the UK. The appellant's immigration and criminal history is set  out
    in some detail in the reasons for deportation letter and  need  not  be
    repeated in full for the purpose of this particular appeal save to  say
    that he was convicted of a number of  offences.  The  most  serious  of
    these was a conviction for manslaughter  in  1995,  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to 18 months detention in a Young Offenders  Institution.  In
    2001 he was sentenced to two years and  nine  months  imprisonment  for
    robbery and aggravated  vehicle  taking.  In  2007  the  appellant  was
    convicted of possessing a firearm with intent, for which he received  a
    sentence of 9 years imprisonment and was recommended for deportation.

2.    On 26 September 2009 the respondent served a notice  of  liability  to
    automatic deportation, which prompted the appellant  to  claim  asylum.
    The respondent refused the application on 10 May  2011.  The  appellant
    appealed the  decision  but  the  respondent  withdrew  the  underlying
    immigration decision before the appeal was determined  because  it  had
    not been served with a deportation decision.

3.    On 18  October  2012  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant.  The
    relevant part of the letter is as follows:

         "I am writing to inform you that the Secretary of State  has  taken
         note of your conviction on 27 November 2007 at Kingston-Upon-Thames
         Crown Court for Firearms (other than  poss/use  offensive  weapon).
         The Secretary of State takes a serious view of your conduct and, in
         the light of your conviction, she has given  careful  consideration
         to your immigration status and the question of  your  liability  to
         deportation.

         In all the circumstances,  however,  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         decided not to take any deportation  action  against  you  on  this
         occasion but you should clearly understand that the  provisions  of
         the Immigration Act 1971 as amended by the Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 1999 relating to deportation continue to apply  to  you.  Under
         these provisions a person who does not have the right of  abode  is
         liable  to  deportation  if  the  Secretary  of  State  deems   his
         deportation to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  or  if  he  is
         convicted of an offence and is recommended  for  deportation  by  a
         court.

         I should warn you therefore that if  you  should  come  to  adverse
         notice in the future, the Secretary of State  will  be  obliged  to
         give further consideration to the question of whether you should be
         deported. If you commit a further offence, and are over 18 years of
         age, the Secretary  of  State  would  also  need  to  consider  the
         automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  You
         should be aware that under such  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
         State may be legally obliged to make a  deportation  order  against
         you.

         In  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  not  to   take
         deportation action on this occasion you will be released on  Monday
         22 October 2012. You  are  expected  to  report  to  your  offender
         manager in line with conditions of your licence."

4.    A Criminal Casework Directorate file note dated 18 October 2012  shows
    that the respondent chose not to pursue deportation  in  light  of  the
    decision in AMM & Others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;  FGM)  Somalia
    [2011] UKUT 445, which acknowledged the humanitarian crisis in southern
    and central Somalia at  that  time  [pg.246-247  AB].  The  information
    provided by the appellant in the deportation questionnaire was that  he
    was born in Mogadishu. As  such,  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant's removal would breach Article 3.  This  is  the  reason  why
    deportation was not pursued in October 2012.

5.    A copy of an internal UKBA email dated 16 November 2012 shows that  it
    subsequently came to light that the appellant may have originated  from
    Las-Anod in the northern Sool region of Somalia. In the absence of  any
    new information to the contrary, the region has been  deemed  safe  for
    some time. As such, the respondent reviewed the case and  decided  that
    it was necessary to conduct a further interview to clarify the issue.

6.    On 06 December 2012 a further asylum interview was  conducted.  On  23
    January 2014 the respondent issued the appellant with a further  notice
    of liability to deportation and gave him the opportunity to  rebut  the
    presumption that he had committed a serious crime and that his presence
    in the  UK  constituted  a  danger  to  the  community  (section  72  -
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). The applicant sought  to
    challenge the decision, including the delay in determining  his  asylum
    claim, by way of an application for judicial review.

7.    In a letter dated 05 February 2014 the respondent gave reasons to  the
    appellant's  representatives  to  explain  why  deportation  was  being
    reviewed:

         "Although your client was informed that the Secretary of State  had
         made a decision not  to  pursue  deportation  action  against  your
         client in October 2012, further information has come  to  light  in
         which  your  client's  Article  8  of  the  ECHR   claim   can   be
         reconsidered. There is evidence in the form of  a  'Declaration  of
         Identity for Visa Purpose' document in which your client's place of
         birth is stated as Lasanod in  Puntland,  Somalia.  This  conflicts
         with various other documentation on  file  where  your  client  has
         stated he is from Mogadishu. On the  basis  that  your  client  has
         materially misrepresented facts in relation  to  the  area  of  his
         origin and background to the Home Office, he is considered to  have
         come to further adverse notice and as such the Home Office will  be
         reviewing your client's asylum claim and in turn his  liability  to
         deportation."

8.    In a decision dated 05 September 2014 (served  01  October  2014)  the
    respondent refused the asylum claim and  decided  to  make  deportation
    order. The appellant had a right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judicial review proceedings fell away because the appellant had  an
    alternative remedy.

9.    A panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  including  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robertson and Mr Getlevog ("the panel") dismissed the appeal in a
    decision promulgated on 11 March 2015. The most  pertinent  section  of
    the panel's findings is as follows:

         "33.     In order to establish that this letter [18/10/12] resulted
         in a legitimate expectation on  the  part  of  the  appellant  that
         deportation  action  would  not  be  pursued  in  the  future,  the
         appellant would have to establish (i) that the  respondent  made  a
         clear and  unambiguous  representation;  (ii)  that  the  appellant
         relied on it to his  detriment;  and  (iii)  no  overriding  public
         interest existed which could defeat the expectation or  promise  or
         assurance devoid of  any  relevant  qualification  (GC  (legitimate
         expectation - entry clearance)  (Romania)  [2005]  UKAIT  0142  and
         Mehmood (legitimate expectation) [2014] UKUT 00469 (IAC).

         34.      Firstly, in the letter of 18 October 2012, the  respondent
         makes clear to the appellant that he "...should clearly  understand
         that the provisions of the Immigration act 1971 as amended  by  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 relating to deportation continue to
         apply to you." She does not confirm that the adverse attention must
         necessarily arise from further criminal offending; she  could  have
         done so expressly by stating that the decision will be reviewed  if
         the appellant commits  any  further  offences.  The  term  'adverse
         attention' is unqualified. Further, the  document  referred  to  at
         para 31 above provides sufficient reasons as to  why  the  decision
         must be reviewed."

         35.      The argument based  on  legitimate  expectation  therefore
         falls at the first question. Either the evidence set out in the  ID
         document as  to  the  birth  of  the  appellant  is  false  or  the
         information provided by him during the hearing was false. In either
         case, it was open to the respondent to view it as information which
         brought the appellant to her 'adverse notice'  and  to  review  the
         decision, putting the appellant to proof to establish his claim."

         36.      The content of paragraph 2 of the  letter  of  18  October
         2012 is more in the nature of  a  concession;  that  being  not  to
         pursue deportation action. As such, it is open to the respondent to
         withdraw it, as established in NR (Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ
         856."

10.   The appellant seeks to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

    (i)    The panel erred in  concluding  that  there  was  no  legitimate
         expectation. The appellant continues to assert  that  a  clear  and
         unambiguous representation was made in the letter dated 18  October
         2012.

    (ii)   The panel erred in failing to consider  section  33  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007.

    (iii)  The panel failed to give consideration  to  Article  31  of  the
         Refugee Convention.

Decision and reasons

11.   After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12.   Ms Mallick submitted that it was  clear  that  the  respondent  should
    have  had  the  relevant  information  before  her  relating   to   the
    appellant's place of birth when a  decision  was  made  not  to  pursue
    deportation proceedings on 18 October 2012. She criticised  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for failing to consider whether the further evidence  the
    respondent relied upon was sufficient to  justify  departing  from  the
    clear promise made in that  letter.  She  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was wrong to conclude that the letter dated  18  October  2012
    did not make a clear  and  unambiguous  representation.  The  appellant
    understood the letter differently and considered that it made  a  clear
    promise that deportation action would not be taken. She argued that the
    information relating to his place of birth was not sufficient to amount
    to 'adverse notice'. In analysing the first part of the test the First-
    tier Tribunal should have considered what  information  the  respondent
    had on 18 October 2012.

13.   It is not argued that the panel's self-direction  was  wrong  in  law.
    The panel quite clearly referred to  the  correct  principles  and  the
    relevant case law [33].  The  grounds  of  appeal,  as  argued,  are  a
    disagreement with the panel's conclusions, which could only  amount  to
    an error of law if their findings were irrational or were not  open  to
    them on the evidence.

14.   The third paragraph of the letter  dated  18  October  2012  gave  two
    warnings. Firstly, that if he should come to  "adverse  notice  in  the
    future" the respondent would give "further consideration" to whether he
    should be deported. Secondly, if he committed a  further  offence,  the
    respondent may be obliged to consider deportation under the UK  Borders
    Act 2007. Those two statements were  disjunctive.  There  would  be  no
    point in making the first statement if it meant the same thing  as  the
    second. The letter did not unambiguously state that further deportation
    action would only be taken if he committed a further criminal  offence.
    In my assessment it was open to the panel  to  conclude  that  'adverse
    notice' did not  necessarily  arise  solely  as  a  result  of  further
    criminal offending.

15.   No doubt it was frustrating for the  appellant  that  the  matter  was
    deemed suitable for review. The respondent could and  should  have  had
    access to the conflicting information relating his place of birth.  But
    whether the decision-maker had the information before her on 18 October
    2012 is irrelevant to the question of whether  the  respondent  made  a
    clear and unambiguous representation. While it is true to say that  the
    letter made a clear statement that a decision  had  been  made  not  to
    deport him at that time it also provided two clear  caveats.  It  might
    well be that the appellant read it to mean that no further action would
    be taken unless he committed a further criminal offence but the  phrase
    "adverse notice" was sufficiently  wide  to  encompass  any  number  of
    public interest issues  that  might  give  rise  to  a  review  of  the
    decision.

16.   It is not arguable that the respondent was not entitled to review  the
    case in light of the conflicting places of birth. That information  was
    material to an assessment of whether the  appellant  could  be  removed
    from the UK without a breach of his human rights. At the time when  the
    decision was made not to pursue deportation action in October 2012  the
    respondent was satisfied that removal to Mogadishu would  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3 of the European Convention in light of the  country
    guidance in AMM (Somalia). The fact that new information came to  light
    that suggested that the appellant  might  originate  from  an  area  of
    Somalia where removal might  be  possible  was  material  to  a  proper
    assessment of the outstanding asylum claim.

17.   When the  respondent  gave  reasons  for  reviewing  the  decision  in
    February 2014 it was open to her to conclude that one or other  of  the
    conflicting pieces of information about his date of birth was likely to
    be a misrepresentation. Given that the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    that the appellant was likely to have been born in Las-Anod  but  moved
    to Mogadishu at a very  young  age,  it  might  be  that  he  genuinely
    believed that he was born in Mogadishu. However, at the date  when  the
    respondent decided to review the  application  there  was  sufficiently
    important evidence to  prompt  a  review  of  the  decision  on  public
    interest  grounds.  The  appellant  committed  a  particularly  serious
    offence for which he was sentenced to a period of 9  years  in  prison.
    The public interest in deportation  is  undoubtedly  strong.  The  only
    reason why the respondent decided not to pursue deportation  action  in
    October 2012 was because  she  thought  he  could  not  be  removed  to
    Mogadishu. The further information that came to  light  clearly  raised
    the possibility that removal could  be  effected  to  another  area  of
    Somalia without breaching Article 3. Undoubtedly it  was  open  to  the
    respondent  to  conclude  that  the  conflicting   information,   which
    suggested falsity in one document or another, was sufficient to  amount
    to 'adverse notice' and that significant public  interest  issues  were
    involved to justify a review of the decision.

18.   By the date of the First-tier Tribunal appeal the Upper  Tribunal  had
    issued up to date country guidance in the case of MOJ & Others  (Return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442. The effect of the guidance
    is  that,  absent  special  circumstances,  there   is   currently   no
    generalised risk on return to Mogadishu. The panel made fully  reasoned
    findings relating to risk on return that have not been appealed.

19.   In my assessment it was open for the First-tier Tribunal  to  conclude
    that no clear and unambiguous representation was  made  in  the  letter
    dated  18  October  2012.  The  panel  gave  sustainable  reasons   for
    concluding that the first limb of the test was  not  met.  It  was  not
    necessary for the panel to go on to consider whether there were  public
    interest concerns to justify departing from the representation. For the
    reasons I have already outlined there was sufficient  justification  to
    do so: (i) given the evidence that came to light and  (ii)  the  strong
    public interest in deportation in light of very serious nature  of  the
    crimes.

20.   It is clear that the  respondent  had  power  to  make  a  deportation
    decision. The question of legitimate expectation could only go  to  the
    proportionality of the decision. No doubt it was deeply frustrating  to
    the appellant to be told he would  not  be  deported,  and  that  after
    further delay, the respondent  decided  to  review  the  position  when
    making a decision in relation to his outstanding asylum claim.  But  in
    the circumstances of this particular case there  is  no  error  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the letter 18 October  2012,  which
    did not make a clear and unambiguous  representation  that  deportation
    would only be reviewed if he committed a further offence.

21.   The grant of permission to appeal was limited to  that  ground  but  I
    allowed Ms Mallick to  make  submissions  on  the  other  two  grounds.
    However, I find that they are without merit.

22.   The second ground of appeal relates to section 33 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007, which outlines  exceptions  to  automatic  deportation  under
    section 32 of the same act. The most commonly relied upon is "Exception
    1", in cases where it is asserted that  removal  in  pursuance  of  the
    deportation order would breach a person's  rights  under  the  European
    Convention or the Refugee Convention. It is quite clear that the  panel
    carried out a detailed and thorough assessment of protection and  human
    rights issues  in  assessing  the  lawfulness  of  deportation.  It  is
    immaterial if no specific reference was made to section 33.

23.   The third ground of appeal  relates  to  Article  31  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. This is also immaterial  to  a  proper  assessment  of  the
    appeal. Article 31 prohibits Contracting States from imposing penalties
    on account of a person's illegal entry.  In  this  case  the  appellant
    entered the UK with valid  leave  to  enter.  The  respondent  did  not
    dispute that initial entry clearance was lawful but merely  highlighted
    the  fact  that  the  information   provided   with   the   application
    contradicted other information, which prompted  a  review.  It  is  not
    arguable that this could be described  as  a  penalty  imposed  on  the
    appellant "on account of their illegal entry".

24.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed      [pic]      Date 03 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
