
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01130/2013
                                                               DA/01131/2013
                                                             & DA/01132/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Royal Courts of Justice   |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 25 January 2016                 |On : 27 January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SR
                                     RC
                                     SC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A B Sesay, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of SR  and  her
two children, RC and SC, against a decision to deport them from  the  United
Kingdom. For the purposes of this decision, I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to
the Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  SR,  RC  and  SC  as  the
appellants, reflecting their positions as they were in  the  appeals  before
the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellants are citizens of Jamaica, born on 17 December 1987, 9  October
2011 and 1 August 2007 respectively. The second  and  third  appellants  are
the son and daughter of the first appellant. The first appellant (to whom  I
shall refer as "the appellant") arrived in the United Kingdom in  July  2000
as a visitor and was subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain as  the
dependant child of her father.

On 13 January 2006 the appellant was convicted  of  possession  of  Class  A
drugs (crack cocaine) with intent to supply,  and  was  sentenced  to  three
years' imprisonment in a Young  Offenders  Institution.  That  sentence  was
reduced on appeal to 21 months' imprisonment. A decision was made to  deport
the appellant in August 2006,  following  which  she  made  an  unsuccessful
appeal. A deportation order was then signed against her in March  2007,  but
could not be served on her as she absconded.

On 10 December 2009 the appellant was  convicted  of  theft  and  breach  of
conditions and was sentenced to 4 months and 20 days' imprisonment  and  had
a suspended sentence activated.  The  deportation  order  previously  signed
against her was then served on her, on 2 May 2010.

The  appellant  applied  for  revocation  of  the  deportation  order.   Her
application was refused on 13 December 2010 but  she  successfully  appealed
against the decision on Article 8 grounds. She was  then  granted  3  years'
Discretionary Leave on 30 June 2011.

On 1 December 2011 the appellant was convicted on  two  counts  of  burglary
and theft and sentenced to 14 months'  imprisonment.  She  was  then  served
with a notice of liability to automatic deportation.   A  deportation  order
was signed against her on 17 May 2013 and on  20  May  2013  the  respondent
made a decision that section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  applied.
Decisions were also made to deport her two children, the  second  and  third
appellants, pursuant to section 3(5)(b) of the Immigration act 1971.

The appellants appealed against the decisions and the  appeals  came  before
the First-tier Tribunal on 3 October 2014. The  appeals  were  dismissed  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton  on  31  October  2014,  but  the  judge's
decision was subsequently set aside in  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  reason  of
error of law, on 20 January 2015. The appeals were remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be heard afresh and came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Wyman on 24 June 2015.

In a decision promulgated on 16 July 2015, Judge Wyman allowed  the  appeals
on Article 8 grounds.

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal and permission to appeal was granted on 11 August 2015.

Thus the appeals came before me. There was some  discussion  as  to  whether
the deportation decision for the main appellant had in fact been before  the
First-tier Tribunal, as the only decisions contained in the files before  me
were for the children. Mr Wilding provided a copy of that decision  for  the
court file.

I heard submissions from both parties on the error of law  and  advised  the
parties that in my view there were errors of law  in  the  judge's  decision
such that the decision had to be set aside in its entirety  and  re-made.  I
reached that decision for the following reasons:

It was  the  respondent's  case  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 399(a) and (b) or 399A of  the  immigration  rules
and that it was therefore for the appellant to demonstrate  very  compelling
circumstances over and above those  in  paragraph  399  and  399A,  for  the
purposes of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules, which she could not  do.


With regard to the two  children,  the  second  and  third  appellants,  the
respondent's case was that paragraphs 365, 366 and 368  of  the  immigration
rules applied as they were children of a person against whom  a  deportation
order had been made. The respondent also considered that the  children  fell
for refusal under the suitability provisions of the rules, in section  S-LTR
1.6 of Appendix FM because of their association with the appellant.

However the judge gave no consideration to  any  of  these  provisions.  She
proceeded on the basis of the principles in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL
27, applying  the  same  principles  and  immigration  rules  to  all  three
appellants, and without reference to  the  rules  relating  to  deportation.
Indeed  the  only  apparent  application  of  the  provisions  relating   to
deportation appear to be at [128] where she referred to  the  provisions  in
section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
concluded that it would be unduly harsh to deport the children and that  the
effect of the appellant's  deportation  on  the  children  would  be  unduly
harsh. However that conclusion was not supported by any  reasoned  findings,
was on the erroneous  basis  that  the  children  were  British  and  failed
properly to engage with the "unduly harsh" test.

For all of these reasons the judge's decision contains  material  errors  of
law and cannot stand. In the absence of any properly  reasoned  findings  it
seems to me, as Mr Wilding submitted, that the decision has to be set  aside
in its entirety and re-made once again. Mr Sesay did not disagree.

Accordingly, the most appropriate course would be  for  the  appeals  to  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal again, for the decision to be re-made.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.  The  appeals  are
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be dealt with afresh, before any judge  aside  from  Judges  Clayton  and
Wyman.

DIRECTIONS

In light of the fact that this is the second  time  the  appeals  have  been
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, it would appear appropriate  for  there
initially to be an  oral  case  management  review  hearing,  in  particular
because the appellants have new representatives and  thus  clarification  of
the availability to all  parties  of  all  the  documents  relevant  to  the
appeals would therefore be helpful.  It may  also  be  appropriate  for  the
appeals to be heard before a panel.




                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
