
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: DA/01196/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                           JUNIOR ALEXANDER GAYLE
                         (Anonymity Order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 21 September, 1970.  He
       appeals the determination of a panel dismissing  his  appeal  against
       the decision of the respondent to deport him on 20 June, 2014.

    2. The appellant arrived in this country on 15 June, 1986 as  a  visitor
       and was granted leave to remain as a student until 23 December, 1988.
       Following his marriage to a British citizen he was granted  leave  to
       remain until 29 January, 1992. He was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
       remain on 13 February, 1992.

    3. One 21 May, 1992 the appellant was convicted at the Central  Criminal
       Court of attempted robbery and possessing an imitation  firearm  with
       intent to commit an indictable offence and  he  was  sentenced  to  7
       years imprisonment.

    4. One 4 April, 1993 the appellant absconded having been issued  with  a
       day  pass  to  participate  in  a  weightlifting  competition.  After
       absconding for some  19  years  the  appellant  was  arrested  on  22
       October, 2012.

    5. The respondent  regarded  the  appellant's  offence  as  particularly
       serious. She found that under  the  immigration  rules  there  was  a
       presumption in favour of deportation. It was in the  public  interest
       to deport the appellant in accordance  with  section  32  of  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007. Under the immigration rules, as the  appellant  had
       been sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding  four  years,  the
       respondent noted that it would only be in  exceptional  circumstances
       that the public interest in deportation would be outweighed by  other
       factors. The respondent took into account her duties under section 55
       of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The  respondent
       was not satisfied that the appellant had established  a  genuine  and
       subsisting family life with his son  who  had  been  born  while  the
       appellant was in prison. It was not considered that the appellant was
       a suitable role model for him. It was in the best  interests  of  the
       appellant's son to remain with his mother. It was not  accepted  that
       the appellant's relationship with  the  child's  mother  amounted  to
       exceptional circumstances.  The  appellant's  relationship  with  his
       partner had been established while the appellant had been absconding.
       It was noted that the appellant's marriage to a British  citizen  had
       ceased to exist. The appellant had provided insufficient  information
       about his claimed medical condition.

    6. The appellant's offence was serious  and  while  in  custody  he  had
       received an adjudication for using insulting words and  had  received
       various warnings  including  being  abusive  to  staff.  In  all  the
       circumstances deportation would not place the respondent in breach of
       her international obligations.

    7. The appellant was not represented at his hearing  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. The panel heard from the appellant and his partner and
       his niece.

    8. The appellant put forward a substantial number of  legal  submissions
       before the panel which the panel summarises at paragraph 47 to 52  of
       its determination. The panel found  the  submissions  to  be  without
       merit. In paragraph 54 the panel concluded  that  the  appellant  had
       been "the author of his  own  misfortune  in  relation  to  the  very
       substantial period of time during which he  absconded  from  prison."
       The panel rejected an argument that the appellant would be at risk on
       return to Jamaica. In relation to article 8  of  the  panel  directed
       itself by reference to Razgar v Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27 and
       Huang [2007] UKHL 11.

    9. The panel found that the appellant was leading a family life with his
       partner and son and accordingly the first  four  criteria  in  Razgar
       were satisfied. It then  considered  the  issue  of  proportionality.
       However, having taken full account of the matters advanced on  behalf
       of the appellant and having guided itself by  reference  to  sections
       117A-117D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  2002
       inserted by the Immigration  Act  2014,  it  found  that  the  public
       interest required deportation and dismissed the appeal.

   10. The appellant applied for permission to appeal. Reliance  was  placed
       on A.A. v the United Kingdom (No 8000/08). Permission to  appeal  was
       granted on 27 February, 2015 by a First-tier Judge.  At  the  hearing
       the appellant filed a skeleton argument referring to  his  employment
       record and the fact that he had committed no crime since  1992,  even
       during his period of absconding. While absconding  he  had  paid  his
       taxes and national insurance contributions. He had returned  to  work
       with his former employer and referred to a letter from  his  employer
       and examples of the firm's work. He had been cleared to work  in  the
       US embassy.

   11. The appellant had enrolled with the Open University and was currently
       studying for a law degree. He was successfully bonded  with  his  son
       and was still in a subsisting relationship with his partner. He hoped
       to marry his partner shortly. He had given information to the  police
       about a criminal and regretted the  offence  he  had  committed.  The
       panel had failed to take  into  account  positive  aspects  that  the
       appellant had relied on in submissions.  He  had  undertaken  various
       educational programs and courses while in prison. The  fact  that  he
       had an unblemished driver's license had not been taken  into  account
       among other things. The decision  to  dismiss  his  appeal  had  been
       irrational in that it had failed to take into  account  a  number  of
       relevant factors. It was inadequately reasoned.

   12. The appellant relied on his skeleton argument and emphasised that  he
       had not re-offended since his release from prison. Mr Kotas submitted
       that the first ground of appealed merely expressed disagreement  with
       the decision of the panel. The panel had clearly had  regard  to  the
       steps in Razgar. The panel had approached matters correctly and  this
       was not a freestanding  article  8  appeal  -  it  was  necessary  to
       demonstrate very compelling circumstances as the panel had  noted  in
       paragraph 75  of  its  decision  over  and  above  the  circumstances
       described in the second exception in section 117C (5).

   13. The principal point was the  case  of  A.A.  v  United  Kingdom.  The
       legislative context had  completely  changed  since  that  date.  The
       applicant in that case had been a minor aged 15. It was apparent from
       paragraph 14 of the decision that the  applicant  had  been  released
       from prison on licence for good behaviour and there was  a  world  of
       difference between his circumstances and those of the  appellant  who
       had absconded. In paragraph 61 the court had  noted  the  applicant's
       period of residence in the UK. The applicant had served his  term  of
       imprisonment. He had spent some seven years  in  the  United  Kingdom
       following his release. The appellant in this  case  by  contrast  had
       been unlawfully at large. Again the applicant  had  not  visited  his
       home country for  11  years  whereas  the  appellant  had  frequently
       visited Jamaica and had family there. The decision in the appellant's
       case was focused on  the  type  of  the  offence  the  appellant  had
       committed and was not simply based on the risk of reoffending.

   14. Mr Kotas referred to Danso v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA  Civ  596
       at paragraph 20 where the Court of Appeal  considered  the  issue  of
       rehabilitation:

           "Mr. Dixon submitted that the tribunal should have  placed  much
           greater weight on the appellant's rehabilitation  and  the  fact
           that he did not pose a  significant  risk  of  re-offending.  He
           suggested that far too little importance is attached to  factors
           of that kind, with the result that  those  who  commit  offences
           have little incentive to co-operate  with  the  authorities  and
           make a positive  effort  to  change  their  ways.  I  have  some
           sympathy with that argument and I should not  wish  to  diminish
           the importance of rehabilitation. It may be that in a few  cases
           it will amount to an important factor,  but  the  fact  is  that
           there is nothing unusual about the appellant's  case.  Most  sex
           offenders who are sentenced to substantial terms of imprisonment
           are offered courses designed to help them avoid re-offending  in
           future and in many cases the risk of doing  so  is  reduced.  It
           must be borne in mind,  however,  that  the  protection  of  the
           public from harm by way of future offending is only one  of  the
           factors that makes it conducive to the  public  good  to  deport
           criminals. Other factors include the need to mark  the  public's
           revulsion at the offender's conduct and the need to deter others
           from acting in a similar way. Fortunately, rehabilitation of the
           kind exhibited by the appellant in this case is not uncommon and
           cannot in my view contribute greatly to  the  existence  of  the
           very compelling circumstances required to  outweigh  the  public
           interest in deportation."

   15. Reliance had been placed in the grounds on the case of Bossadi [2015]
       UKUT 00042 (IAC). This was "hopelessly misguided"  as  the  appellant
       was  a  foreign  criminal  and  could  not   meet   the   suitability
       requirements.

   16. In relation to s 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
       2009 it was clear the panel had well in mind the  best  interests  of
       the appellant's child as was apparent for example from paragraphs  52
       (where the  panel  had  recorded  the  appellant's  submissions)  and
       paragraph 69. Mr Kotas referred to LC (China) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1210
       where it had been argued that the tribunal had erred  in  failing  to
       recognise  and  give  sufficient  weight  to  the  interests  of  the
       appellant's children and  their  British  nationality.  Reliance  was
       placed on Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of  State  [2013]  UKSC  74  and  ZH
       (Tanzania) v Secretary of State [2011] UKSC 4. Mr Kotas  referred  to
       paragraph 24 of the decision:

           "However, it must be borne in mind  that  both  of  those  cases
           concerned the removal  of  persons  who  were  in  this  country
           illegally. In neither case was  the  court  concerned  with  the
           deportation of a foreign  criminal.  Mr.  Slatter's  submissions
           would carry a good deal of force if the appellant were  at  risk
           of being removed merely on the grounds  that  he  did  not  have
           leave to remain, but in this case the appellant  is  susceptible
           to deportation  for  other,  much  more  serious,  reasons.  The
           Secretary of State was obliged to make a  deportation  order  in
           respect of him pursuant to section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007
           unless he could bring himself within one of  the  exceptions  in
           section 33, in this case by  establishing  that  to  remove  him
           would involve  an  unlawful  interference  with  his  article  8
           rights, and in making her determination she was obliged to weigh
           up the competing considerations in  accordance  with  paragraphs
           398 - 399A of the Immigration Rules. The starting point for  any
           such assessment is the recognition that the public  interest  in
           deporting foreign criminals is so great that only in exceptional
           circumstances will it be outweighed by other factors,  including
           the effect of deportation on any  children.  However,  in  cases
           where the person to be deported has been sentenced to a term  of
           imprisonment for less  than  4  years  and  has  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a child under the  age  of
           18 years who enjoys British nationality and is in the  UK,  less
           weight is to be attached to the pubic interest in deportation if
           it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
           and there is no one else here to look after  him.  By  contrast,
           however, where the person to be deported has been sentenced to a
           term of  4  years'  imprisonment  or  more,  the  provisions  of
           paragraph 399 do not apply and  accordingly  the  weight  to  be
           attached to the public  interest  in  deportation  remains  very
           great despite the factors to which  that  paragraph  refers.  It
           follows that neither the  fact  that  the  appellant's  children
           enjoy  British  nationality  nor  the  fact  that  they  may  be
           separated from their father for a long time will  be  sufficient
           to constitute exceptional circumstances of a kind which outweigh
           the public interest in his deportation. The appellant's children
           will not be forced to leave the UK since, if she chooses  to  do
           so, their mother is free to remain with them in this country."

   17. The grounds were erroneous in law and went no further than expressing
       disagreement with the decision of the panel.

   18. The appellant submitted that the  previous  law  prevailing  in  1992
       should apply to him. He had been in the country lawfully. Although he
       had absconded the situation should be compared with the  position  of
       someone who had been released on bail and had committed a  crime.  He
       had not committed a crime. He had not used an alias. The Home  Office
       had known where he was. His divorce was not  yet  finalised  and  his
       marriage had lasted a lengthy  time.  The  decision  was  unfair  and
       disproportionate. He had come to the United Kingdom aged  15  and  he
       had a medical condition. His partner was on income  support  and  the
       panel  had  overlooked  relevant  points.  He  only  had   a   single
       conviction.  The  panel  had  downplayed  or  overlooked  significant
       matters such as his illness. He  made  significant  contributions  to
       national insurance. He would lose this money.

   19. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  determination.  I
       can only  interfere  with  the  decision  of  the  panel  if  it  was
       materially flawed in law. Although  the  appellant  was  representing
       himself he has the benefit of some legal training  and  he  made  his
       submissions orally and in writing in a clear and attractive manner.

   20. The appellant considered that the panel had not done justice  to  his
       arguments. In my view the  panel  fully  and  properly  set  out  the
       submissions that the appellant made before it. As mentioned above the
       panel stated in paragraph 53  of  its  decision  that  it  found  the
       submissions to be without merit. I have to say  I  agree.  The  panel
       applied the correct legal provisions in the appellant's case. As  the
       panel say, the appellant was the author  of  his  own  misfortune  by
       absconding for such a  long  period.  He  cannot  complain  that  the
       respondent should have applied the law as it would have been  had  he
       not absconded. He cannot rely on his own wrong. The appellant further
       complains about the respondent's delay but again he was the author of
       his own misfortune. He could have turned himself in at any  time.  As
       the panel state in paragraph 66 of its decision "the  onus  was  upon
       the appellant to comply with the criminal law the United Kingdom.  He
       had been sentenced. He had received a long sentence. He chose not  to
       comply with it having abused the privilege of day release."

   21. The panel states as follows in paragraph 67:

           "We find that it is necessary for the principle of deterrence to
           be applied. We find that it would send out  entirely  the  wrong
           signal if the appellant  were  to  be  successful  in  resisting
           deportation given the existence  of  the  twin  factors  of  the
           seriousness of the original offence and the fact  of  absconding
           in conjunction with the length of it. It is necessary for us  to
           conduct a balancing exercise in analysing the  positive  factors
           to  be  weighed  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  We  take  full
           cognizance of that which he has put forward in his  own  favour.
           We take the evidence of the appellant and the  witnesses  called
           on his behalf and the evidence of the  witnesses  who  were  not
           called whose statements have been provided including  after  the
           hearing at their highest. We have considered the nature  of  the
           family life which the appellant leads."

   22. The panel find in paragraph 69 of its decision that the appellant was
       not a suitable role model for his son. The  panel  correctly  reminds
       itself about the effect of the amendments made  to  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002 by the Immigration Act 2014. It took
       all positive factors into account. While it noted that the  appellant
       had achieved social and cultural integration in the United Kingdom it
       did not find that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration into Jamaica "given that his mother still lives there and
       he could stay with her pending finding employment. We also find  that
       the appellant's  level  of  intelligence  and  ability  to  react  to
       circumstances equip him to re-establish himself in Jamaica."

   23. In paragraph 75 of its decision the panel accepted that the appellant
       had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner and  child
       who are British citizens. It accepted that the effect of the  removal
       of the appellant would be unduly harsh  upon  both  his  partner  and
       child and as the panel states: "The difficulty  which  confronts  the
       appellant is that there must be very  compelling  circumstances  over
       and above those described in the exception."

   24. The panel did not arguably err  in  law  or  misdirect  self  or  act
       irrationally in concluding that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated
       that there were such very  compelling  circumstances.  It  also  gave
       consideration to the question of the  appellant's  medical  condition
       and was entitled to find that treatment would be  available  for  the
       appellant for that condition  in  Jamaica.  The  panel  concluded  by
       noting that the appellant had been afforded the  fullest  opportunity
       of presenting his case and adducing all relevant material in relation
       to it. The argument that the appellant would be at risk on return  to
       Jamaica was rightly rejected by the panel in paragraphs 55 to  57  of
       its determination and was not pursued on appeal.

   25. I have taken full account  of  the  points  made  by  the  appellant.
       However, his offence was a very serious one  carrying  a  substantial
       period of imprisonment and the appellant  chose  to  abscond  for  19
       years. The circumstances of the appellant are very far  removed  from
       the circumstances of the applicant in A.A. v  United  Kingdom  as  Mr
       Kotas submitted. I accept the submissions of Mr Kotas  as  summarised
       above. The panel considered the matter  properly  under  the  current
       rules and legislation. It did not fail to  reflect  or  downplay  any
       salient argument the appellant presented to it.

   26. Accordingly the challenge to the  panel's  decision  fails  and  this
       appeal is dismissed.

       Anonymity Order

       The First-tier Tribunal made Anonymity Order and I make none.

      Signed

                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               18 December 2015



