
 [pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01612/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th October 2015                    |On 21st December 2015              |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     Ud
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Malik, instructed by Thompson & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Jamaica.   The  Tribunal  makes  an
    anonymity direction pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as  amended)  as  the  case  involves  the
    interests of minor children.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court
    orders  otherwise,  no  report  or  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant
    or the minor children.  This prohibition applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties and their representatives.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, seeks to appeal  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Afako) who, in a  determination  promulgated
    on 17th March 2015 dismissed her appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State that she was  entitled  to  make  a  decision  under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 to deport the Appellant.

 3. The applicant's immigration history can be summarised as  follows.   In
    October 1998 the Appellant arrived in the UK  as  a  visitor  with  six
    months leave until April 1999.  In that month, an application was  made
    for an extension of stay as a student but that application was  refused
    and an appeal was dismissed in 2001.  In January 2001 a child, DD,  was
    born and in that year a decree absolute  was  issued  relating  to  her
    former spouse, whom she had married in 1995.   On  29th  May  2001  the
    Appellant married  a  British  citizen,  GD.   On  20th  June  2001  an
    application for leave to remain as a  spouse  was  made  but  that  was
    refused in 2002 with no right of appeal.  Subsequently on 10th May 2002
    a further application was submitted on  Article  8  grounds  which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State and  an  appeal  was  lodged  by  the
    Appellant.  At  a  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  22nd
    September 2005 her appeal was allowed outside of the Rules on Article 8
    grounds.  The decision of the Tribunal is set out in the papers at [A1]
    of the Respondent's bundle.

 4. In January 2011 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  for  herself
    and a son from her former marriage, BC, and they were granted leave  to
    remain in February 2011 until 22nd February  2014.   There  were  other
    children, DC born in 2001 who was  granted  discretionary  leave  until
    28th September 2006 on the basis that he was an adult.

 5. On 1st February 2013 at the Crown Court the Appellant was convicted  of
    four counts of making a false statement or representations in order  to
    obtain benefit, an obtaining  property  by  deception:  two  counts  of
    obtaining a money transfer by deception; obtaining  an  exemption  from
    liability by deception and  acquiring,  using  or  possessing  criminal
    property.  She was sentenced to nine periods of 30 months' imprisonment
    to run concurrently; therefore the overall  sentence  was  one  of  two
    years and six months.  On 28th May 2013 the Appellant was convicted  of
    travelling on a railway without paying a fare and received a fine.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal set out the Appellant's criminal  offending  at
    paragraphs [36] - [37].  This was an offence described as a  series  of
    frauds involving public funds and that over  an  extended  period,  the
    Appellant obtained, along  with  her  co-defendants,  over  �95,000  of
    public funds.  Some of the claims being made in the names of relatives,
    including her father-in-law and  the  sentencing  judge  described  the
    offending as "a sophisticated and calculated  fraud".   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge described the  offences  as  being  "quite  serious  and
    caused direct loss to  the  public".   It  was  also  stated  that  the
    offences involved, and thus corrupted, a number of people and in one of
    those cases, one of the victims whose  identity  was  assumed  for  the
    purposes of the fraud, the Appellant played what  was  described  as  a
    "key role".  The offence caused considerable distress to this victim.

 7. In the light of that conviction the Appellant was served with a  notice
    of liability to automatic deportation on 11th September 2013.  On  25th
    July 2014 a deportation order was  made  against  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant submitted reasons why she should not  be  deported  based  on
    Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   Such  application  was  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State in the light of the family life with her partner and
    her children but was rejected in a  decision  letter  dated  25th  July
    2014.  The conclusion reached by the Secretary of State  was  that  the
    Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  not  cause   a
    disproportionate interference with  her  right  to  continue  to  enjoy
    family life.

 8. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 16th  February  2015.
    The decision of the Tribunal was promulgated on 17th  March  2015.   In
    that decision the judge considered the issues as set out and summarised
    at [7] based on her family life with her partner and her children;  her
    partner having a particular medical condition.  The judge dismissed her
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  based  on  two
    specific grounds and permission was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 21st April 2015 in the following terms:-

         "In terms of the first  ground  for  permission  to  appeal  it  is
         arguable that the judge  has  misdirected  himself  by  failing  to
         consider the first determination  in  terms  of  Devaseelan  [2002]
         UKAIT 00702.  Although the second ground as to  whether  the  judge
         failed to properly assess the Appellant's  case  in  light  of  the
         probation report where the Appellant was assessed as a low risk  of
         reoffending is weaker, I am disinclined to exclude it."

10. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Malik  relied  upon
    the two grounds as pleaded and in  addition  made  the  following  oral
    submissions.  In respect of Ground 1, he submitted that the  judge  did
    not take as a starting point the facts found by the First-tier Tribunal
    in 2005.  Thus there was a material error of  law  in  not  considering
    what he described as the "established facts" which were still  relevant
    to the decision to be  made  under  the  deportation  proceedings.   He
    submitted that Section 117 still required a decision maker to  consider
    the family circumstances.  He further submitted that the  judge  failed
    properly to  consider  those  findings  and  that  in  particular,  the
    Appellant's partner had medical issues and it had not  been  said  that
    the medical evidence had improved since 2005 and that he  continued  to
    suffer from the same medical problems.  Thus had the  judge  looked  at
    the established facts, the outcome would have been to allow the appeal.
     He conceded that the Appellant's partner had not  attended  court  but
    submitted that the  established  facts  were  that  he  had  a  medical
    condition which had not improved.

11. He submitted that in relation to the circumstances in 2005, the  length
    of the private life of this Appellant was far less and that since  that
    date she had been resident in the United  Kingdom  for  a  further  ten
    years.  Whilst there had been a criminal conviction since the  decision
    in 2005 and that may be relevant to the balancing exercise, it  has  no
    relevance to the facts.  He submitted that the  conclusion  that  there
    were other relatives who care for the children was not supported by the
    evidence and that the evidence was that her partner would not  be  able
    to look after the children (relying on the findings made in 2005).   He
    submitted that if the court found an error of law based  on  Ground  1,
    then evidence would be required from her partner.

12. As to the second ground, he submitted that the judge failed to properly
    consider the report of the Probation Officer which had stated that  she
    was at a low risk of reoffending.  Looking at the determination at [40]
    the judge went beyond the evidence and thus erred in law.

13. Mr Wilding relied upon the Rule 24 response sent  to  the  Tribunal  on
    24th April 2015.  As to Ground 1, he submitted that the judge was  well
    aware of the previous decision as set out at paragraphs  [5]  and  [67]
    and whilst the Tribunal was required to consider the previous  findings
    as a starting point, any evidence provided after that time  would  have
    to be considered.  Ten years had elapsed since  the  findings  of  fact
    made in 2005 and it was open to the judge to consider her circumstances
    in the light of any changes that  had  been  made  during  that  period
    including the fact that she had committed a  serious criminal  offence.
    He submitted the judge had considered all the evidence and was entitled
    to reach the conclusions that he did from the evidence that was  before
    him as at the date of the hearing.   Subsequently  the  judge  did  not
    misapply the Devaseelan principles.

14. As to the second ground, the  judge  assessed  the  evidence  and  made
    credibility findings.  The  judge  set  out  the  significance  of  the
    offence and the amount of money fraudulently claimed and the length  of
    sentence and  the  mitigation.   The  judge  summarised  the  Probation
    Officer's letter at [38] and the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  identified
    three significant matters at paragraph [39].  Consequently it was  open
    to the judge to reach the conclusion that the Probation Officer had not
    engaged with those aspects of the evidence that the judge had  set  out
    in the preceding paragraph.  Thus the judge  properly  dealt  with  the
    evidence and the judge was entitled to find that in the  light  of  the
    oral evidence given, the probation report had not dealt with the  issue
    of her failure to accept the offence and her attitude to it.

15. He submitted that the medical issues in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    husband, had not been specifically raised in the grounds but that if it
    arguably fell for consideration under the ambit of  ground  1  and  the
    issue of the application of the Devaseelan principles, the decision  of
    the Tribunal considered all the evidence and the Appellant's  partner's
    circumstances when reaching a decision.  The  judge  made  findings  of
    fact open to him that the Appellant's partner had  been  able  to  cope
    well whilst she was in custody as set out in the cumulative findings at
    paragraphs [48]-[50]. Therefore there was no error of law identified in
    the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal judge.

Assessment

16. There are two grounds pleaded and advanced on behalf of the  Appellant.
    I shall consider each ground separately.



Ground 1:

17.  Dealing with Ground 1,  Mr  Malik  relied  upon  the  written  grounds
    whereby it was submitted that the judge erred by  failing  to  consider
    the case of Devaseelan and  that  the  factual  findings  made  by  the
    Immigration Judge in 2005 continued to be the  starting  point  despite
    the change in the legislation.  It is further  submitted  that  because
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal from 2005 that was a material error of law and  that  the
    reference to it at [55] was insufficient.

18. In his oral submissions Mr Malik submitted that the judge erred in  law
    by not considering the established facts from  2005  which  were  still
    relevant.  In particular, the Appellant's partner's  medical  condition
    had not improved and he continued to suffer from the same condition and
    that in  2005,  the  Appellant's  private  and  family  life  was  less
    established then than it was in 2015.  He further submitted that whilst
    there had been a criminal conviction since 2005, it was relevant to the
    balancing exercise but not to the facts themselves.

19. The findings of fact made by the Tribunal in 2005 are set  out  in  the
    determination exhibited at A1 of the Respondent's bundle.  The findings
    are set out at paragraphs [4.1-4.1.4].  They can be briefly  summarised
    as follows:-

          a) The judge found that she had first arrived  in  1998  and  had
             married a British citizen in May 2001.  The judge  found  that
             she had no leave to remain when she became married and had her
             children and was well aware of her immigration status and also
             that her partner knew of it [4.3].

          b) At [4.4] he found that she had lived in the UK for seven years
             and had five children for whom she was the main carer.

          c) At [4.7], he  made  reference  to  the  Appellant's  husband's
             medical  condition;  that  it  was  diagnosed  in  2001  which
             required a liver transplant in March 2003.  He found that  his
             function had remained stable after several relapses because he
             now depended on daily medication.

          d) The judge also found that whilst it had been stated there  was
             no adequate  healthcare  in  Jamaica,  he  found  that  to  be
             unreliable at [4.7].

          e) As to matters of dependency at  [4.8]  the  judge  found  that
             there was no medical evidence that her husband was  completely
             dependent on his wife for care or that he  required  the  care
             both had attempted to show she provided.  He found that  there
             was no medical evidence to confirm that he  required  24  hour
             care and no medical evidence to  support  the  claim  that  he
             needed the Appellant to help him to take his medicine  and  to
             care for him.

          f) He found that he was emotionally dependent on his wife.

          g) The judge appeared to accept that ideal medical care would  be
             ongoing clinical visits.

          h) The judge also found that there had been no  medical  evidence
             as to the availability of appropriate  healthcare  in  Jamaica
             being provided before the Tribunal.

          i) The judge found that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             her husband joining her in Jamaica if required to leave.

          j) At [4.11] he found that they were a close-knit family who  had
             been together for five years and  found  that  Mr  D  was  not
             working and therefore could not support his wife's application
             to settle if one was made.

          k) At [4.12] the judge found that he would be in no condition  to
             take responsibility for caring for the Appellant's children.

          l) At [4.13] he considered the impact of removal and found it  to
             be unreasonable.

20. The decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 concerned a human  rights
    appeal which followed  an  asylum  appeal  on  the  same  issues.   The
    Tribunal stated  that  in  such  circumstances,  the  first  Tribunal's
    decision stands as an assessment of the claim the Appellant was  making
    at the time of that first determination.  The Tribunal set out  various
    principles including that the decision is always a starting  point  but
    that facts since then could always be considered.

21. Whilst the judge did not specifically make reference  to  the  case  of
    Devaseelan, it is clear from reading the determination as a whole, that
    he was plainly aware of the previous decision and the findings of  fact
    made in 2005.  At paragraph [5] he set out her immigration history  and
    at paragraphs [55] and [57] the judge made specific  reference  to  the
    determination and the previous findings of fact.  The  grounds  do  not
    demonstrate that even if the findings of fact I have  summarised  above
    were the starting point that it was not open to the judge  to  consider
    the evidence at the date of the hearing in 2015, some ten years  later,
    which were given in a wholly different context.

22. The judge had found in 2005 that the Appellant was the  main  carer  of
    the children.  However the judge was entitled to consider the change in
    the family's circumstances from the evidence  since  that  finding  was
    made.  The judge was plainly aware that she  had  been  the  children's
    main carer and began  his  consideration  of  the  evidence  from  that
    starting point.  However the appellant had committed a serious criminal
    offence leading to her incarceration and therefore her role as the main
    carer had changed as a  result  of  her  criminal  conviction  and  her
    consequent incarceration.  It was therefore open to the judge  to  find
    that whilst it had been said that her imprisonment would put  the  care
    of the children in jeopardy, that the family had supported the children
    and that no serious adverse effects had been reported (see  finding  at
    [37]).  Furthermore at [45] it was open to the judge to find  that  the
    "reality that has emerged from the evidence is  that  both  girls  have
    been looked after by their father and other family members while  their
    mother was in prison.  It had not been shown that this  occasioned  any
    harm to them."  The judge went on to state

         "The Social Services did not become involved with the family  as  a
         consequence  of  the  absence  of  their  mother.   Despite   their
         awareness of their limitations, the combination of the  Appellant's
         husband, niece, sons and other relations have  managed  to  support
         the girls.  There appears to be a sufficient number of relatives in
         this country, of both sexes who can support the  children  and  the
         Appellant's husband."

    Thus the judge did consider the change in the Appellant's circumstances
    since the hearing in 2005.

23. The judge also properly identified her length of residence and that she
    had established a private and family life in the UK  and  proceeded  on
    that basis in reaching the decision in 2015.

24. Whilst the judge found there to be "exceptional circumstances" in 2005,
    the circumstances then were wholly different.   The  decision  made  in
    2005 was against the background of an application for leave  to  remain
    outside of the Rules and was not  a  deportation  case  which  involves
    fundamentally different concepts including the strong  public  interest
    in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals   now   underpinning   the
    legislation to be applied.  The judge was plainly  aware  of  this  and
    properly took this into account at [55].  That it would lead to  family
    members being split is a matter contemplated in  cases  of  deportation
    (see AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 345).

25. Mr Malik also relied upon the findings  made  in  2005  concerning  her
    partner's medical condition.  I observe that  the  Appellant's  husband
    did not attend the hearing and consequently did not give oral  evidence
    before  the  Tribunal  (see  paragraph  [18]  of  the   determination).
    Nevertheless  the  judge  plainly  proceeded  on  the  basis   of   the
    "unchallenged evidence" that her partner  had  a  liver  condition  for
    which he had  received  a  transplant  in  2003  (see  paragraph  [7]).
    Contrary to the written grounds, the findings made by the  Tribunal  in
    2005 did not show complete dependency on the  Appellant  as  the  judge
    found at paragraph [4.8] of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  and  set
    out at [57] of the present determination.

26. Furthermore the First-tier Tribunal in 2005 found  that  there  was  no
    evidence to show that his condition could be or could not be treated in
    Jamaica whereas in the proceedings in 2015 the judge found  as  a  fact
    that there was material before him to demonstrate  that  his  condition
    could be managed in Jamaica.  The judge was entitled to  consider  what
    had  happened  in  the  ten  years  since  the  decision  and  properly
    considered the evidence before the Tribunal at the date of the hearing.

27. At paragraphs [47-50] the judge analysed the  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's partner.  At [47] the judge summarised his condition noting
    that in August 2013 his condition had  not  deteriorated  and  that  in
    December 2013 that overall the health trend was satisfactory  and  that
    he did not exhibit any symptoms referable to his liver.   At  [48]  the
    judge found that the medical  assessments  had  been  made  whilst  the
    Appellant was in custody.  The judge considered this to be  significant
    because it had shown that during the period that she  was  in  custody,
    her husband's condition had not deteriorated.  The judge made reference
    to the fact that none of the medical reports expressed concern that the
    Appellants' domestic circumstances were having an adverse impact on her
    husband's health although the judge recorded  that  the  Appellant  had
    sought to portray that  her  absence  was  damaging  to  her  husband's
    health.  The judge rejected that as not being supported by the evidence
    [see 48].  The judge made reference to the Appellant's  husband  having
    missed one previous medical appointment but that appeared to be because
    he was managing well and that there was no medical evidence to  confirm
    that he had returned to drinking alcohol.   Thus  the  judge  concluded
    that "it is  difficult  to  accept  in  these  circumstances  that  the
    Appellant's absence would have the claimed serious  adverse  impact  on
    her husband's health."

28. At [49] the judge took into account the change from  2005,  whereby  he
    had not been working.   The  judge  noted  that  he  had  been  working
    intermittently in 2013 demonstrating  that  he  was  able  to  function
    economically.  The judge found he was able to drive and  was  therefore
    "able to live a relatively active life despite his condition" and  that
    there were no  concerns  from  Social  Services  about  the  children's
    welfare arising from their mother's absence.  At [50] the  judge  found
    that  there  was  no  evidence  produced  to  show  that  if  necessary
    medication or medical expertise would not be available in  Jamaica  and
    in the alternative, there was no evidence that he could not  travel  to
    visit his wife there.

29. Consequently the grounds do not demonstrate any error  of  law  in  the
    judge's approach to the fact-finding exercise by  failing  to  properly
    consider the determination of the previous Tribunal  in  2005.   Whilst
    the written grounds at paragraph 9 appear to submit  that  because  the
    judge in 2005 had found that her husband was unable to look  after  the
    children and  thus  paragraph  399  was  satisfied,  that  ignores  the
    evidence that was before the judge ten years later that demonstrate  to
    the contrary; that he had been able to care for  the  children  in  the
    absence of their mother (see findings of fact at [37, 45, 46 and  49]).
    The grounds therefore do not demonstrate that the findings of fact made
    by the judge were not open to him on the evidence that was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Ground 2:

30. Dealing with  Ground  2,  it  is  asserted  in  the  grounds  that  the
    Immigration Judge failed to properly assess  the  Appellant's  case  in
    light of the probation report that she was at a low risk of reoffending
    and that the judge materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  provide
    reasons for departing from the conclusion in the said report.

31. In his oral submissions Mr Malik referred to the  report  of  3rd  June
    2014.  He submitted that in the findings of fact reached by  the  judge
    at [40] the judge went beyond the evidence and therefore erred in law.

32. I have  considered  the  submissions  made.   The  judge  set  out  the
    circumstances of the index offence at [36] and [37] and the contents of
    the  presentence  report  that  had  been  provided  at  the  time   of
    sentencing.  At paragraphs [38] to [40], the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    considered the evidence since that date which was  in  the  form  of  a
    letter of 3rd June 2014.  The judge summarised the letter at  [38]  and
    reached the following conclusions at paragraphs [38] to [40].  I  shall
    set out those paragraphs:-

         "[38]    The additional  evaluation  of  the  Appellant  after  the
             sentencing is a short form letter dated 3rd  June  2014,  from
             Jennifer Tucker,  the  Probation  Officer  in  charge  of  the
             Appellant at the time.  It is  said  that  the  Appellant  has
             engaged with the Probation Service, and continues  to  show  a
             high  level  of  commitment  and  motivation  to  address  her
             offending behaviour including through  thinking  skills.   The
             letter states that the Appellant recognises that  her  actions
             would have a detrimental effect on her  future.   It  is  said
             that she has made progress to  improve  her  thinking  skills,
             including victim empathy.

         [39]  Under  cross-examination  at  the  hearing,  it  was   rather
             troubling the Appellant continued to maintain  that  when  she
             did what she did, she thought she was helping.  She said she'd
             explained to the court that she did not profit from the  crime
             and that her brother-in-law had  claimed  the  benefits.   The
             difficulty with this line of defence is that not only was this
             rejected by the trial court, and  by  the  offending  manager,
             that it demonstrates that the Appellant does not  quite  grasp
             the true nature of her offences  which  are  a  fraud  on  the
             public purse.  As is pointed out in  the  presentence  report,
             the monies had in fact been paid into the Appellant's account.
              Even if the monies had  indeed  been  transferred  direct  to
             others without personal gain for the Appellant (a  proposition
             for which she has not adduced evidence) she was  still  wholly
             responsible for defrauding the public.  I note that  the  only
             discount in her sentence was given on account of her  children
             not because of the nature of her role  in  the  crimes,  which
             were found to be at the highest end of responsibility.

         [40] In a short report the Probation Officer has not  engaged  with
             this aspect of the Appellant's attitude to her offending,  for
             which she appears to be still raising exculpatory points which
             were rejected by the sentencing judge.   Although  I  do  note
             that she acted either with or for the benefit of other  family
             members, including her father-in-law and  brother-in-law,  the
             use to which  the  monies  were  put  does  not  diminish  her
             culpability; the parties were either non-existent or were  not
             entitled to the monies.  The fact the  probation  report  does
             not deal with this aspect of the Appellant's partial denial of
             responsibility leaves questions about the reliability  of  the
             assessment that she is at a low risk of reoffending."

33. It is plain from reading the relevant paragraphs as set out above  that
    the judge did assess the Appellant's case in the light of the probation
    report but was entitled to do so in the light of all the evidence  that
    was  before  the  Tribunal.   The  judge  identified  aspects  of   the
    Appellant's evidence which undermined the contents of the  report.   At
    [39] the judge referred to the evidence that had been  elicited  during
    cross-examination concerning the offence, the circumstances of  it  and
    her attitude  towards  it.   The  judge  found  that  her  account  was
    "troubling" and  that  she  had  continued  to  maintain  her  lack  of
    culpability in the offences themselves.  The judge went on to  consider
    her evidence  and  her  explanation  to  the  Tribunal  concerning  the
    circumstances of the offence and it was wholly open  to  the  judge  to
    consider that this evidence was not only rejected by  the  trial  judge
    but also by the offending manager and that it demonstrated that she had
    no acceptance or understanding of the  true  nature  of  her  offences.
    Consequently on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal it was open
    to the judge to reach the conclusion that the  short  letter  from  the
    Probation Officer did not  consider  this  aspect  of  the  Appellant's
    attitude  towards  her  offending  which  included  her   partial   and
    continuing denial of responsibility.  In those circumstances the  judge
    was entitled to reach the conclusion that he could not place weight  or
    reliance upon the conclusion that she was at a low risk of reoffending.
     It is of note that no OASys Report was provided to set out the risk or
    how it had been calculated or on what particular evidence.

34.  Consequently I am satisfied that the grounds do  not  demonstrate  any
    arguable error of law in the judge's conclusions  in  relation  to  the
    probation report.

35. At the conclusion of the advocate's submissions, I pointed out to  them
    that whilst the judge had properly applied Section 117  (and  Exception
    2) the judge had applied the wrong Rule  and  that  the  amended  Rules
    became effective as of 28th July 2014 (see YM (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1292).I therefore invited the submissions  from  each  of  the
    advocates.

36. Mr Wilding on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that the issue
    that the judge was required to consider was properly identified at [54]
    as to whether the effect on the Appellant's children and her husband of
    her removal was "unduly harsh".  The judge had identified this  as  the
    key issue and the findings of fact, which were  properly  made  on  the
    evidence dealt with the issues under the new Rules thus  any  error  in
    applying the wrong Rule  was  not  material.   He  submitted  that  the
    grounds did not set out any challenge to the assessment of  whether  it
    was "unduly harsh" and that the judge's reasoning  was  clear  on  this
    point.  The findings of fact were fully open to the judge to  make  and
    the judge dealt with all the issues arising and therefore  it  has  not
    been demonstrated that those findings of fact  were  not  open  to  the
    judge to make and thus there was no material error of law.

37. Mr Malik submitted that the family circumstances were bleak and that if
    the judge had  properly  considered  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made in 2005 the judge would have been led to  the  conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to be removed from  the
    United Kingdom and her family members.  Those factors  identified  from
    the 2005 determination were that there were three  minor  children  and
    that the judge failed to take that into account.

38. As to the Rules themselves, Mr Malik conceded that the Appellant  could
    not meet 399(b)(i) relating to the Appellant's partner.

39.  As to materiality, he submitted that the judge did  not  consider  the
    family's circumstances  in  the  light  of  what  had  been  previously
    established and therefore paragraph [54] dealing with  the  test  under
    Section 117 did not properly dispose of the appeal.  Therefore  as  the
    judge did not take into  account  the  circumstances  by  applying  the
    approach in Devaseelan, the decision of the judge was wrong and that it
    would be "unduly harsh" for the Appellant to be removed from the United
    Kingdom.

40. As set out above neither advocate had identified that the Tribunal  had
    not applied the amended Rules which had become  effective  as  of  28th
    July 2014 but the parties were given the opportunity  to  address  that
    issue.

41.  I therefore have to consider whether the error  was  material  to  the
    outcome as an error of law does not in itself lead to a decision  being
    set aside and an appeal being granted.  I have to consider whether  the
    error either was, or  may  have  been,  material  to  the  outcome.   A
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal may be upheld if the final  outcome
    was correct notwithstanding an error and whether an error  is  material
    will depend upon matters as to the  centrality  of  the  error  to  the
    reasoning set out in the judgment.  It is also dependent  upon  whether
    the facts relied upon and found by the Tribunal were  relevant  to  the
    correct test to be applied  so  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  can  assess
    whether they might or would lead to a different outcome.

42. The judge identified that the length of the sentence  was  one  of  two
    years six months and therefore paragraph  398(b)  applied.   The  judge
    therefore had to consider whether she met paragraph 399  or  399A.   On
    the findings made by the judge, the Appellant could not meet  paragraph
    399A in light of the findings made at [53]; the Appellant had not  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of her life, nor could it be  said
    that there were very significant obstacles to her  integration  bearing
    in mind the findings of fact made that she had arrived in the UK at the
    age of 33, that she had lived in her previous country of residence  for
    most of her life and had previously worked and raised  a  family  there
    and still had family relations in that country.

43. It was  also  conceded  by  Mr  Malik  that  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 399(b) and that whilst she had a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who was in the UK and a  British
    citizen, it could not be established that the relationship  was  formed
    at a time when the person  was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  that  their
    immigration status was not precarious in the light of the findings made
    by the  judge  in  2005  and  in  2015.   Furthermore  in  relation  to
    399(b)(ii) the judge found that in the light of the  findings  of  fact
    made that it would not be unduly harsh for her partner to live  in  the
    country to which  she  was  to  be  deported  because  there  were  not
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    EX.2 of Appendix FM.  The judge found that notwithstanding his  medical
    condition the availability of medical care in Jamaica was available  to
    him for the reasons set out at paragraphs {47-50].  The judge  did  not
    find that there would be any  significant  difficulties  faced  by  the
    applicant or her partner continuing their family life  outside  of  the
    UK.  In any event, even if it would be unduly harsh for her husband  to
    live in Jamaica, the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge  did  not
    demonstrate that paragraph 399(b)(iii) were met, namely that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK without the person
    who is to be deported.  The judge properly considered this in the light
    of the medical circumstances at paragraph [47 to 48]; the  judge  found
    that he was able to function economically [49], he was able to lead  an
    active life despite his condition and that at  [45]  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for him to remain in the UK without his partner.

44. Thus in the light of that concession, and the findings of fact made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, the only relevant Rule was that  of  paragraph
    399(a), ( and Exception 2) namely, that the person has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age of  18  who
    is in the UK and is a British citizen.

45. There are two limbs to be met:-

         (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the  country
             to which the person is to be deported; and

         (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
             without the person who is to be deported.

45.  As to the first limb, the judge properly identified at  [30]  that  the
    "criteria" within the Rules which must be satisfied in  order  for  the
    parental relationship to outweigh the  public  interest  and  that  the
    criteria, reflected the duty to have  regard  to  the  children's  best
    interests.  Whilst the judge at [31] considered it in  the  context  of
    reasonableness, in the finding made at [31] the judge  considered  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK given
    their ties to their country and in the case  of  one  of  the  children
    their education and the fact that there  would  be  a  lack  of  proper
    arrangements for them in Jamaica.  Therefore the  judge's  findings  in
    that respect would have satisfied paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a).

46.  However the second limb still had to be satisfied and the  judge  would
    have to have considered whether it would be unduly harsh for the  child
    to remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

47.  Whilst the judge did not  consider  this  under  the  Rules  the  judge
    considered  this  issue  comprehensively  when  considering  Article  8
    outside of the Rules from paragraph [34] onwards and made findings upon
    this issue as to whether it would be unduly harsh for the  children  to
    remain in the UK without the Appellant.

48.  The findings in this respect can be summarised as follows:-

         (a)  At paragraphs [31] to [32] the judge  found  that  there  were
             other relatives (including the children's elder  siblings  and
             older cousins) who had helped look after  the  children  while
             the Appellant was in prison and could continue to do so in the
             Appellant's absence.

         (b)  At paragraphs [41] to [46], at [41] the judge identified  "the
             key focus is  therefore  on  the  impact  of  removal  on  her
             children whose interests are a primary consideration  and  her
             partner."

         (c)  The judge considered the circumstances  individually  for  the
             relevant children, B, D and K.  In respect of B  at  [42]  the
             judge found that he had limited leave to remain but  that  his
             stay in the UK was not contingent on  his  mother's  presence,
             that the evidence was that he had stopped attending school and
             was not at college and was about to move  out  of  the  house.
             The judge found that he was making his own decisions and  that
             "it cannot be said that his  interests  in  a  life  with  his
             mother should prevail."  In her absence, he would be supported
             by his  older  siblings  and  other  relatives  including  his
             stepfather.

         (d)  The judge  identified  the  circumstances  of  K  and  D  were
             different at [43].  The  judge  took  into  account  that  the
             children would no doubt be affected by their mother's  absence
             but stated "the key question is whether their  best  interests
             in receiving the continuing support of their mother  alongside
             that of their father overrides the public  interest  in  their
             mother's deportation."  In considering that  issue  the  judge
             took into account the following factors, namely that they were
             still young, that they would be left in a  predominantly  male
             household ill-equipped to raise them  and  took  into  account
             letters from their father  and  sibling  though  neither  were
             present at the hearing or gave evidence.  The  judge  remarked
             at [44] that it was "somewhat surprising" that  the  Appellant
             did not adduce specific professional evidence to  advance  the
             children's circumstances and noted that there were no detailed
             reports of the children's respective schools [44].  The  judge
             took into account the documents from the academy relating to D
             and disruptive behaviour but found that they  related  to  the
             period from September 2015 and the  judge  observed  that  the
             period of time was when the  Appellant  was  in  fact  out  of
             prison and that it had not been demonstrated that D's problems
             were linked to the prospects of her mother's deportation.

          e) At [45] the judge recorded that

             "the reality that has emerged from the evidence is  that  both
             girls have been looked after by their father and other  family
             members while their mother was in prison.   It  has  not  been
             shown that this occasioned any harm to them.  Social  Services
             did not become involved with the family as  a  consequence  of
             the absence of their mother.  Despite their awareness of their
             limitations,  the  combination  of  the  Appellant's  husband,
             niece, sons and other relations have managed  to  support  the
             girls.  There appears to be a sufficient number  of  relatives
             in this country, of both sexes, who could support the children
             and the Appellant's husband."

          f) As to K the judge found that there was no doubt that she would
             affected adversely by the decision to remove her mother.

          g) At [54] the judge considered Section 117C(5) and the following
             question,  "Would the effect on the Appellant's daughters  and
             her husband of  her  removal  be  unduly  harsh?"   The  judge
             considered that this was at the "heart of the  proportionality
             question as the genuine subsisting  relationships  of  the  UK
             family members has already been accepted by the Respondent."

49.  The findings made at paragraphs [55 to 58]  should  be  read  with  the
    earlier identified findings made when considering the children and  the
    Appellant's  partner.   The  judge  properly  considered  the   earlier
    findings made in 2005 and  for  the  reasons  that  I  have  given  was
    entitled to find that the circumstances  were  different  in  that  the
    context of the proceedings were different and that  the  Appellant  had
    come before the Tribunal as a serious offender whose case  fell  to  be
    determined against the context of the clear statutory  stipulations  as
    to the weight to be accorded to the public interest in the  deportation
    of a foreign  criminal.   The  judge  properly  reminded  himself  that
    against this there was a  statutory  duty  to  take  into  account  the
    children's best interests as a primary consideration.  The  judge  made
    reference to the fact that

         "... in the absence of serious  offending  by  the  Appellant,  the
         situation of the children might well  have  outweighed  any  public
         interest in their mother's  deportation  had  she  merely  been  an
         overstayer or had she committed a less serious crime.  I have found
         the children are in  fact  able  to  benefit  from  support  of  an
         extended family."

    That would also include their father.

50. I have set out at length the findings of fact made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. Whilst Mr Malik sought  to  submit  when  relying  upon
    Ground 1 that the judge's findings of fact did not properly take as the
    starting point the material findings made by the judge in 2005, for the
    reasons that I have given earlier in the determination, I did not  find
    that ground to have  merit.   Consequently  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    findings of fact that were made by the judge were open to  him  on  the
    evidence  before him. I bear in mind that the judge had  the  advantage
    of seeing the Appellant give evidence. Mr Malik did not attempt to take
    the Tribunal through the statements and  evidence  to  show  that  such
    evidence was incapable of justifying the judge's conclusions.

51. As I have set out earlier it is necessary to apply the Rules  to  those
    facts to assess whether  they  might  or  would  lead  to  a  different
    outcome.  I am satisfied that had the judge  applied  paragraph  399(a)
    that the outcome would not have been any  different  in  the  light  of
    those findings of fact that were made.  Neither party  either  produced
    copies of the decisions of KMO (Section 117  -  unduly  harsh)  Nigeria
    [2015] UKUT 00543 and MAB (paragraph 399, "unduly  harsh")  USA  [2015]
    435 (IAC) or made any submissions relating to  the  contents  of  those
    decisions. In MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC),
    the Upper  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  and  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Phillips) held that the phrase " unduly harsh"  in  para
    399 of the Rules and s.117C(5) of  the  2002  Act  does  not  import  a
    balancing exercise requiring the public interest to be weighed  against
    the circumstances of the individual (whether child or  partner  of  the
    deportee).  The  Tribunal  held  that  the  focus  is  solely  upon  an
    evaluation  of  the  consequences  and  impact  upon   the   individual
    concerned. However, the Upper Tribunal took a different view in KMO .In
    reaching his decision, Judge Southern considered and dealt with (at [8]-
    [25]) the reasoning of the panel in MAB  in  reaching  its  conclusion.
    Whilst I am not bound by either decision of the Upper Tribunal I prefer
    the decision of KMO in the light of the detailed consideration  of  the
    issues set out in that determination.

52. In KMO the construction of the phrase "unduly harsh" was considered  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  As in this appeal, the  Upper  Tribunal  was  only
    concerned with paragraph 399 and not 399A  and  the  assessment  as  to
    whether 399 applied in an assessment whether deportation  would  result
    in an infringement of Article 8 rights.  In that decision the  Tribunal
    considered that paragraph 399 (and 399A), are concerned with the public
    interest question because the overriding presumption of  the  Rules  as
    recited  in  paragraph  396  is  that  where  a  person  is  liable  to
    deportation, the presumption shall be that the public interest requires
    deportation.  Therefore the public interest question inhabits paragraph
    399 as it does in paragraph 398 (see [14]).

53. At [17] the Upper Tribunal found that there was nothing in the Rules or
    statute to eliminate from an  assessment  of  what  is  "unduly  harsh"
    consideration of the seriousness of the offence  committed  (see  [17])
    which is reinforced by  the  fact  that  categorisation  of  a  foreign
    criminal can also arise on  the  basis  of  persistent  offending  (see
    [18]).  Thus at [19] the Upper Tribunal considered the  phrase  "unduly
    harsh" which plainly anticipates an evaluation being required.

54. Therefore the conclusion reached at [24] was that the word "unduly"  in
    the phrase "unduly harsh" requires  consideration  of  whether  in  the
    light of the seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the  foreign
    criminal and the public interest considerations that  come  into  play,
    the impact on the children or partner of the person being  deported  is
    inordinately or excessively harsh.

55. The question identified by the Upper Tribunal in KMO at [33] whether it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in  the  UK  without
    their father (in the present  case  the  mother)  identified  that  the
    question must be addressed in the  light  of  the  circumstances  as  a
    whole, paying regard in particular to the  factors  the  Tribunal  must
    take into account as a consequence of Section  117  of  the  2002  Act.
    Whilst the Tribunal did not have the advantage of the decision in  KMO,
    it is plain from reading the determination as a whole that the relevant
    question that was addressed by the First-tier Tribunal, namely  whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the  UK  without
    their mother, was properly considered in the light of the circumstances
    as a whole and by considering properly the public interest.  Whilst the
    determination took into account that it would be in the best  interests
    of the children to maintain a parental relationship with both  parents,
    that was not a complete  answer  to  the  question  identified  in  KMO
    because the judge noted that a balance had to be  struck  between  that
    important consideration and the powerful public interest  consideration
    in play (see paragraphs [55] and [56]).

56. Thus the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  take  into  account  the  relevant
    considerations when reaching an overall view of  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  be  removed  with  the  children
    remaining in the United Kingdom and adopted  and  applied  the  correct
    approach as set out in KMO.

57.  Whilst  the  judge  applied  the  wrong  Rule,  when  considering  the
    determination in the light of the findings of fact which were made  and
    properly open to the Tribunal to so make, it has not been  demonstrated
    that the error was material and that the facts relied upon by the judge
    were properly considered and were relevant to the correct  test  to  be
    applied.  The Rules contemplate separation as being a possible  outcome
    of deportation proceedings and thus it is not sufficient to say that it
    is  "harsh"  to  separate  the  parties  involved.   Separation  is  an
    inevitable feature of deportation as recognised under  the  Immigration
    Rules  and  primary  legislation  and  it  is  also  reflected  in  the
    jurisprudence (see AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ  345)  and  that  the
    nature of a deportation order is  that,  however  tragically,  it  will
    sometimes break up families, with the inevitable  adverse  consequences
    on any children of the family. Furthermore it is not sufficient for the
    Appellant to point to the fact that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a child under 18 who is a British citizen,
    as overlaying those  features  of  the  case  is  the  requirement  for
    separation to be unduly harsh.  The evidence before the judge  did  not
    establish the existence of unduly harsh consequences if  the  Appellant
    was deported and that they would have to remain in the United Kingdom.

58. Thus in the light of  those  findings,  the  decision  reached  is  not
    materially affected by the structural error in approach  taken  by  the
    judge in relation to his assessment.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

