
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA018142014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 June 2016                               |On 15 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     s s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cross, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, SS, was born in 1980 and is a male  citizen  of  Latvia.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge C J Woolley) against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 1 September  2014  to  deport  him  to
    Latvia.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 3  March
    2015,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  April  2006  from
    Latvia and had worked variously as  a  warehouse  operative  and  in  a
    factory.  He is a drug user and took to shoplifting in  order  to  fund
    his habit.  He was sentenced to imprisonment in the United  Kingdom  in
    August 2009 for driving while disqualified and for theft  offences  the
    last custodial sentences have been passed in June 2014.  The  appellant
    claimed that if he returned to Latvia he will be killed  by  the  mafia
    there.

 3. The appellant was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    first two grounds of appeal complain of the judge's failure to  adjourn
    the hearing and to  give  directions  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    partner, L.  The judge dealt with the adjournment application at [4]:

         "The appellant applied for an adjournment.   One  year  before  his
         sister had passed away and his  mother  could  not  come  with  him
         today.  He should be at home as well.  He had left some  papers  at
         home with information as to what he did  now  (working  nightshifts
         and looking after three  children).   Ms  Lewis  [the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer] considered this  was  an  unusual  application.
         There was a need to have evidence of treaty rights and there was no
         evidence of them as yet.  Family members would have attended.   She
         did  not  oppose  the  application.   After  considering  all   the
         submissions I  indicated  I  was  not  prepared  to  adjourn.   The
         appellant was already in court despite his sister's  death  and  he
         could give evidence of the exercise of treaty  rights.   He  had  a
         witness who could speak  in  his  support.   He  had  a  bundle  of
         documents present in court.   I  considered  the  appeal  could  be
         justly  determined  without  an  adjournment  and  that  it  should
         proceed."

 4. As the grounds of appeal record, that the present  Procedure  Rules  of
    the First-tier Tribunal simply provide  a  paragraph  to  "adjourn  and
    postpone a hearing"; there is no test as to the justice of the decision
    to adjourn provided by paragraph 21 of the  2005  Rules.   The  judge's
    decision, therefore,  ought  to  be  considered  by  reference  to  the
    overriding objective in the current Procedure Rules to "deal with cases
    fairly and justly".  Ultimately, the judge had to consider the question
    of  fairness  and  to  determine  the   application   for   adjournment
    accordingly.  The grounds of appeal place much  weight  upon  the  fact
    that the respondent supported the application.  However,  the  decision
    remained one for the judge.  He was not  compelled  to  adjourn  simply
    because both parties had agreed that the hearing should  be  adjourned.
    The grounds also assert that an adjournment was required to enable  the
    appellant "to obtain his witnesses and central material  supported  the
    relationship between the appellant  and  his  three  children..."   The
    judge accepted that the appellant had a  relationship  with  his  three
    children and that he was a joint carer with his  partner  L  for  those
    children.  It is unclear, even at this stage in the  proceedings,  that
    the evidence which the appellant states he would have adduced had there
    been an adjournment might have materially  altered  the  factual  basis
    upon which the judge determined the appeal.   Indeed,  as  regards  the
    question of rehabilitation, the judge dealt with this  at  [30]  basing
    her findings to a large extent on the candid  description  of  his  own
    criminality provided by the appellant himself.  The judge was  entitled
    to note that the appellant had been informed of the date of the hearing
    and time in advance and that he might well have  anticipated  that  the
    hearing would coincide with the  anniversary  of  his  sister's  death.
    Despite being aware of that fact, the appellant  had  done  nothing  to
    seek an adjournment prior to the date of  the  hearing  itself.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge took fully into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was not legally represented and I find that she was  entitled
    to conclude that the hearing could  be  determined  fairly  without  an
    adjournment because the appellant himself was in court and able to give
    evidence because he had brought documents with him to support his case.
     Another judge faced with the same  application  may  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion.  However, that is not the point.   Judge  Woolley
    has given adequate reasons  for  refusing  the  adjournment.   She  was
    entitled to find that the hearing could be conducted fairly.

 5. The grounds also complain the  judge  failed  to  adjourn  the  hearing
    despite the fact that the appellant's  partner  (L)  had  been  granted
    permission for a judicial  review  on  24  February  2015  against  the
    respondent's refusal of her claim that she had  been  trafficked.   The
    grounds assert that the judge should have linked  the  appeals  of  the
    appellant and L.  To have done so would have required an adjournment.

 6. I find that the ground has no merit.  That the appellant's partner  may
    well have been granted permission to bring judicial review proceedings.
     She appears to have received that permission on the same  day  as  the
    hearing before Judge Woolley.   The  Presenting  Officer  was  able  to
    inform the judge that the appeal of L  before  the  Tribunal  had  been
    withdrawn.  First, I find that there were  no  proceedings  before  the
    Tribunal  which  the  judge  could  have  consolidated.   It  was   not
    reasonable to expect the respondent to  have  known  of  the  grant  of
    permission for judicial review given that that permission  was  granted
    on the same day as the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Secondly, even  if
    the respondent and  the  Tribunal  had  been  aware  of  the  grant  of
    permission it is not clear why this  should  have  led  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to adjourn the appellant's appeal.  L is a Latvian citizen and
    the joint carer of the children of herself  and  the  appellant.   When
    assessing L's position and that of the children, the judge has done  so
    on the alternative bases that L would remain in the United Kingdom with
    the children or be removed with  the  children  and  the  appellant  to
    Latvia.  Whatever the outcome of the judicial review application of  L,
    those appear to remain the only possible scenarios  and  Judge  Woolley
    has duly considered them.

 7. Ground 3 concerns the judge's conclusion that the appellant represented
    a genuine present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  The judge properly  considered  Essa
    (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC).   The  grounds
    complain that the Tribunal,

         "... failed to consider the potential  result  deportation  of  the
         appellant and the likely diminution of the family support  for  him
         and the withdrawal of the discipline of methadone conditions  which
         he now  faces  since  his  release  and  the  benefits  of  regular
         employment in the community and the new  position  as  the  primary
         carer of his children."

 8. The judge dealt with Essa at [30].  The judge noted there had been  "no
    evidence  that  the   appellant   had   made   any   progress   towards
    rehabilitation".  He had undertaken a  victims'  awareness  course  but
    "this course had not had any effect since very soon after  his  release
    he committed a further offence of shoplifting".  On the  basis  of  the
    evidence,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  shown  "no
    reasonable prospects of rehabilitation".  The judge was  aware  of  the
    appellant's relationship with L and the existence  of  their  children,
    for whom he was the primary carer.  The judge did not  need  to  repeat
    that she was aware of those facts in her discussion of the prospects of
    rehabilitation.  I am satisfied that the judge reached her decision  as
    regards rehabilitation by duly following Essa and on the basis that the
    appellant had family ties  and  responsibilities  here  in  the  United
    Kingdom but she found that,  notwithstanding  that  evidence,  she  was
    satisfied that the appellant would continue to commit offences in order
    to fund his drug habit.  Indeed, the judge noted that  the  appellant's
    "problems are very deep seated and that  he  is  a  habitual  criminal"
    [31].

 9. The fourth ground of appeal concerns  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    interests of the children A and L.  At [35], the judge  found  that  it
    would "not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without
    the presence of the appellant since they have  already  been  separated
    from him by numerous terms of imprisonment and immigration  detention".
    I reject entirely the suggestion in the grounds that the judge in  some
    way considered that the interests of the children should be  diminished
    on  account  of  the  fact  that  they  are   not   British   citizens.
    Furthermore, implicit in the judge's  reasoning  is  her  understanding
    that neither the appellant nor L face detention in Latvia if either  or
    both of them  are  returned  to  that  country.   Either  or  both  the
    appellant and L, therefore, will be able to  look  after  the  children
    either in the United Kingdom or in Latvia.  The fact that the  children
    are Latvian rather than British does not provide any additional  reason
    for their remaining here rather than Latvia.  The judge was entitled to
    find  that  the  children  (aged  11  and  7)  had  not  "developed  an
    independent life apart from their  parents".   Her  assessment  of  the
    interests of the children are clear and properly  reasoned  and,  as  I
    have noted above, the judge has considered the case both on  the  basis
    that L remains in the United Kingdom or returns to Latvia.   The  judge
    has not fallen into legal error  for  the  reasons  identified  in  the
    grounds of appeal or at all.

10. The final ground of  appeal  concerns  L  and  the  appellant's  asylum
    claims.  The grounds complain that the  position  of  L  had  not  been
    properly considered especially in the light of the fact  that  she  had
    been granted permission to bring proceedings for  judicial  review.   I
    repeat the facts as regards L which I have set out  above.   The  judge
    was not aware that L had been granted permission to  bring  proceedings
    for judicial review.  She was aware L's appeal to the Tribunal had been
    withdrawn.  Further, the judge has dealt with  the  appellant's  claims
    regarding himself and L and the mafia and rejected that evidence  [47].
    She did not accept that L or the appellant were at risk from the  mafia
    in Latvia and has given reasons for rejecting the appellant's  account.
    At the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  there  had
    been no judicial determination of L's claims and, in  my  opinion,  the
    judge's findings are sound.

11. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date 9 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 9 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
