
IAC-FH-NL-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01225/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 March 2015                              |On 22 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MATTHEW ASARE FRIMPONG
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hubber, Counsel instructed by Descartes
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian who on 6 January this  year  allowed
    an appeal by the respondent against a deportation order which had  been
    made by the Secretary of State.

2.   The background is in no way favourable to this appellant.  There is  no
    record of his entry into this country.  He claimed to have been born in
    this country in 1959 to Ghanaian parents who moved back  to  Ghana  and
    then returned to the United Kingdom sometime in 1979.  However in  1998
    he married a lady by proxy in Ghana and in November 2006  he  submitted
    an application to transfer a certificate of entitlement to the right of
    abode using a Ghanaian passport under the  false  identity  of  another
    man.  That he had fraudulently adopted that  other  man's  identity  is
    unquestioned because he  was  convicted  on  9  December  2010  at  the
    Snaresbrook Crown Court of possessing that false identity document  and
    as a result was sentenced to  eighteen  months'  imprisonment.   It  is
    plain from the remarks of the sentencing judge that a  very  poor  view
    was formed of the appellant.  As the judge said  for  long  periods  of
    time he had adopted a false identity, in effect stolen or hijacked  the
    identity of the real person in question who had indeed  suffered  as  a
    result.  He raised a totally  false  defence  and  showed  no  remorse,
    indeed never has shown any remorse for what he did.   He  was  released
    from that sentence on 7 April 2011.   Unfortunately  the  Secretary  of
    State did not take  any  steps  to  remove  him  as  a  result  of  his
    conviction  because  the  sentence  meant  that  he  was  an  automatic
    deportee.  However, in due course, that decision was reached and as  we
    say he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   Judge Andonian said he had no sympathy  whatsoever  for  the  appellant
    and indeed it is perfectly clear that if it had simply been his private
    life he would have got nowhere.  The reason why the appeal was  allowed
    was because of the effect of the appellant's deportation upon his wife.
     There was powerful evidence before Judge Andonian that dealt with  his
    wife's condition.  She was hugely handicapped and had  recently  had  a
    stroke.  Her left arm and hand were completely useless following a fall
    in late 2012 and unfortunately her condition has deteriorated.  She  is
    in pain, has kidney disease and diabetes and apparently  needs  someone
    to inject her with insulin because she cannot do it herself as one  arm
    and hand are useless because of the stroke  from  which  she  suffered.
    She relies on the appellant for 24 hour care.  He told lies  about  how
    he was earning money but it is clear that the family is living  on  the
    benefits to which his wife is entitled.  However the only thing that is
    in his favour is that he clearly has cared for, and continues  to  care
    for his wife.  She told Judge Andonian that  she  was  unaware  of  the
    appellant's falsehoods and as the judge decided, and we quote:

         "I found her to be the real victim in this appeal, an innocent  and
         credible lady whose love for her husband  had  not  diminished  one
         iota even after his arrest and conviction  and  before  she  became
         immobile due to her stroke and the other progressive  illness  such
         as liver and kidney disease she did visit him as much as she  could
         in prison."

4.   She was asked whether she would go and live with him  in  Ghana  if  he
    was deported and she said that she could hardly move let  alone  travel
    to a foreign country where she would receive  no  medical  support  and
    nowhere to live and  in  addition  the  appellant's  stepchildren  gave
    evidence to Judge Andonian that their children, that is to say his step-
    grandchildren,  were  very  close  to  him,  regarding  him  as   their
    grandfather.  He had brought up his step-children and their  biological
    father had died a considerable time ago so they considered  him  to  be
    their father.  Now of course, so far as they are concerned, the  family
    life is probably not within the meaning of Article 8.  Nonetheless  one
    has to bear in mind the position of the grandchildren who look  to  the
    appellant as their true grandfather.  However  it  is  the  appellant's
    wife's condition that is crucial so far as this  appeal  is  concerned.
    She is significantly not only physically impaired  but  also  there  is
    evidence from the reports that she does rely on her husband and were he
    not to be there she would deteriorate so far as  her  mental  condition
    was concerned.

5.   The attack upon the judge's decision is based upon the submission  that
    he failed properly to consider the up-to-date  Rules  in  reaching  his
    conclusion and that he had failed to make a decision  which  looked  to
    the other side as it were of the situation than that simply relating to
    the position of the wife.  However the fact is that he did consider the
    up-to-date primary legislation.  That is contained in Section  117C  of
    the 2002 Act and that so far as material provides  by  sub-Section  (1)
    the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest; (2) the
    more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal the greater is
    the public interest in the deportation of the criminal.  Then there is,
    by sub-Section (5) an exception which applies where the criminal has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    and the effect of deportation on the partner or child would  be  unduly
    harsh.  Qualifying partner means by Section 117D (a) a partner who is a
    British citizen (that does not apply) or (b) is settled in  the  United
    Kingdom within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971.  One is then to
    look back to Section  33(2A)  of  the  1971  Act  which  provides  that
    reference to a person being settled in the United Kingdom is  reference
    to his being ordinarily resident here without being subject  under  the
    Immigration Laws to any restriction on the  period  for  which  he  may
    remain.  Accordingly the appellant's partner is a qualifying partner.

6.   Going back to sub-Section 5, exception 2, which  is  the  exception  in
    question, applies as we have said where  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  So that is the test that the primary legislation requires to be
    applied.

7.   Judge Andonian considered the law.  He referred to  Razgar  and  to  MF
    (Nigeria) in relation to Article 8 and he considered the impact on  the
    step-grandchildren but he went on to decide that the deportation  would
    have, as he put it, a devastating effect on others,  in  particular  on
    his innocent and incapacitated wife and innocent step-grandchildren and
    would not be a proportionate act in the circumstances.   That  approach
    is criticised because it is said not only to have regard to the primary
    legislation but also to Rules which have been made in relation  to  the
    removal of foreign criminals.  Those Rules are to be found in  398  and
    399(b).  398 so far as  material  provides  how  the  rules  should  be
    applied where a person claims that their deportation would be  contrary
    to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.
    398(b) provides that the deportation of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
    have been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
    a period of imprisonment of less than four years but  at  least  twelve
    months.  In assessing the  claim  that  deportation  would  breach  the
    claimant's rights under Article 8 the Secretary of State will  consider
    whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it  does  not  the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

8.   Paragraph 399(b) deals  with  the  case  where  the  individual  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the United
    Kingdom and is settled in the UK but it requires that the  relationship
    was formed at a time when the deportee was in the UK lawfully and their
    immigration status was not precarious.  On his immigration  status  the
    appellant was not here lawfully and indeed his immigration  status  was
    precarious.  So paragraph 399B does not apply.

9.   However 399B provides:

         "Where an Article 8 claim for a foreign criminal is successful

         (a)  in the case of a person who  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully  ....
             limited leave may be granted...."

    That of course presupposes that there can be a case where a  person  in
    the UK unlawfully can qualify under Article 8.

10.  When one goes back to the decision of Judge Andonian  in  paragraph  26
    he concludes thus, and we quote:

         "I have also considered the various considerations that need to  be
         taken into account under section 117C of the Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 inserted by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  Under
         that section  I  have  considered  the  exceptions  to  the  public
         interest requirement to deport, and it is only to exception 2  that
         I turn to in that regard, that being the fact  that  the  appellant
         has a genuine relationship with a qualified partner,  and  that  it
         would be unduly harsh for the partner if the appellant were  to  be
         deported."

11.  Now whatever the Rules may or may not say the  primary  legislation  in
    Section 117C makes it plain that the test that has  to  be  applied  is
    whether it would be unduly harsh.  True it is that the Rule talks about
    compelling circumstances but that test on the approach to the facts  by
    Judge Andonian would also clearly have been met.  It is  not  submitted
    on behalf of the Secretary of State that the decision that it would  be
    unduly harsh on the facts was one to which  Judge  Andonian  could  not
    come.  It would in  those  circumstances,  in  our  judgment,  only  be
    appropriate to allow this appeal if we were persuaded that on the facts
    the conclusion that notwithstanding the position  that  deportation  is
    conducive  to  the  public  good  and  in  the  public  interest,  that
    deportation would have an  unduly  harsh  impact   on  the  appellant's
    partner not only because  in all the circumstances it would  mean  that
    effectively it would not be possible for family life to  be  maintained
    in Ghana but also that the appellant's partner would  lose  the   carer
    whose support is vital to her welfare.   That being so, it seems to  us
    that whether or not in reaching his conclusion Judge  Andonian  applied
    the correct approach, the fact is when he reached his final decision he
    adopted a test which it is accepted was the correct test, namely was it
    unduly harsh and since it was not unlawful for him to have found on the
    facts that it was unduly harsh so far as the  appellant's  partner  was
    concerned, it seems to us we have no alternative but  to  dismiss  this
    appeal.

12.  We make it clear that obviously as will be likely in  all  these  cases
    it depends entirely upon  its  own  facts.   We  are  not  setting  out
    anything that is new law or untested law, we are simply applying to the
    facts of this individual case as found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    the approach which Parliament has  decided  is  the  correct  approach,
    namely unduly harsh.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:       Dated:  20 April 2015
For and on behalf of
Mr Justice Collins

