

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01773/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 13th February 2014                         |on 19th February 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ROBERT JOHNSON
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Azmi instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler and Mr G
        Getlevog (non legal member), hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel'
        who in a determination promulgated on the 20th October 2013 allowed
        the appeal against the decision  to  deport  Mr  Johnson  from  the
        United Kingdom made pursuant to section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration
        Act 1971. This is therefore not an automatic deportation case.


     2. The Panel set out their findings of fact at paragraphs 11 to 22  of
        the determination in which they accept the evidence that Mr Johnson
        is involved to a significant degree in the care of his child.


     3. The Panel analyse the provisions of the Immigration Rules so far as
        they apply to the facts of this case [23 -26] and remind themselves
        of the need to undertake a proportionality assessment  as  per  the
        guidance provided by the Court of Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 1192, which they did. As a result they found the  decision
        to deport not to be proportionate on the facts [32].


     4. The Secretary of State challenges the conclusions of the  Panel  in
        relation to the effect of the delay that has occurred it this case.
        The Panel noted the offending behaviour, sixty six offences in  ten
        years, [13] and also found:


     16.  It is the appellants' case, which in the absence of challenge,  we
              accept, that he has since that time taken  steps  to  end  the
   drug habit              which was, it would appear, at the root  of  much
   of his offending             behaviour.   We  accept  his  evidence  that
   during his last prison                 sentence  he  was  accepted  on  a
   rehabilitation programme which                helped him to get off drugs
   and that he continued the programme           after his sentence,  taking
   Methadone until he was bale to come off            that.


     17.  Evidence as to the risk of re-offending is found in  a  letter  of
   20th           April  2009  from  the  probation  officer  who  had  been
   supervising the               appellant  since  September  2008.  He  had
   engaged well in                       supervision and  was  motivated  to
   address his  offending  behaviour.               He  was  then  receiving
   intensive support to address his drug issues.               The probation
   officer's   assessment   at   that   time   of   the    risk    of    re-
   offending was low.


     5. In relation to the issue of delay the Panel found:


     29.  Had the respondent  taken  steps  to  deport  the  appellant  much
   earlier,       for example in 2008, the decision maker and  the  Tribunal
   on appeal      would have taken account of  the  lengthy  and  persistent
   offending      history between 1998 and 2008 and would  also  have  taken
   into           account the apparent absence at that time of family.


     6. When assessing the weight to be given to the delay the Panel found:


     30.  The circumstances before the Tribunal in late  2013  are  markedly
   different.  The delay cannot, in  our  judgment,  be  attributed  to  the
   appellant.  Since 2008 the appellant had  freed  himself  from  the  drug
   habit  which  appears  to  have  been  at  the  root  of  his   offending
   behaviour.  He has not offended  for  more  than  five  years.   He  has,
   importantly, established family  life  with  his  partner,  his  daughter
   now aged 1 and his four stepchildren.


     7. The challenge to the weight the Panel gave to this element  of  the
        case has no arguable merit. The offending and delay  elements  were
        considered by the Panel with  the  required  degree  of  care.   In
        Yousuf (Somalia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 394  the  Court  of  Appeal
        said that the amount of time the Home Office allowed to pass before
        serving a deportation order did not create any kind  of  legitimate
        expectation that the claimant would not be  deported,  but  it  did
        mean that the Home Office, and,  in  turn,  the  Tribunal,  had  to
        consider a period in which, unlike most deportees who had offended,
        the claimant had been able to show himself capable of living a  law
        abiding life.


     8. In this case the decision under appeal is dated  15th  August  2013
        whereas the last offence was committed in 2008. During that time Mr
        Johnson was able to avoid re-offending and  formed  a  genuine  and
        strong family life.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  in  some  sense
        responsible for the factual matrix  created  before  the  Tribunal.
        There is no merit in the claim the Panel  failed  to  consider  the
        relevant legal principles in relation to delay.


     9. Ground 2 alleges a failure to consider the case of Nnyanzi v UK. It
        as asserted that as all the ties Mr Johnson has formed,  and  which
        he relies upon in support of his case, have been formed at  a  time
        he had no valid leave  to  remain  there  could  be  no  legitimate
        expectation he would be permitted to remain to  continue  with  his
        relationships in the UK.


    10. Mr Johnson's immigration history was properly noted by the Panel as
        was the timing of the various relationships formed and relied  upon
        [31].  They also found he is unable to satisfy  the  provisions  of
        the Immigration Rules in relation to family and private life  which
        they specifically noted as being a factor the Panel  were  required
        to weigh in the balance, as was the  presumption  that  the  public
        interest required his deportation. The  determinative  factors  for
        the Panel are highlighted in paragraphs 33 and  34  in  which  they
        state:


     33.  In assessing proportionality we are bound to have  regard  to  the
   best       interest of the children as a primary  consideration:  see  ZH
   (Tanzania)           v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.   Bearing  in   mind   the
   difficulties  which  the         appellant's   partner   has   previously
   experienced and the involvement       of Children's Services which  ended
   in May 2013, we conclude that         the presence of  the  appellant  in
   the household is on balance a             protective factor for  each  of
   the children.  We bear in mind also that      for M it would  be  in  her
   interests to be brought up by both of her          parents.


     34.  In summary we conclude that the public interest in deportation  is
     outweighed by other factors. The appeal must therefore succeed.


    11. It cannot be  said  the  Panel  failed  to  consider  all  relevant
        elements of the case and I find they undertook a proper  assessment
        of the competing  interests  when  undertaking  the  proportionally
        exercise.  Such a properly conducted assessment, which this is, can
        only be challenged on public law grounds of which none are made out
        on the facts of this case.  The Panel applied the weight they  felt
        they were entitled to give to evidence and made findings within the
        range of those they were entitled to make on that evidence. It  has
        not been shown such findings are perverse, irrational  or  contrary
        to the evidence.


    12. Although the Panel refer to the case of EO [2007]  UKAIT  00062  in
        paragraph 6, which has  been  superseded  by  Bah  (EO  (Turkey)  -
        liability to deport)  [2012]  UKUT  00196(IAC),  they  applied  the
        correct legal principles and so no material error is established.


Decision

    13. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) as no application for such
        was made and it has not been established it is warranted on the
        facts.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18th February 2014












