
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01388/2013
     DA/01389/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 June 2016                           |On 11 May 2017                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            fe (first appellant)
                            NE (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Mair, instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, FE and NE, were born in 1985 and 2013 respectively  and
    are female citizens of Nigeria.  The  second  appellant  is  the  first
    appellant's daughter.  A decision was taken in June 2013 to deport  the
    first appellant under Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The
    appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Reed;  Mrs
    Endersby) which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18  February  2014,
    dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and, when their application for permission was refused, to the
    Upper Tribunal.  That Tribunal also refused the  appellants  permission
    to  appeal  so  the  appellants  applied  for  judicial  review.    The
    application for judicial review came before Mr Justice Walker  in  June
    and October 2015.  Walker J delivered his judgment on 11 February 2016.
     Inter alia, the court quashed the refusal of permission in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and returned the matter to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  further
    consideration.  Permission was granted by Mr Ockelton (Vice  President)
    on 1 March 2016 and came before the Upper Tribunal at  Bradford  on  14
    June 2016.

 2. I am grateful to Miss Mair for providing both  myself  and  Mr  Diwnycz
    with a copy of Walker J's judgment.  In the light of that judgment,  Mr
    Diwnycz told me that, whilst he  was  not  authorised  to  concede  the
    appeal, he wished to make  no  submissions  whatever  with  a  view  to
    supporting the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  In  the  circumstances,
    therefore, I shall be brief.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision  which
    was promulgated on 18 February 2014 is set aside.  None of the findings
    of fact shall stand.  I have reached that decision  for  the  following
    reasons.

 3. There were three grounds of claim before the  High  Court  on  judicial
    review.  These grounds reflect the basis upon which the appellants  had
    challenged the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Walker  J
    found that the judicial  review  claim  should  succeed  on  all  three
    grounds.  The first  concerns  procedural  unfairness;  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sought to "go behind" a concession clearly made before  it  by
    the Presenting Officer to the effect that the appellant was a victim of
    trafficking from Nigeria to the United Kingdom.  Secondly, the Tribunal
    had failed to appropriate proper weight to expert  evidence  before  it
    relied upon by the appellants on the basis that the evidence  had  been
    discredited in earlier proceedings  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  (PO
    (Nigeria) [2011] EWCA Civ 132).   The  appellants  had  asserted  that,
    although the decision of the Upper Tribunal in PO had been set aside by
    the Court of Appeal,  the  expert  evidence,  upon  which  the  present
    appellants also sought to rely, had been unfairly rejected by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. I do not intend to quote Walker  J's  decision  at  length  but  it  is
    plainly apparent that he found the  grounds  of  application  (and,  by
    extension, the grounds of  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision) to have been made out such that the refusal of permission  to
    the Upper Tribunal should be quashed; beyond that, my  reading  of  the
    judgment leaves little if no room for the Secretary of State to seek to
    argue that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in  law  such  that  its
    decision falls to be set aside.

 5. Both parties accept that the first appellant  is  a  victim  of  female
    genital mutilation (FGM).  I also record that the  Secretary  of  State
    does not now seek to withdraw the concession  made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer before the First-tier Tribunal, namely that the first appellant
    has been a victim of trafficking  from  Nigeria.   It  is  against  the
    background of that factual matrix that the next  Tribunal  will  remake
    the decision concentrating, in particular, upon the extent of any  risk
    facing both appellants on return to Nigeria.

Notice of Amended Decision

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    18 February 2014 is set aside.  None of  the  findings  of  fact  shall
    stand.  However, the First-tier  Tribunal,  to  which  this  appeal  is
    returned to remake the decision, shall do so  on  the  basis  that  the
    first appellant was trafficked from Nigeria to the United Kingdom.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Note: This decision was amended and re-promulgated on 9 May 2017


Signed                              Re-promulgated on 9 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

