
IAC-FH-AR-V5
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01209/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 March 2015                     |On 19 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, instructed by Shan & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe. He appealed  to  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge against the respondent's decision  of  6  June  2013  to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order.

2.   We will not go into great detail as to  the  contents  of  the  judge's
    determination save as regards the  particularly  relevant  issues.   He
    noted the appellant's immigration history including the  fact  that  he
    had eight convictions for nineteen offences and  the  fact  that  as  a
    consequence of his convictions totalling an aggregate of twelve  months
    or more he was notified on 9 November 2006 by  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against him.  He appealed against that  decision  but
    his appeal was dismissed as was a subsequent High Court review.   On  6
    March 2007 a deportation  order  was  signed  and  was  served  on  the
    following  day.   On  18  May  2009  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    possession  of  fire  arms  and  three  counts  of  supplying  Class  A
    controlled drugs, heroin, for which he received  a  sentence  of  seven
    years and two years respectively, amounting therefore  to  a  total  of
    nine years' imprisonment.

2.   The judge noted that the appellant has a British wife to  whom  he  has
    been married for a number of years, and a British child.  The appellant
    and his wife  are  both  HIV  positive.  His  wife  also  suffers  from
    depression.

3.   Most recently the appellant was sentenced to six  months'  imprisonment
    on 14 February 2014 for possession of cannabis which he had taken  into
    prison.  His evidence was that he did not realise it was in his  pocket
    and when he realised it he panicked and gave it to the  person  he  was
    visiting to get rid of it, but his wife's evidence was that he had been
    forced by the cousin he was visiting to take the drugs  and  was  under
    pressure.

4.   The judge in a  very  detailed  and  careful  consideration  noted  the
    relevant tests, taking into account decisions such as Maslov, Grant, MF
    (Nigeria), MM (Lebanon) in setting out the legal background.   He  paid
    careful attention to the judge's sentencing remarks at the time of  the
    appellant was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment and noted  the  two
    NOMS reports, and as a consequence of his assessment of the evidence as
    a whole he concluded that the appellant was at high risk to the  public
    given his previous offending and the escalation in it, and that he  was
    at least medium risk of reoffending.  There is no  challenge  to  those
    findings.

5.   The judge noted the evidence concerning  the  appellant's  health.   He
    had been diagnosed as HIV positive in 2003, although in  November  2010
    his CD4 count indicated that he did not  require  treatment,  over  the
    following twelve months it dropped considerably which indicated that he
    was having difficulty accepting treatment and  that  the  initial  drug
    given to him had had significant side effects and that was discontinued
    after one week.  He commenced on Eviplera in June 2012 and that had  no
    side effects and his CD4 count had risen again.

6.   The evidence in a medical report  of  10  May  2013  was  that  if  the
    appellant were returned to Zimbabwe it was doubtful as  to  whether  he
    would be able  to  obtain  antiretroviral  medication  or  blood  tests
    required to ensure the treatment was successful and would not  be  able
    to obtain his current regime as it was a relatively new  drug  and  not
    available in many countries.  The report went on to say that if he were
    unable to obtain treatment his HIV would progress with a  fall  on  the
    CD4 count which would lead  him  to  be  susceptible  to  opportunistic
    infections which if not treated would lead eventually to death.

7.   A subsequent report of 14 August 2014 stated that  it  was  vital  that
    antiretroviral therapy be maintained lifelong and that if  he  did  not
    receive treatment his viral load would rise and  his  CD4  count  would
    decrease  and  he  would  be  at  risk  of   developing   opportunistic
    infections, opportunistic cancers and premature death.

8.   In addition the appellant had suffered from depression since the  death
    of his mother in 2004.   The  judge  accepted  that  Eviplera  was  not
    referred to on the list of drugs currently available in Zimbabwe.

9.    In  addition  the  appellant's  wife  had  health  problems.  She  was
    diagnosed as HIV positive on 14 February 2006.  The report on her  said
    that although she was physically well from the HIV point  of  view  she
    had often struggled psychologically with the diagnosis and  indeed  had
    problems in bringing up her son on her own and missed  the  support  of
    her husband  who  had  been  in  prison  for  a  large  part  of  their
    relationship.  He had a history of anxiety, low mood and stress and had
    suffered from depression, taking an overdose of paracetamol in November
    2007. The more recent report on her of 6  August  2013  said  that  she
    continued  to  appear  anxious  and  was  tearful  and  reported  being
    forgetful and having difficulty coping with daily living and caring for
    her son, and that she was fearful about  her  husband  being  deported.
    She was not under any form of  psychiatric  care  at  present  but  was
    awaiting  counselling  from  local  services.    She  had  had  further
    thoughts of self-harm and the doctors were concerned about her welfare.



10.  As regards the couple's son, who was born in 2006, there  was  evidence
    that he had struggled without  the  support  of  a  father  and  saw  a
    counsellor at school.  He had a history of eczema for which he required
    regular emollient creams.   Evidence from his  primary  school  teacher
    noted that he was very quiet and withdrawn and said he was missing  his
    father and was upset, and this was  confirmed  by  his  mother.   As  a
    consequence, at the beginning of the following school term began one-to-
    one session of counselling from the Young Concern Trust and  it  seemed
    that such levels of support would be expected to last up to six months.
     A further letter from his primary school dated 3 June 2014  which  the
    judge noted indicated that he was showing signs of  emotional  distress
    which they believed were linked to the  potential  deportation  of  his
    father and the counselling sessions begun and they recognised the  need
    to continue to assist him in working through his emotional issues.   No
    additional counselling was being provided by CAMHS as he was  currently
    receiving counselling from school but his mother believed that  if  the
    school  counselling  stopped  he  would  be  eligible  for   additional
    counselling through them.

11.  As regards the issue of the appellant's health and its  treatment,  the
    judge noted the evidence as  set  out  above  but  commented  that  the
    appellant had only had  one  previous  alternative  treatment  and  the
    reports provided by him did not indicate that he could not tolerate any
    other type of treatment which might be available in Zimbabwe.

12.  As regards the issue of the appellant's son, the  judge  accepted  that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect him and  his  mother  to  return  to
    Zimbabwe to maintain their relationship with the appellant  there.   He
    took into account the fact that the best interests of  the  appellant's
    child were a primary consideration and clearly his best interests  were
    to live in a family unit with both his mother and father  in  a  loving
    relationship.  He noted that the son was established in the school  and
    receiving assistance from the  school  as  a  result  of  his  father's
    detention in prison and the possible effects of  his  removal,  and  he
    also took into account the fact that all of his son's  other  relatives
    were in the United Kingdom and he clearly had a  close  bond  with  his
    maternal grandmother and did see both the appellant's  father  and  the
    appellant's aunt albeit on an ad hoc basis. He noted that although  the
    appellant's  wife  clearly  had   difficulties  herself  due   to   her
    depression and her HIV status, she did have support from her family  in
    relation to looking after her  son  and  had  indicated  that  she  was
    looking to increase her part-time work  so  that  she  could  come  off
    benefits.  Her son had been cared for on occasions by  her  sister  who
    herself had three children and clearly  he  would  have  established  a
    relationship  with  them,  although  he  noted  the  illness   of   the
    appellant's sister (she  has  a  crumbling  spine  and  will  be  in  a
    wheelchair in the next five years and currently has metal rods  in  her
    spine) but his mother's evidence was that her sister  looks  after  her
    son when she is at work.   The  judge  accepted  that  there  would  be
    difficulties for both the appellant's wife and his son by  his  removal
    and that the best interests of the son were not a trump  card  and  the
    son would be cared for by his mother as he had been for his whole  life
    and would continue to receive support both from  his  family  and  also
    through  counselling  which  would  assist  him  in  coping  with   the
    appellant's removal.

13.  At paragraph 200 the  judge  said,  taking  into  account  all  of  the
    factors in favour of the appellant including the effect on his son  and
    his wife by his removal and taking into account his HIV status and  the
    problems he might face on return to Zimbabwe  as  a  result,  balancing
    these against the respondent's legitimate aim he was not satisfied that
    the appellant had shown that  these  factors,  even  when  cumulatively
    taken together, were  sufficient  to  constitute  exceptional  or  very
    compelling circumstances  of  the  kind  which  outweighed  the  public
    interest in his deportation, clearly bearing in mind the provisions  of
    section 117B and C of the 2002 Act.

14.  The appeal having been dismissed, the appellant sought and was  granted
    permission to appeal on essentially two grounds which were developed by
    Mr Balroop before us.  The first is that the judge failed to take  into
    account material factors  in  assessing  compelling  circumstances  and
    failing to place any or any  due  weight  on  the  appellant's  medical
    condition and the fact that the medication he requires is not available
    in Zimbabwe.  The second ground concerns the alleged  failure  to  make
    any or any proper assessment of the best interests of the child.

15.  Mr Balroop developed these points before us as follows.

16.  On the first point the judge had  said  there  were  other  medications
    available and there was no evidence he could not use them.  This was an
    unlawful finding.  The Tribunal was referred to the doctor's letter  at
    pages 100 and 111 of the bundle.

17.  It was clear that Article 3 was not relied on and only Article  8,  and
    in that regard the decision of the Court of Appeal in JA (Ivory  Coast)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 1353 was put in on  the  point  that,  as  set  out  at
    paragraphs 25 and 26 in the judgment there, Article 8 issues would fall
    to be considered in an HIV case.

18.  On the second point, the  judge  accepted  the  relationship  with  the
    child and the impact on the child of the deportation  proceedings.   He
    erred at paragraphs 188 and 189 concerning the proposed support for the
    child, since it was clear from paragraph 55 and the appellant's  wife's
    evidence that her sister was unable to help.  She said  she  could  not
    take the child on her own  without  the  appellant,  given  her  health
    problems.  There was a lack of support for her without  the  appellant.
    The judge seemed  to  think  that  the  sister's  help  could   make  a
    difference but was not right on  the  evidence.   The  errors  in  this
    regard related to matters  which  showed  very  compelling  exceptional
    circumstances which had not properly been considered by the  judge  and
    there was a clear error of law.

19.  In his submissions Mr Bramble argued that one had to bear in  mind  the
    appellant's criminal history as the context to the  particular  matters
    in  respect  of  which  challenges  were  made.   The  grounds  were  a
    disagreement only.   The judge had gone through  the  medical  evidence
    and the objective evidence concerning Zimbabwe.  He was  clearly  aware
    that it was a matter of Article 8 rather than Article 3 as set  out  at
    paragraph 84.  JA was irrelevant as it  was  not  a  deportation  case.
    There was therefore a lack of such a strong public interest as in  this
    case which is affected  by  the  appellant's  criminality.   It  was  a
    question of whether, when all the evidence was taken into account,  the
    findings were sufficient or incorrect so as to  amount  to  a  material
    error of law.  The judge's findings were open to him.

20.  As regards the child, the  judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the  child's
    problems and could only take the evidence so far, as for example  could
    be noted from paragraph 73  in  the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions
    where it was clear there was no psychological report on the child.  The
    weight of the public interest had to be taken into account and what had
    been said in LC (China) was of importance.  The public interest in this
    case was very strong.   The determination was sound.

21.  By way of reply, Mr Balroop agued that the judge had  spoken  in  terms
    of  the  Article  3  test  in  particular  at  paragraph  102  of   the
    determination  and  also  the  relevant  criteria  in  that  regard  at
    paragraph 111.   With regard to the conclusions at paragraph  198,  the
    judge was obliged to  provide  further  reasons  in  order  to  make  a
    finding.  that was a material error of law.  Although the judge had set
    out what was said by the doctors at paragraphs 176 and 177, he had  not
    taken  it  into  account  in  his  conclusions  at  paragraph  198  but
    speculated about the possibility of another drug that could  help.   It
    was unclear how he had concluded as he did.  It was necessary  for  him
    to say what the other available drug was.

22.  As regards ground 2, the issue was not with the child per  se  but  the
    situation with regard to the mother had not been properly considered as
    she had her own problems and needed the appellant's  help.   The  judge
    had ignored the problems.  There was no support  from  the  family  and
    material factors had not been considered or  not  considered  properly.
    With regards what was said at paragraph  194  about  support  from  the
    family it should be asked what family was being referred  to  and  what
    support and the appellant's wife herself needed  support.   These  were
    the compelling circumstances.  Both the child and the  mother  were  in
    receipt of counselling.  These had to be material matters.

23.  We reserved our determination.

24.  We consider first ground 1, but at the same  time  reminding  ourselves
    of the context of the decision which is the serious criminal record  of
    the appellant and the unchallenged findings that he is at high risk  to
    the public given his previous offending and is at least at medium  risk
    of reoffending.  That being said, it is of course right, and Mr Balroop
    reminded us, that if there are errors of a material nature they are  to
    be treated as such despite the significant public interest that clearly
    exists in this case.

25.  The particular evidence to which Mr Balroop took us is the letter  from
    Dr Mun-Yee Tung, dated 14 August 2014, to which we have referred  above
    and which the judge summarised at paragraph 177 of  the  determination.
    It  is  clear  from  that  evidence  that  the  antiretroviral  therapy
    initially employed proved to be  ineffective,  in  that  the  appellant
    could not tolerate it because of bad side effects.   In  light  of  the
    fall in his CD4 count Eviplera was tried and he tolerated this and  the
    CD4 count rose to an acceptable level.  It was accepted  by  the  judge
    that Eviplera is not available in Zimbabwe.  He also noted the doctor's
    prognosis that if the appellant did not  receive  treatment  his  viral
    load would rise and his CD4 count would decrease the ensuing risks as a
    consequence, which we have set out above.

26.  In this regard the judge commented at paragraph 183 that the  appellant
    had only  had  one  previous  alternative  treatment  and  the  reports
    provided by him did not indicate that he could tolerate any other  type
    of treatment which might be available in Zimbabwe.  At paragraph 198 he
    reminded himself that the  current  medication  was  not  available  in
    Zimbabwe but said  that  there  were  a  number  of  other  medications
    available and he did not  have  medical  reports  indicating  that  the
    appellant could not be placed on any of them.

27.  We do not read this as the judge having in effect speculated as to  the
    possibility of another  drug  that  could  help.   The  judge  properly
    considered the medical evidence, noting that one type of antiretroviral
    treatment had not succeeded  but  that  another  kind  had.   There  is
    nothing  in  the  doctor's  letter  to  say  that  the  only   possible
    antiretroviral therapy is Eviplera, but we consider,  bearing  in  mind
    that the burden of proof is on the appellant that it  was  for  him  to
    show that that was the case if he wished to show that he  would  be  at
    risk of a significant determination in his health and possible death on
    return to Zimbabwe if the particular medication which he is on is  not,
    as is accepted, available to him  and  more  significantly,  for  these
    purposes, that there is no alternative medication available to him.  We
    do not consider that the judge improperly speculated  in  this  regard,
    but simply in the context  of  the  proper  burden  of  proof  and  the
    evidence before him came to a conclusion that was clearly open to  him.



28.  As regards the situation of the appellant's  son,  it  is  relevant  to
    bear in mind from the appellant's wife's evidence that  she  said  that
    her sister looked after their son when she is at work and would not  be
    able to become more involved as she has her own three children and  has
    medical problems.  Her evidence was also that her son did see his  aunt
    and that she sees her father-in-law but not regularly although he  does
    buy birthday presents and has been over  to  the  house.   We  consider
    that, bearing in mind this evidence, it was clearly open to  the  judge
    to say at paragraph 188 that the appellant's  wife  does  have  support
    from her family in relation to  looking  after  her  son  and  also  at
    paragraph 189 that the son is cared for on occasions by her sister  and
    that her sister's support is still available to her.  It was also  open
    to him to note at paragraph 187 that all of the son's  other  relatives
    are in the United Kingdom and he clearly has a  close  bond  with   his
    maternal grandmother, who gave evidence before the judge and  she  said
    that she did her best to provide him  with  emotional  support  to  her
    daughter and her grandson and that she saw her  grandson  nearly  every
    day.  The references to Article 8 are by the way.   At  paragraphs  101
    and 102 the judge briefly addressed the  issue,  in  effect  solely  to
    satisfy himself that the lack of reliance on Article 8 was appropriate,
    which was clearly right.

29.  The judge took  into  account  the  psychological  evidence  and  other
    medical evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  wife  and  her  medical
    history and  also  the  problems  of  her  son  including  the  ongoing
    counselling that it seems he may still be  receiving  as  well  as  the
    eczema for which he has a history.  The judge was clearly aware of  the
    difficulties they would both face as a consequence  of the  appellant's
    removal and made it clear that it would be in the best interests of the
    son to live in a family unit with both  his  mother  and  father  in  a
    loving relationship, but that the son's best interests are not a  trump
    card and that he will be cared for by his mother as he has been for the
    whole of his life and will continue to receive support from his  family
    and from the  counselling.   He  balanced  these  factors  against  the
    respondent's legitimate aim and came to a conclusion that was  properly
    open to him.  We consider  that  this  is  not  only  a  very  detailed
    determination but also a careful one where the judge has not lost sight
    of the need to place the evidence in the context of the relevant  legal
    tests and came to conclusions that were properly open  to  him.   As  a
    consequence we find there is no error of law in this decision  and  the
    judge's decision dismissing the appeal is  maintained.   The  direction
    regarding anonymity is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
