

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01580/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th December 2014                         |on 20th January 2015         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            SAID IBRAHIM MOHAMED
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Tariq Khan instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills -Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. On 14 May 2014 the Upper Tribunal  found  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         panel considering this  appeal  had  materially  erred  in  law  in
         failing to consider a  ground  of  appeal  they  were  specifically
         requested to do by the Appellant, namely whether he was entitled to
         a grant of humanitarian protection in this case. All  the  findings
         the panel made on the issues they did consider are preserved.


      2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia born on 10th September 1989.
         He entered the United Kingdom and claimed asylum in  January  2006.
         That application was rejected  but  he  was  granted  discretionary
         leave as a minor valid until 10 September 2007. An  appeal  against
         the refusal of the asylum claim was dismissed in July 2006  and  an
         application for reconsideration refused in August 2006.


      3. On 5th July 2007 the Appellant  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
         robbery and one count of attempted robbery and sentenced to  twelve
         months detention. On 29th October 2007 the Secretary of State  made
         a decision to  deport  him  to  Somalia.  An  appeal  against  that
         decision was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human
         rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules. Reconsideration  of
         the First-tier Tribunal decision was ordered  and  the  hearing  to
         establish whether an error of law had been made came before  Senior
         Immigration Judge Martin on 12th September 2008, who found that the
         FTT panel had materially erred in failing to make it clear findings
         as to whether or not the Appellant spoke fluent  Somali  which  was
         said to be material to the question of risk on return.


      4. Judge Martin substituted a decision finding that the Appellant does
         speak Somali. Other grounds relied upon before her  were  discussed
         in  the  body  of  the  determination  leading  to  the   following
         conclusions in paragraphs 22 and 23 that:


         22.  The grounds completely failed to take into  account  that  the
             panel has found that the appellant had family in  Somalia.  He
             had spent virtually all of his life with them there. He had it
             found, built up a family life  with  his  aunt  but  that  any
             interference with that was not of such gravity  as  to  engage
             article 8. This is  against  a  background  of  the  appellant
             having his close and immediate family in Somalia.  The grounds
             seem to be arguing that  because  someone  has  established  a
             family life then it must always engage article  8.  Whilst  AG
             indicates that the  threshold  to  engage  article  8  is  not
             particularly high there is nevertheless a threshold. The panel
             decided in this case the appellant did not meet it and on  the
             basis of the rest of its findings that  is  something  it  was
             entitled to do. In any event the panel did go on  to  consider
             the  question  of  proportionality  at  paragraph  76  of  the
             determination.


         23.  As a whole, I find no merit in the grounds save  for  the  one
             aspect of the failure to make  a  proper  finding  as  to  the
             Appellant's linguistic abilities. I have  made  a  finding  on
             that point. Given that  I  have  found  the  Appellant  speaks
             perfectly adequate  Somali  and  that  the  remainder  of  the
             grounds disclose no material errors of law then  I  substitute
             my decision on the basis of the panel's  sustainable  findings
             that the Appellant is a young,  healthy  man  with  a  serious
             criminal conviction, a risk  of  reoffending;  who  is  not  a
             member of a minority clan and who has immediate family members
             in Somalia dismissing the appeal.


      5. It is further recorded in the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Nixon and Ms V Street, promulgated on 6 November  2013,  that
         being the determination in respect of which the material error  was
         found on 14th May 2014, that on 29 October 2007 the  appellant  was
         served with a decision to make a deportation order.  He was granted
         bail with reporting conditions on 4th February 2008 although it  is
         said he failed to report on three occasions. On 26 June 2008 he was
         sentenced to  49  days  detention  for  taking  a  vehicle  without
         consent. His High Court review application against the dismissal of
         his  earlier  appeal  having  itself  been  refused/dismissed,  the
         Appellant was served with the deportation order on 28 October 2008.
         Removal directions set for 4th March 2009 were cancelled on 3 March
         2009 as the Appellant had made a Rule 39 application. The Appellant
         was granted bail on the 3 September 2009 but failed to report as  a
         result of which, on 7th May 2010, he was recorded as an  absconder.
         On 31 October  2011  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  12  months
         imprisonment for burglary and theft.


      6. On 22 July 2013 the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  fresh  decision
         following further representations seeking  the  revocation  of  the
         deportation order served on 28 October  2008.   It  is  the  appeal
         against this  decision  which  came  before  the  First-tier  Panel
         chaired by Judge Nixon. The Panel's findings can be  summarised  as
         follows:


             i.   It has previously been found that the Appellant  had  not
                  shown he  was  a  member  of  the  minority  Ashraf  Clan.
                  Professor Aquilar's conclusions  on  the  issue  were  not
                  found to be persuasive enough to  warrant  departing  from
                  previous findings. It appears the Appellants  account  was
                  accepted  without  question  whereas  the  Appellant   was
                  previous found to have given inconsistent  and  incredible
                  evidence.


             ii.  The Appellant has failed to show that he is of a minority
                  clan. The Panel had heard and  seen  nothing  which  would
                  give them     cause to depart from the  findings  that  he
                  has family members in  Somalia.


             iii. The Appellant claims once again to be  at  real  risk  of
                  being forcibly recruited by  Al  Shabaab  if  returned  to
                  Somalia which has previously been found not to be the case
                  by the Tribunal.


             iv.  Professor Aquilar's report states the Appellant  faces  a
                  real risk     because he is westernised with an  imperfect
                  command of the    Somali language  and  because  he  comes
                  from a minority clan but without objective  support,  this
                  was not found  sufficient  to  depart  from  the  previous
                  findings the Tribunal, especially in light of the fact the
                  Tribunal did not find the Appellant  is  from  a  minority
                  clan.


             v.   It is unclear where the Appellant comes from  in  Somalia
                  but for  the purposes of the appeal the  Panel  considered
                  Mogadishu     either as his home area or in  any  event  a
                  place for internal relocation.


             vi.  The Panel find the Appellant has failed to show he has no
                  family or other support in Mogadishu where his  father  is
                  from and he is fit for work. Whilst it  is  accepted  that
                  property is expensive the Panel found no  reason  why  the
                  appellant could not  find  employment  in  order  to  find
                  accommodation if his family  members  have  no  room.  The
                  Panel therefore found the Appellant failed to show that he
                  is at real risk of harm.


             vii. The Panel considered the merits of the  article  8  claim
                  and having conducted to the  required  balancing  exercise
                  found   the   decision   of   the   Secretary   of   State
                  proportionate.



Discussion


      7. The hearing of this matter was delayed as a result of  the  pending
         publication of the Upper Tribunal's country guidance case  relating
         to Somalia, now promulgated with reference  MOJ  [2014]  UKUT  442.
         There are a number of  previous  cases  that  may  in  part  remain
         relevant when considering Somalia including AMM [2011] UKUT 445 and
         Sufi & Elemi 8319/07, 11499/07 of June 2011  which  considered  the
         situation in areas of the country under the control of  Al-Shabaab,
         although  they  are  now  somewhat  dated  in   light   of   recent
         developments in Somalia.


      8. The Tribunal is also aware of the decision of the European Court in
         KAB (Sweden) 886/11.  In KAB it was held  that,  whilst  the  human
         rights and security situation in Mogadishu was serious and fragile,
         the available information as at September  2013  did  not  indicate
         that the situation at present placed anyone present in the city  at
         a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3. It was held that Al
         Shabaab attacks were directed against specific groups  rather  than
         deliberately targeting civilians.


      9. MOJ is the current relevant country guidance case for the  purposes
         of determining the issues at large  in  this  appeal  which  is  an
         extremely comprehensive determination in which it was found:


             In MOJ& Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442
             (IAC):


                  (i)   The  country  guidance  issues  addressed  in   this
                      determination     are not identical to those  engaged
                      with by the Tribunal in    AMM and others  (conflict;
                      humanitarian crisis; returnees;     FGM)  Somalia  CG
                      [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where       country
                      guidance has been given by the  Tribunal  in  AMM  in
                      respect of issues not addressed in this determination
                      then the      guidance provided by AMM shall continue
                      to have effect;


                  (ii) Generally, a person who  is  "an  ordinary  civilian"
                      (i.e. not     associated with  the  security  forces;
                      any   aspect   of    government    or        official
                      administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
                      organisation)  on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a
                      period of     absence  will  face  no  real  risk  of
                      persecution or risk of harm  such     as  to  require
                      protection under Article 3 of  the  ECHR  or  Article
                      15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In  particular,
                      he will not be    at real risk simply on  account  of
                      having lived in a European      location for a period
                      of time of being viewed with suspicion  either by the
                      authorities as a possible  supporter  of  Al  Shabaab
                      or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose
                      Islamic  integrity has been compromised by living  in
                      a Western country;


                  (iii)    There has been durable change in the  sense  that
                      the  Al  Shabaab     withdrawal  from  Mogadishu   is
                      complete and there is no real    prospect  of  a  re-
                      established presence within the city. That was    not
                      the case at the time of the country guidance given by
                      the  Tribunal in AMM;


                  (iv) The level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-
                      military      casualties that clearly fall within  Al
                      Shabaab  target  groups  such       as   politicians,
                      police  officers,  government  officials  and   those
                      associated with NGOs and international organisations,
                      cannot   be precisely established by the  statistical
                      evidence which  is       incomplete  and  unreliable.
                      However,  it  is  established   by   the     evidence
                      considered as a whole that there has been a reduction
                           in the level of civilian casualties since  2011,
                      largely due to the     cessation  of  confrontational
                      warfare within the city and Al  Shabaab's  resort  to
                      asymmetrical warfare on carefully selected   targets.
                      The present level of casualties does not amount to  a
                      sufficient risk to  ordinary  civilians  such  as  to
                      represent an      Article 15(c) risk;


                  (v)  It is open to an ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to
                      reduce further    still his personal exposure to  the
                      risk of "collateral damage" in  being caught up in an
                      Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted       at  him
                      by avoiding areas and establishments that are clearly
                           identifiable as likely Al Shabaab  targets,  and
                      it is not              unreasonable for him to do so;


                  (vi) There is no real risk of  forced  recruitment  to  Al
                      Shabaab  for    civilian   citizens   of   Mogadishu,
                      including for recent returnees  from the West;


                  (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of
                      absence will  look to his nuclear family, if  he  has
                      one living in the city,  for      assistance  in  re-
                      establishing  himself  and  securing  a   livelihood.
                      Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his
                      clan     members who are not  close  relatives,  such
                      help  is  only  likely  to      be  forthcoming   for
                      majority clan members, as minority clans     may have
                      little to offer;


                  (viii)   The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu
                      has  changed. Clans now provide, potentially,  social
                      support   mechanisms  and  assist  with   access   to
                      livelihoods,  performing     less  of  a   protection
                      function than previously. There are no clan  militias
                      in Mogadishu, no clan violence,  and  no  clan  based
                      discriminatory  treatment,  even  for  minority  clan
                      members;


                  (ix) If it is accepted that a person facing  a  return  to
                      Mogadishu after   a period of absence has no  nuclear
                      family or close relatives in    the  city  to  assist
                      him in re-establishing himself on return, there  will
                      need to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
                      circumstances.    These considerations will  include,
                      but are not limited to:


                      (a)  circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                      (b)  length of absence from Mogadishu;
                      (c)  family or clan  associations  to  call  upon  in
                           Mogadishu;
                      (d)  access to financial resources;
                      (e)  prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that
                           be   employment or self employment;
                      (f)  availability of remittances from abroad;
                      (g)  means of support during the time  spent  in  the
                           United   Kingdom;
                      (h)  why his ability to fund the journey to the  West
                           no longer      enables  an  appellant  to  secure
                           financial support on return;
                  (x)  Put another way, it will be  for  the  person  facing
                      return to     explain why he would  not  be  able  to
                      access the economic    opportunities that  have  been
                      produced by the economic boom,  especially  as  there
                      is  evidence  to  the  effect  that   returnees   are
                      taking jobs at the expense of those  who  have  never
                      been away;


                  (xi) It will, therefore, only be those  with  no  clan  or
                      family support    who  will  not  be  in  receipt  of
                      remittances from abroad  and  who      have  no  real
                      prospect  of  securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
                      return who  will  face  the  prospect  of  living  in
                      circumstances      falling  below   that   which   is
                      acceptable in humanitarian      protection terms;


                  (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly  that  it  is  not
                      simply those who  originate from Mogadishu  that  may
                      now generally return to    live in the  city  without
                      being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or  facing a
                      real  risk  of  destitution.  On  the   other   hand,
                      relocation  in      Mogadishu  for  a  person  of   a
                      minority clan  with no former links     to the  city,
                      no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family
                      or social support is unlikely to be realistic as,  in
                      the absence of    means to establish a home and  some
                      form of ongoing financial  support there  will  be  a
                      real risk of having no alternative but to    live  in
                      makeshift accommodation  within  an  IDP  camp  where
                      there is a real possibility  of  having  to  live  in
                      conditions  that     will   fall   below   acceptable
                      humanitarian standards.


     10. The Appellants claim has been considered by reference to Paragraphs
         339I to 339M of the Immigration Rules. 339L  establishes  the  duty
         upon a person to substantiate their asylum claim or establish  that
         they are a  person  eligible  for  humanitarian  protection  or  to
         substantiate his human rights claim


     11. In relation to humanitarian protection claims,  paragraph  339C  of
         the Immigration Rules states:


             "A person will  be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
             United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


             (i)  he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a  port  of
                  entry in the United    Kingdom;
             (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation
                  2 of The Refugee   or  Person  in  Need  of  International
                  Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006;
             (iii)    substantial grounds have  been  shown  for  believing
                  that the  person         concerned,  if  returned  to  the
                  country of return, would face a real risk of     suffering
                  serious harm and  is  unable,  or,  owing  to  such  risk,
                  unwilling to  avail himself  of  the  protection  of  that
                  country; and
             (iv)  he  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant  of   humanitarian
                  protection.


             Serious harm consists of:


             (i)  the death penalty or execution;
             (ii) unlawful killing;
             (iii)     torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading   treatment   or
                  punishment of a person in  the country of return; or
             (iv) serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or
                  person  by  reason  of      indiscriminate   violence   in
                  situations of international or internal armed    conflict.




     12. The Appellant is currently in the United Kingdom and satisfies  the
         requirement of paragraph 339C  (i).   His  asylum  claim  has  been
         refused and he is not entitled to  be  recognised  as  refugee  and
         therefore meets the requirements of 339C (ii).


     13. In relation to the risk of serious harm, a as per MOJ: a person who
         is "an ordinary civilian" (i.e. not associated  with  the  security
         forces; any aspect of government or official administration or  any
         NGO or international organisation) on returning to Mogadishu  after
         a period of absence will face no real risk of persecution  or  risk
         of harm such as to require protection under Article 3 of  the  ECHR
         or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular,  he
         will not be at real risk simply on account of  having  lived  in  a
         European location for  a  period  of  time  of  being  viewed  with
         suspicion either by the authorities as a possible supporter  of  Al
         Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as an apostate or  someone  whose  Islamic
         integrity has been compromised by living in a Western country.


     14. The Appellant's case is that he will face such a risk and refers in
         his bundle to a number of news articles reporting  attacks  on  tax
         collectors in October 2014, an  attack  on  Somalia's  Intelligence
         Headquarters in August 2014 together with car  bombs  exploding  in
         Mogadishu. It was recognised in the early authorities that  certain
         groups within Somalia may be at greater risk; which includes  those
         employed by the government collecting income tax or working in  the
         intelligence headquarters, but neither applies  to  the  Appellant.
         The information provided by the Appellant  when  coupled  with  the
         other generally available country material provides  no  basis  for
         this tribunal to depart from the country guidance findings. No risk
         of harm has been established solely as a result  of  the  Appellant
         being present within Mogadishu at this time.


     15. It is further submitted  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  it  is
         necessary to carefully consider his own personal circumstances  and
         ability to return to Mogadishu. It is argued he will be  unable  to
         re-establish himself in Mogadishu as he was born there in 1989  but
         moved elsewhere when he was three years of age has been  absent  at
         22 years. He claims to have lost contact with his family in Somalia
         and to have contacted the Red Cross in order to  ascertain  whether
         his family could be traced.


     16. The Appellant submits he has not lived in Mogadishu since  the  age
         of three and has no recollection of the city or connections  there,
         no family or clan ties  to  call  upon  and  no  capital  or  other
         resources. He also claims he does not speak clear Somali  and  that
         English is his first language which will hinder  his  prospects  of
         securing any type of livelihood and that he will be  excluded  from
         employment as he is not a member  of  the  largest  clan  group  in
         Mogadishu.


     17. The Appellant claims that he left Somalia with  the  assistance  of
         his clan group who  arranged for him to travel with an agent  which
         he claims to be "fortuitous" and he that he  could  not  reasonably
         expect such support would continue to avail itself after nine years
         absence.


     18. The points the Appellant advances in support of his claim have been
         considered in light of the  previous  findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  and  the  country  guidance  case  law.   The   Appellant
         maintained previously that he has insufficient language skills  but
         this matter was disposed of by Senior Immigration Judge Martin  who
         found he speaks Somali and that no risk  arose  from  his  language
         abilities.  Attempting to repeat such a claim in the absence of up-
         to-date supporting evidence is  disingenuous.  Returning  from  the
         United Kingdom does not place the Appellant at credible real  risk.
         It was found Mogadishu is the point of  return  or  relocation  and
         that the Appellant has family in  Somalia.  The  Appellant's  claim
         regarding his clan membership has been found to lack credibility on
         more than one occasion. He claimed to be a member of  the  minority
         Ashraf clan and claims his journey from  Mogadishu  to  the  United
         Kingdom with the help of an agent was paid for by this clan  group.
         This lacks plausibility in light of the fact the Ashraf  clan  were
         targeted and their material wealth taken from them by the  dominant
         clans. If the Appellant was a member of a clan group with resources
         sufficient to have assisted him previously, the country information
         does not suggest that it would have been the Ashraf.  In any event,
         it has been found the Appellant is not a member of a minority  clan
         group and his assertions to the contrary have been  found  to  lack
         credibility inferring that the Appellant must therefore be a member
         of a majority clan. In MOJ it was found that "the  significance  of
         clan membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.  Clans  now  provide,
         potentially, social support mechanisms and assist  with  access  to
         livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a  protection   function   than
         previously. There are  no  clan  militias  in  Mogadishu,  no  clan
         violence, and no clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
         minority clan members".  The Appellant has  not  substantiated  his
         claim that he will not be able to contact family members on  return
         or receive support from his  clan.  Even  if  re-integration  is  a
         process that takes time the Appellant has not substantiated a claim
         he will not be able to make contact with his clan in Mogadishu. The
         clan structure  in  Somalia  underpins  society  and  is  of  great
         importance and the evidence before the  tribunal  shows  that  such
         connections will provide social support mechanisms and assist  with
         access to livelihoods; indicating assistance being available to the
         Appellant to enable him to establish himself.


     19. The Appellant has had the benefit of an education received  in  the
         United Kingdom and has not substantiated his claim that he will not
         be able to obtain some form of paid employment  as  was  previously
         found. It is accepted the Appellant may find it difficult  and  may
         experience periods of hardship but it has not been shown  that  the
         impact/consequences of his removal to Somali will be such  that  he
         will suffer serious harm or a real risk of the same  sufficient  to
         engage the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  any  international
         convention.


     20. The Appellant states he contacted the Red Cross in  an  attempt  to
         trace his family a few weeks after he came to the  United  Kingdom,
         which would have been in 2006, but no details have been provided of
         a concerted effort to try and locate them since, even when he  knew
         he was the subject deportation order, and it  has  not  been  shown
         that facilities that  may  assist  are  not  available  to  him  in
         Mogadishu on return.


     21. Having considered all relevant factors, I do not find the Appellant
         has substantiated  his  claimed  to  be  entitled  to  a  grant  of
         humanitarian protection. He has not established that he is able  to
         satisfy paragraph 399C (iii).


Decision

     22. The First-tier Tribunal Panel materially erred in law. I set  aside
         their decision. I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal  is
         dismissed.


    Anonymity.


     23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.  I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th January 2015

