
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01788/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 13th November 2015                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 LUIS LOPES
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills - Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr M Beard - non legal representative.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Pooler promulgated on  the  23rd  December  2014  in  which  he
       allowed Mr Lopes appeal against the order for  his  deportation  from
       the United Kingdom.

Background


    2. Mr Lopes is a national of Portugal who was born  on  the  13th  April
       1996. He has no solicitor at this stage but  was  assisted  by  Mr  M
       Beard, a lay representative, who is known to the family and who  made
       an impassioned plea for Mr Lopes to be given a second chance.

    3. There is no dispute between the  parties  in  relation  to  the  core
       facts. Mr Lopes entered the United Kingdom aged 6 and was educated in
       this country. He attended primary school from January 2003 until July
       2007 and secondary school from September 2007 to January 2012 and  at
       an alternative provision school from January to June  2012  following
       exclusion from his previous school. Mr Lopes has returned to Portugal
       in the interim for the purposes  of  family  holidays  where  he  has
       visited family members who still live there.

    4. In relation to his offending history, Mr Lopes received  a  reprimand
       and warning in 2011 but no previous convictions prior  to  the  index
       offences which were committed on the  27th  October  2012.  Mr  Lopes
       pleaded guilty on 21st December 2012 and on 11th March  2013  he  was
       sentenced to four years detention for Wounding with  Intent  (Section
       18) and two years detention, concurrent, for Wounding  (Section  20).
       Judge Pooler set out the sentencing remarks of Mr Recorder Palmer  QC
       at paragraph 5 of the determination which refer to the events of  the
       night in question which included the use of a knife by  Mr  Lopes  to
       inflict injury in a premeditated attack upon his victims.

Error of law findings


    5. At paragraph  11  of  the  determination  Judge  Pooler  records  the
       following:

           "11.   At a case management hearing it was conceded on behalf of
                the respondent that the  appellant  fell  within  regulation
                21(4) and could not be removed except on imperative  grounds
                of public security. This  concession  was  clearly  made  in
                paragraph 22 of the respondent's  letter  on  10  June  2014
                giving reasons for the deportation."

    6. It is not disputed that such a concession was  made  in  the  refusal
       letter. In the renewed grounds on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
       sought,  directly  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  is  said  that  the
       concession was incorrectly made and is withdrawn.

    7. Ordinarily it is not acceptable for a party in relation  to  whom  an
       adverse  decision  has  been  made  to  expect  to  be  permitted  to
       materially alter the nature of  their  case  in  an  application  for
       permission to appeal, and then claim on such  basis  that  permission
       should be granted.

    8. The Judge cannot be criticized for noting the concession as it formed
       part of the case before him. It may,  however,  be  argued  that  the
       Judge erred if it is shown he treated the concession as determinative
       of the issue of Mr Lopes' status in law, when this is  not  the  case
       and is wrong.  The concession is not one of fact but of law. This was
       recognised by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr in his grant of permission in
       the following terms:

           "The respondent now seeks for  the  first  time  to  withdraw  a
           concession made at a case management hearing and in the  refusal
           letter.

           It is disturbing if it be correct that such  an  error  was  not
           recognised at an earlier stage.

           Nevertheless I grant permissions as the concession sought to  be
           withdrawn is one of law rather than of fact.

           All the grounds of appeal may be argued."

    9. The record  of  the  case  management  review  hearing  contains  the
       following: "Resp. accepts that imperative grounds of public  security
       must be shown".  It is now said this is incorrect in law.

   10. It is accepted that a concessions as to fact will form  the  starting
       point in the consideration of the evidence. A judge is not  bound  to
       accept the conclusions in the concession but  any  departure  from  a
       position established as true by both parties requires explanation.

   11. The basis of  the  concession  is  an  assessment  of  the  level  of
       integration of Mr Lopes into the UK. The relevant paragraphs  of  the
       refusal letter being:

           "21.   It is accepted that you have obtained a  permanent  right
                to reside by virtue of a  five  year  period  of  continuous
                residence in accordance with the EEA Regulations between  15
                January 2003 to 11 March 2013. Although it is accepted  that
                you have resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least  10
                years, the Home Office  takes  the  view  that  you  do  not
                automatically  qualify  for  the  protection  of  imperative
                grounds of public security.  The Home Office has applied the
                "integration test" set out  at  recitals  23  &  24  of  the
                Directive and in the CJEU case of Tsakouridis  to  establish
                whether the highest level of protection is available to you.
                The following factors have been considered:

                 a)  The  cumulative  duration  and  the  frequency  of  any
                    absences from the United Kingdom during  the  qualifying
                    period (and the reasons for those absences);

                 b) Time spent in prison;

                 c) The overall length  of  your  residence  in  the  United
                    Kingdom;

                 d) Your client's family connection in the United Kingdom;

                 e) Your client's links with your country of origin, and ;

                 f) Your clients age on arrival in the United Kingdom.

           22.    Having assessed all these factor, the Home  Office  takes
                the view that you meet the integration criteria, as set  out
                in Tsakouridis. As a result it  is  necessary  to  establish
                that your deportation is warranted on imperative grounds  of
                public security.

   12. Questions relating to the higher level of protection available  under
       the Directive have occupied the courts for  a  number  of  years  and
       resulted in a referral for a preliminary  ruling  under  Article  267
       TFEU on 24th August 2012 concerning  the  interpretation  of  Article
       28(3)(a) of  Directive  2004/38/EC.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the
       European Union (CJEU) delivered it judgment on 16th January  2014  in
       two related cases of Case C-400/12, Secretary of State v MG and  Case
       C-387/12, Onuekwere v SSHD in which it was found that  the  ten  year
       period of residence referred to in the relevant  provision  must,  in
       principle, be continuous and must be calculated by counting back from
       the date of decision ordering the expulsion of the person  concerned.
       It was also held that Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38  must  be
       interpreted  as  meaning  that  a  period  of  imprisonment  is,   in
       principle, capable both of interrupting the continuity of the  period
       of residence for the purposes of that provision and of affecting  the
       decision regarding the grant of the enhanced protection provided  for
       thereunder, even where the  person  concerned  resided  in  the  host
       Member State for the 10 years prior  to  imprisonment.  However,  the
       fact that that person resided in the host Member  State  for  the  10
       years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration  as  part
       of the overall assessment required in order to determine whether  the
       integrating links previously forged within the host Member State have
       be broken.

   13. It is asserted the concession was incorrectly made  by  reference  to
       paragraphs 29 to 39 of MG (C-400/12).

   14. The date of the expulsion decision is the 10th June 2014 which  forms
       the starting point. The ten year period from this  date  is  to  11th
       June 2004 when it is accepted Mr Lopes was in the United Kingdom. The
       Youth Team Offender Worker in the Pre-Sentence Report and  Mr  Lopes'
       mother both refer to the date of entry as being 2002, 12 years before
       the removal decision.  Mr Lopes was sentenced on the 11th March  2013
       to four years detention  which  disrupts  the  period  of  continuous
       residence and is capable of  affecting  the  decision  regarding  the
       grant of the enhanced protection, as per MG.

   15. The Upper Tribunal, post receipt of the CJEU decision promulgated the
       case of MG (Prison -Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive)  Portugal
       [2014] UKUT 00392 in which it was said that the judgment of the  CJEU
       should be understood as meaning that a period of imprisonment  during
       those 10 years does not necessarily prevent a person from  qualifying
       for enhanced protection if that person  is  sufficiently  integrated.
       However, according to the same judgment,  a  period  of  imprisonment
       must have a negative impact in so far as establishing integration  is
       concerned.

   16. Both decisions were available to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  even
       though illustrating the  assessment  leading  to  the  concession  is
       arguably legally flawed as there  is  no  consideration  of  MG,  the
       concession was accepted  without  consideration  of  whether  it  was
       correct in law. The duty of a court is not to accept a concession and
       assume it is right in law  in  all  cases.  A  court  must  ensure  a
       concession is correct in law.

   17. The issue in relation to the challenge is one of  materiality.  Judge
       Pooler found Mr Lopes is entitled to the higher level of  protection.
       Mr Lopes was imprisoned within the 10 years immediately preceding the
       relevant decision but this not the only factor as  otherwise  no  one
       would be entitled to the benefit of the higher degree  of  protection
       if imprisoned before attaining ten years residence.

   18. The assessment requires a holistic approach to the  evidence.  It  is
       not disputed Mr Lopes entered the United Kingdom aged  six  with  his
       parents and has been in the country for twelve years at the  relevant
       date. It is accepted Mr Lopes has grown up as any young person  would
       have at the relevant time in the United Kingdom, reflecting a  degree
       of integration. It is submitted by Mr  Mills  that  such  integration
       has, however, been broken by Mr Lopes.

   19. It is accepted Mr Lopes does not have a long criminal record  but  he
       does have a long record of anti-social behaviour which  included  his
       being excluded from school  in  2011  and  later  from  college.  The
       Sentencing Judge refer to this past conduct where he states:

           "At seven am on that Saturday morning you had been up all night.
           On your own account you probably had some alcohol  and  you  had
           taken some drugs. You had been up all  night  and  on  your  way
           back, whether you were going to your home at that stage does not
           really matter, you and your little group went  past  this  local
           shop, this neighbourhood shop, where you had already been  known
           for your anti-social behaviour and which had been the trouble on
           previous occasions."

   20. It is also noted in the Risk of Harm section of the ASSET Report that
       "Luis  has  a  history  of  anti-social  behaviour  with  the   local
       community, which appears to have taken  place  when  he  was  with  a
       group, he also has some previous for shoplifting".

   21. The index offence is illustrative of Mr Lopes' conduct. It  is  noted
       in the sentencing remarks that:

           "... On you own account the others had gone away  and  you  then
           went in alone to scare the shopkeeper, the father at that stage,
           the father saw you off the premises. You returned, having  armed
           yourself with a stone or rock, and as we know for certain  armed
           somehow at that stage with a very sharp knife.  You say that you
           have no recollection of that knife.  As  I  pointed  out  to  Mr
           Clarke, you have sufficient recollection and you had  sufficient
           presence of mind when you left the scene to  burn  your  clothes
           and shoes. It is strange that you have no recollection  of  what
           you did with the knife or where that knife  came  from.  Anyway,
           with that knife when you went back in you inflicted the injuries
           we have heard about in this court; the one wound to the  father,
           half a dozen wounds to the son, and those wounds, I am sure  you
           have seen the photographs, they speak for themselves.  They  are
           serious wounds with a sharp knife, slashing and puncturing which
           could have so easily caused major injury, major life threatening
           injury"

   22. It is said the son has lasting physical effects of  the  injuries  to
       the functioning of his hand and ability to live life and  carry,  and
       both have  psychological  effects  of  the  attack.  In  the  section
       detailing the impact on the victims in the ASSET Report it is noted:

           "Both victim sustained physical injuries.  One  victim  received
           five stab wounds to their left arm, side and stomach. The  other
           victim received a stab wound to their stomach. Medical attention
           needed to be sought and both victims  were  hospitalised.   Both
           victims will be left with permanent scarring.  Victim statements
           indicate that although the victim's wounds have  begun  to  heal
           the  victim  who  received  the  five  stab  wounds  still   has
           difficulty moving their arm and is unable to carry out  ordinary
           simple tasks.  This victim also has no feeling in the fingers of
           their left hand and they  have  been  informed  this  may  never
           return. This victim spent five days in hospital and has  had  to
           undergo two operations. They  continue  to  have  to  return  to
           hospital for further assessment and treatment and will  need  to
           undergo  physiotherapy.  The  victim   impact   statement   also
           indicates that the victims have also been psychologically harmed
           i.e. they feel vulnerable to further attacks, have had to change
           their day to day routine, and are fearful of further  reprisals.
            They state that they live in fear of further attacks."

   23. Mr Beard in his submission to the Tribunal referred to the  death  of
       Mr Lopes' father and step-father and to the fact he has 'gone off the
       rails'. It is clear that in his conduct  Mr  Lopes  has  deliberately
       acted in a manner inconsistent with the laws of the  United  Kingdom.
       This is a pattern that has continued in that it has also  been  noted
       in the ASSET report that  there  have  been  altercations  whilst  in
       prison which the author states appear  to  be  linked  to  Mr  Lopes'
       attempt to 'gain his place among his peers'. It is  not  disputed  Mr
       Lopes has been subject  to  adjudications  and  in  relation  to  his
       current detention at IRC Morton Hall it is recorded that (i) on  25th
       November 2014 a green leafy substance  thought  to  be  cannabis  was
       found in a card  addresses  to  Mr  Lopes  of  which  he  denied  all
       knowledge, (ii) on 27th December 2014 Mr Lopes was  in  the  room  of
       another named individual. When told to return to his room for a roll-
       call he ignored the Officer. He eventually left but returned  to  the
       room where an argument occurred  between  the  other  person  and  Mr
       Lopes. Mr Lopes was ushered from the room back to his  own  room  but
       was noted to open the observation panel and to clear  his  threat  to
       spit on the panel. He was told this was disgusting  as  a  result  of
       which he stopped and returned to his room where he threw things about
       and muttered, swearing at the Officer, (iii) 4th March 2015 Mr  Lopes
       was spoken to about his behaviour and the  use  of  a  weapon  in  an
       assault against another named person. Mr Lopes admitted using a towel
       rail to hit this person two or three times after he  claims  to  have
       been punched. Evidence supported the reduction of his privileges  and
       the referral of the incident to the police, (iv) 17th June 2015 it is
       recorded that it was noted that morning that 'Mr Lopes was under  the
       influence. He was laid on his bed, slurring his words, and  his  eyes
       were red and 'glazey'. He had covered his observation panel, contrary
       to instruction, and refused to remove the cards he covered  it  with.
       He is noted to be very argumentative and uncooperative'.

   24. Mr Lopes appears otherwise to be a capable individual able to speak a
       number of languages  in  addition  to  Portuguese.  He  has  attained
       certificates in prison from courses  he  has  attended  but  has  not
       provided copies of the certificates he says he  was  awarded  showing
       him to be drug free.  His education was disrupted as a result of  his
       exclusion  from  secondary  school  and  his  adverse  behaviour  has
       continued. There was insufficient evidence  of  social  and  cultural
       integration into the United Kingdom before the First-tier  Judge  but
       this was not an issue  canvassed  as  a  result  of  the  concession.
       Reliance on the concession is arguably material and  in  this  regard
       the determination must be set aside.

Discussion


   25. In remaking the decision the first issues to  be  considered  is  the
       withdrawal of the concession made by the Secretary for State  in  her
       grounds. In SSHD v Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA  Civ  106  the  Court  of
       Appeal said that the Tribunal can allow a concession made  by  either
       party to be withdrawn if it considers that there is  good  reason  in
       all the circumstances to do so.  The Tribunal must try  to  obtain  a
       fair and just result and consider each case on its merits.  It may be
       relevant to consider the nature of the  concession,  the  timing  and
       whether there will  be  prejudice  to  one  of  the  parties  if  the
       withdrawal is allowed.  It is not essential to demonstrate  prejudice
       before an application to withdraw a concession can  be  refused.   In
       the absence of prejudice, if a party  has  made  a  concession  which
       appears in retrospect to be a concession which should not  have  been
       made, then probably justice will require that the party be allowed to
       withdraw that concession.

   26. On the basis the concession is arguably wrong in law, for the reasons
       set out above, there is good reason to permit the Secretary of  State
       to withdraw the same for which permission is given.

   27. Mr Beard was given the opportunity to discuss with Mr  Lopes  whether
       he wanted the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
       further considered there or for an adjournment to prepare the case on
       the basis  the  question  of  integration  needed  to  be  considered
       further. Having spoken to Mr  Lopes  the  Tribunal  were  advised  he
       wanted to proceed before the Upper Tribunal today.

   28. Mr Lopes also wanted to speak to the Tribunal which he was  permitted
       to do. He claimed that at  Morton  Hall  he  had  problems  with  the
       officers. He did not realise he hit the other person with  the  towel
       rail until afterwards. He claims not to have intended to strike him.

   29. Integration is defined in the Oxford Dictionary  as  "The  action  or
       fact of passing into, or approximating to, each  other  by  degrees".
       Mr Lopes has lived in the United Kingdom  since  2002  and  has  been
       educated here. There is no evidence of secure employment  or  of  his
       having setup a life or home of his own. Before  being  imprisoned  Mr
       Lopes lived in the family home in the  Dursley  area.  He  previously
       attended Stroud College on a plumbing and electrician course which he
       started in September 2012 although, after one month, was excluded. Mr
       Lopes had a part time job washing up at a local public house.

   30. On the negative side is the  rejection  of  the  laws  and  rules  of
       behaviour and expectation as to  conduct  with  the  United  Kingdom,
       illustrated by his criminal conduct, conviction, and imprisonment for
       a very serious violent offence.

   31. All relevant  factors  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  each
       individual case, in particular the duration of each period of absence
       from the host Member State, the cumulative duration and the frequency
       of those absences, and the reasons why the person concerned left  the
       host Member State and which are of a nature to ascertain  whether  or
       not those absences involve the  transfer  to  another  State  of  the
       centre of personal, family or occupational interests.  Mr  Lopes  has
       visited Portugal on holiday as set out in the papers but this is  not
       frequent and does not represent a transfer to Portugal of his family,
       personal or occupational interests.

   32. Until his  conduct  deteriorated  the  facts  suggest  Mr  Lopes  was
       sufficiently integrated as a long term resident in the United Kingdom
       by his presence here.  There  are,  arguably,  two  elements  to  the
       concept of integration which is the need for a physical presence  and
       intention to live in the UK and abide by its laws and  the  rules  of
       society and for  there  to  be  a  degree  of  permanence  about  the
       residence - the person must have a settled intention to make  his  or
       her home here.

   33. Mr Lopes as a child in the UK would have followed his parents' wishes
       and entered and lived in the UK as this is what they decided.  It  is
       not therefore a case in which he made a conscious decision to come to
       the UK and integrate as an individual as he  would  have  lacked  the
       capacity to make such a decision in his early years, although  during
       this period the fact he was in the UK, educated here and  lived  here
       and not  in  Portugal  is  relevant.   Once  Mr  Lopes  came  of  age
       sufficient to form his own thoughts in  relation  to  his  future  he
       remained in the UK and only  visited  Portugal.  During  his  teenage
       years it would have been unrealistic to expect  that  it  would  have
       been practicable for Mr Lopes to do other than remain at home  as  he
       would not have had the economic means  to  set  himself  up  to  live
       independently. During this time, and since, however his  conduct  has
       deteriorated. Whilst Mr Lopes may have formed an intention to live in
       the UK it is debatable that he formed an intention to  abide  by  its
       laws and the rules of society in the UK. The issue is whether he  has
       'thrown away' that integration by his actions.

   34. A period of ten years residence in a host State has  for  many  years
       been accepted in Europe as being the period in which  a  person  will
       become so assimilated into the society in which they live  that  they
       should be viewed as if they were in the same position as citizens  of
       that country, and only face expulsion in  exceptional  circumstances.
       This, in some respects, reflects the concept of the European  citizen
       in which rather than being a citizen of the Member State of birth, we
       are all citizens of the greater European State  first  and  foremost.
       Compare this with a person subject to the domestic laws of the United
       Kingdom where under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  a
       minimum period of twenty years residence  is  required  to  enable  a
       person to remain on private life grounds.

   35. Mr  Lopes'  conduct  must  have  an  impact  upon  integrating  links
       previously forged within UK although this does not automatically mean
       that  his  conduct  or  period  of  imprisonment  prevents  his  from
       qualifying for enhanced protection  if  sufficiently  integrated  (my
       emphasis).  The  period  of  imprisonment  came  after  a  period  of
       residence in excess of ten years during which, until 2011,  there  is
       no indication of a threat to the degree of integration achieved.

   36. Judge Pooler also noted that that he did not have sight of section  4
       of the ASSET - Youth Justice Board - Risk of Serious Harm Assessment,
       dated 9 October 2013, but noted that the assessment was that of  'low
       risk'. This Tribunal has received the missing section and noted  that
       the classification of risk of serious harm to others is of a  'Medium
       Risk'. This is stated to be; 'some risk identified but  the  offender
       is unlikely  to  cause  serious  harm  unless  circumstances  change.
       Relevant issues can be addressed as part of  the  normal  supervision
       processes'.

   37. The author of the report records  the  outcome  of  reviews  dated  9
       October 2013 and 24 June 2013 in which the following is noted:

           'Start- Mappa guidance would indicate that Luis  is  category  2
           level 2 at present however it is  recognised  he  will  serve  a
           lengthy custodial sentence and further assessment will  be  need
           to take place prior to his release in  order  to  ascertain  any
           change to this.  When taking into account the  use  of  weapons,
           the substantial physical injuries the  victims  sustained  which
           ultimately  could  have  been  fatal,  the  psychological   harm
           inflicted and furthermore that  Luis  committed  these  offences
           whilst under the  influence  of  substances,  his  is  currently
           assessed as HIGH risk of serious harm.

           Review 24.6.13 - Whilst it is acknowledged that to date Luis has
           been involved in a total of 8 altercations throughout the  total
           period of time in which he has been on remand and sentenced none
           of these resulted in any serious harm being caused.  Given  that
           Luis is now in a secure and contained environment where  he  has
           no access to weapons and constant supervision  along  with  also
           having no access to substances these are  all  relevant  factors
           and due to these being  in  place  at  present  Luis's  risk  of
           serious harm is currently assessed as Medium.  However,  due  to
           the serious nature of these current offences is acknowledged and
           will continue to be monitored and Luis's risk  of  serious  harm
           will need to be further assessed should other significant events
           occur whilst he is  in  custody  and  fundamentally  when  these
           protective factors are removed prior to  his  release  into  the
           community.

           Review 9.10.13 - Although it is recognised that Luis was further
           involved in an altercation within the first few  days  of  being
           placed at Werrington YOI to date  there  have  been  no  further
           information or evidence to suggest his involvement in any  other
           incidents at this time.  Luis has now been  placed  on  enhanced
           Regime which he has maintained for 1  �  months  to  date  which
           reflects the positive progress he has been making  there.   Luis
           continues to articulate remorse  for  his  actions  towards  his
           victims for these offences. Luis also maintains that he does not
           wish to cause any further harm or distress  to  the  victims  of
           this offence or others.  Given the protective factors identified
           below remain in place Luis risk of serious  harm  remain  is  as
           assed as Medium however the  serious  nature  of  these  current
           offences continues to be acknowledged and this will continue  to
           be monitored.  It continues to be acknowledged that Luis risk of
           serious harm will need to be further assessed should  any  other
           significant  events  occur  whilst  he   is   in   custody   and
           fundamentally these protective factors are removed prior to  his
           release into the community.'

   38. The reports from Morton Hall show further occurrences of violent  and
       anti-social behaviour within that secure environment  which  supports
       the concerns of the author of the report.

   39. It has not been shown there  is  acceptable  an  explanation  for  Mr
       Lopes' actions other than that this is the way in which he has chosen
       to behave. Juvenile delinquency has been  recognised  as  a  relevant
       factor when assessing the actions  of  young  persons.  In  Maslov  v
       Austria (Applic 1638/03) EctHR (First section) it was found that  the
       decision was disproportionate under Article 8  because  the  offences
       were committed during a difficult  period  of  adolescence  and  were
       qualified as non-violent juvenile crimes, because the claimant's good
       conduct in prison and because of his close ties to the host  country.



   40. In this appeal the index offence is a serious violent crime committed
       when Mr Lopes was under 18. The reference to 'very  serious  reasons'
       is satisfied when considering the nature of the very violent  offence
       and the ongoing risk as demonstrated by Mr Lopes' conduct  since  his
       being sentenced and being detained in immigration detention. Specific
       elements also include that fact the offence was committed  under  the
       influence of substances the use and possession of which  is  illegal,
       the use of weapons including a knife and  rock  which  he  must  have
       deliberately obtained and disposed of after the event, the infliction
       of numerous stab wounds upon his victims, and the fact the victims in
       the shop were known to Mr Lopes and specifically targeted. The  ASSET
       report at page  58  records  the  following  features  of  Mr  Lopes'
       behaviour on the night of the offence (a) use  or  acquisition  of  a
       weapons (b) unpredictability (c) seems driven/impelled  e.g.,  desire
       for revenge (d) loss of control e.g. temper (e) recklessness and  (f)
       intention to hurt or harm. It is also noted as  an  area  of  concern
       that Mr Lopes (a) denied any recollection of having or using a  knife
       (b) left his peers and  then  specifically  sought  the  victims  out
       unaccompanied and (c) both  victims  are  likely  to  have  permanent
       scaring from their injuries.

   41. In the pre-sentence report it is recorded:

           'When taking into account Luis's move to England at the  age  of
           six, English being his second  language,  his  relatively  small
           stature, and his record of anti-social behaviour the majority of
           which has taken place in the presence of other  peers.  I  would
           conclude that Luis perception of himself, his desire to "fit in"
           and be accepted amongst his peers, may have a greater  influence
           upon  his  thinking  and  behaviour  than  he  is   willing   to
           acknowledge.'

   42. It is also recorded in the report:

           'Positive factors

           3.13 Luis has previously engaged  with  training  and  education
           albeit for a short period of time.  He tell me that  he  intends
           to utilise custodial sentence as an opportunity  to  focus  upon
           gaining qualifications in order to increase the  change  of  him
           being able to secure employment when released. Luis has a strong
           link with his family and it is evidence  that  he  will  receive
           ongoing support particularly from his mother  and  other  family
           members.'

   43. Mr Lopes is also recorded as having informed the reports author  that
       he will no longer use substances and has identified changes  that  he
       plans to make [3.12] which are matters that need to be considered  by
       reference to the Morton Hall reports. It is, however, noted  at  page
       60 of the ASSET report that he is  known  to  associate   with  other
       peers and older males known to the police  and  linked  to  the  drug
       fraternity and that his strong desire for belonging within  his  peer
       group could make him more susceptible to peer pressure.

   44. Although the draft of this determination was set  out  shortly  after
       the hearing the delay in promulgation  has  been  to  enable  further
       consideration of the issue of the circumstances in which a period  of
       integration can be said to  have  been  'lost'.   This  can  only  be
       determined as a question of fact, not law, based upon the conduct  of
       the person concerned.  Had this been a case in  which  Mr  Lopes  was
       accused of acts classified as juvenile delinquency arising  from  the
       type of odd thinking some young men and women have  at  that  age  in
       relation what they perceive as acceptable  behaviour,  it  is  likely
       that a finding that  such  status  had  been  lost  would  not  be  a
       proportionate assessment. In this case the offence is not that  of  a
       minor nature but the offence alone cannot justify the decision.  That
       offence is illustrative of a process in  the  mind  of  Mr  Lopes  in
       relation to how he sees himself in society. He appears to have made a
       conscious choice that his status within his peer group and desire  to
       'belong' has become the determinative driving factor in his  conduct,
       irrespective of the fact that this may involve acts contrary  to  the
       laws of the United Kingdom.

   45. In addition there is the key offence in which Mr Lopes, acting  alone
       but under the influence of substance MCAT  which  is  Mephadrone,  an
       illegal class B drug, deliberately targeted the victims  for  revenge
       using weapons. The violent element  in  his  personality  appears  to
       remain  and  to  have  been  exhibited  since  his   conviction   and
       imprisonment.

   46. I find after careful thought and having weighed up the evidence as  a
       whole that the rejection of the laws and norms of society  in  favour
       of a self-centred approach based upon a desire to enhance his profile
       among his peers supports the respondents case  that  any  integration
       into the society of the United Kingdom has been rejected and lost  in
       other than the physical sense of living at home with his  mother  and
       sibling, which too has been lost as a result of his imprisonment  and
       subsequent period of immigration detention. This is a case in which I
       find, notwithstanding Mr  Lopes  age,  integration  links  previously
       forged within the host Member State have be broken. I find  Mr  Lopes
       has not discharged the burden of  proof  upon  him  to  the  required
       standard to show he qualifies for the enhanced protection as  he  has
       not shown that since 2011 he is sufficiently integrated.

   47. Although Mr Lopes is unable to show he  is  entitled  to  the  higher
       level of protection it is accepted by Mr  Mills  he  has  acquired  a
       permanent right of residence as a result of his being in  the  United
       Kingdom for five years in accordance with the Directive. As such  the
       required test is that to be found in Regulation 21(3) that a relevant
       decision may not be taken in respect of a  person  with  a  permanent
       right of residence under regulation 15 except on serious  grounds  of
       public policy or public security.

   48. In MG and VC (Ireland) [2006] UKAIT  00053  the  Tribunal  said  that
       "where regulation 21(3) applies to an individual (because  he  is  an
       EEA national with a permanent right of residence but not a  minor  or
       along term resident) he may be removed as previously on  the  grounds
       that there is a risk of his committing  further  offences,  with  the
       proviso that the risk of harm  must  constitute  serious  grounds  of
       public policy for his removal."

   49. In BF(Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 923 the Appellant,  a  citizen
       of Portugal, arrived in the UK and had acquired permanent  residence.
       He was convicted of battery against his partner and sentenced  to  42
       months imprisonment.  He could only be removed on serious grounds  of
       public  policy  or  public  security.   The  Tribunal  first  had  to
       determine the claimant's relevant personal conduct; secondly  whether
       the conduct represented a genuine present  and  sufficiently  serious
       threat; thirdly whether that threat affected one of  the  fundamental
       interests of society;  and  fourthly  whether  deportation  would  be
       disproportionate in all the circumstances.  The  Tribunal  noted  the
       evidence that the claimant had a high propensity to re-offend against
       the same victim and any new partner, but went on  to  find  that  the
       SSHD had failed to prove that there were serious  grounds  of  public
       policy  or  security  which  made  deportation   proportionate.    In
       remitting the appeal, the Court of Appeal said  the  Tribunal  should
       have reached a conclusion as to whether the threat, which was clearly
       present at the time of the offence, was still present at the hearing.
        The Tribunal had to decide  whether  there  was  a  present  serious
       threat and if so the extent of that threat.

   50. Following the four stage procedure  outlined  in  BF  (Portugal):  in
       relation to Mr Lope's personal conduct, this is referred to above. In
       relation to the question  whether  Mr  Lopes'  conduct  represents  a
       genuine present and sufficiently serious threat, it is  necessary  to
       consider the evidence made available  in  relation  to  the  risk  of
       reoffending.  Judge Pooler comments in the determination that he  had
       not been provided with a complete  copy  of  the  ASSET  Report.  The
       missing pages have now been made available as  shown  above.   It  is
       also noted in the assessment that Mr Lopes remains  in  a  protective
       custodial environment and that he will need to be  reassessed  should
       other significant events occur whilst he is in custody and  when  the
       positive protective factors are removed prior to his release into the
       community. The entries referred to above in relation to  his  ongoing
       conduct, including the use of a weapon  to  attack  another  detained
       person earlier this  year,  suggest  the  threat  which  was  clearly
       present at the time of the offence is still present  at  the  hearing
       and represents a present serious threat of  violent  offending  which
       may include the use of a weapon against his victims.

   51. When asked about the incident  involving  the  towel  rail  Mr  Lopes
       denied being able to recall details and then stated that  it  was  in
       self-defence. The inability to recall  or  remember  is  specifically
       commented upon by the Sentencing Judge and appears to be a pattern of
       denial  of  responsibility  and  lack  of  acceptance   of   personal
       responsibility. Mr Beard describes Mr Lopes as 'going off the  rails'
       and the use of disproportionate violence if he thinks he  or  one  of
       his friends have been 'wronged' is a cause for concern.

   52. The evidence suggests there is a real risk  of  serious  reoffending.
       There  has  been  no  work  undertaken  in  relation   to   emotional
       difficulties said by his mother to emanate from the time of the death
       of his step-father and it is not known if work has been undertaken in
       relation to Mr Lopes perception of himself and his desire to 'fit in'
       and be accepted by his peers. It is noted in the Report  that  "Given
       the nature of this offence and the information provided  whilst  Luis
       maintains he wanted to "scare" the victim it appears Luis did in fact
       lose control during the commission of the offence.  Luis claims  that
       he  does  generally  give  thought  to  his  actions   however   from
       discussions with his mother  it  appears  that  Luis  does  have  the
       potential  to  act  impulsively  often   not   thinking   about   the
       consequences of his actions until after he has acted".   It  is  also
       said that Luis desire to be accepted amongst his peer group "may have
       a greater influence upon him that he is willing to acknowledge".

   53. The report is somewhat dated having been prepared on 9th October 2013
       but it illustrates  the  real  issues  facing  Mr  Lopes.  Unless  he
       resolves such issues there  is  a  real  risk  of  further  offending
       resulting in serious harm as a result of the use of  violence  as  he
       has in the  past  both  outside  and  within  the  prison/immigration
       detention environment.  It is on the evidence made available  that  I
       find he presents a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat at
       the date of the hearing.

   54. Mr Lopes plea for a further chance and assurance of remorse and  that
       he will not re-offend in the future is noted but he made such a claim
       to the author of the ASSET report and yet used  a  weapon  thereafter
       and has demonstrated continued  anti-social  behaviour,  meaning  his
       word is not sufficient. There is no  evidence  of  an  acceptance  of
       responsibility for important elements of his conduct such as  use  of
       the knife or of the events in Morton Hall and no  suggestion  of  his
       willingness to work with professionals to remedy  the  cause  of  his
       conduct.

   55. The third element is the question whether that threat affects one  of
       the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   In  GW   (EEA   reg   21:
       'fundamental interests') Netherlands [2009] UKAIT 00050 the  Tribunal
       said that the 'fundamental interests' of a society within the meaning
       of reg 21 (a threat to which may justify  the  exclusion  of  an  EEA
       national) is a question to be determined by reference  to  the  legal
       rules governing the society in question,  for  it  is  unlikely  that
       conduct that  is  subject  to  no  prohibition  can  be  regarded  as
       threatening those interests.

   56. Mr Lopes' record shows a propensity to renewed violence  such  as  to
       satisfy the relevant test. The  offences  he  has  committed  and  in
       relation to which there is a real risk of repeat is prohibited by the
       criminal law.

   57. In relation to the question of whether it would  be  disproportionate
       in all the circumstances, Mr Lopes was born on 13th April 1996 and so
       is now 19 years of age. Although the index offence was committed as a
       minor he has continued use acts of violence as an  adult.  He  is  in
       good health with  no  identified  health  needs.  Mr  Lopes  has  his
       immediate family of his mother and half-brother in the United Kingdom
       and a cousin,  and  family  in  Portugal.  The  issue  of  Mr  Lopes'
       integration into the United Kingdom is discussed above.  Although  he
       has no recent knowledge of living in Portugal he  is  fluent  in  the
       language and his claim not to be able to read or write Portuguese  is
       not substantiated. It is noted that in his deportation interview when
       asked what languages he is able to speak Mr Lopes did not claim to be
       able to speak Portuguese until he was asked how he communicated  with
       his mother who speaks no English, at which point he admitted  it  was
       in Portuguese.  There is no evidence family in Portugal are unwilling
       to  assist  him  in  adapting  to  life  in  Portugal  or  that   the
       consequences   of   removal   are   such   that   the   decision   is
       disproportionate when considering the  free  movement  principle.  Mr
       Lopes was asked in the deportation interview whether  there  was  any
       reason why he did not want to be deported to  Portugal  to  which  he
       replied "No reason why I can't. I wouldn't  like  to  go  back.  I've
       lived in the UK 12-13 years. It would be hard to get a job.  I  can't
       read and write Portuguese and to go back to  Portugal  after  all  of
       these years it is not going be easy for me."

   58. In relation to the question of rehabilitation, the Report  refers  to
       some areas Mr Lopes could benefit from working with but  it  has  not
       been shown he cannot access the same in Portugal.  European law makes
       it necessary to consider whether a decision to deport  may  prejudice
       the prospects of rehabilitation from offending in the  host  country,
       and weigh that risk in the  balance  when  assessing  proportionality
       under regulation 21(5)(a). It has not been shown  that  this  is  the
       case or that any prospect of rehabilitation is less in Portugal  than
       in the United Kingdom.  The peer group who are said to be an  element
       in the offending are in the UK and so removal from them could in fact
       enhance prospects of rehabilitation.

   59. The Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon her to
       show that there is a present serious threat and that the decision  is
       proportionate on the facts.  Regulation 21(3) is satisfied.

   60. In relation to Article 8 ECHR. It has not been shown Mr Lopes is able
       to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
       assessment of the proportionality of the decision by reference to the
       disruption with his family  and  private  life  in  the  UK  must  be
       considered by reference to the above findings. In this regard I  find
       the respondent has discharged the burden of proof  upon  her  to  the
       require standard  to  show  the  decision  is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate aim of the protection of the public and the right  of  the
       State to removal  offenders  by  the  use  of  a  lawful  deportation
       decision.

Decision

   61. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity.

   62. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.  I make no such order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th August 2015

