
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01691/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th April, 2014                           |On 15th May 2014             |
|Signed 15th May 2014                          |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr Spencer Kudita

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVitie, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nyamayaro, an assistant solicitor with Bake & Co
Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the  appellant  in
    these proceedings and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her  as  "the
    claimant."

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Zimbabwe, who was born on  1st  October,
    1971, and  who  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  19th
    September, 1999.  The respondent  was  granted  six  months'  leave  to
    remain and he joined his wife, Yvonne Vuyo Hela,, to whom he  had  been
    married since 23rd December, 1995, and who was a domestic worker at the
    Zimbabwean High Commission in London.

3.   The respondent and his wife have two British born children, Y  who  was
    born in 2002 and T, who was born in 2005.  Both attend  school  in  the
    United Kingdom.

4.   Following the respondent's arrest for  using  a  French  passport,  the
    respondent came to the attention of the immigration authorities and was
    served with a notice as an overstayer, liable to removal.

5.   He was not removed but I do not know why.

6.   On 29th June, 2007, at  Birmingham  Crown  Court,  the  respondent  was
    convicted of using a false instrument, obtaining an advantage for  self
    by deception and remaining in the United Kingdom beyond the time limit.
     He was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment on each of  the  first
    two offences and to  three  months'  imprisonment  on  the  third,  all
    concurrent.

7.   It was on 11th July, 2007, that the  respondent  was  notified  of  his
    liability to deportation and  on  23rd  July,  that  year,  he  claimed
    asylum.  On 10th October, 2007 the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  made  a  decision  to  deport   the   respondent   and   on
    18th October, 2007 the respondent lodged  appeal  against  deportation
    which was dismissed on appeal on 21st January, 2008.   The  deportation
    order was signed on 11th September, 2008.

8.   For reasons which have not been explained to me the respondent was  not
    then removed from the United Kingdom.

9.   On 24th February, 2009, representations were  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to the Secretary of  State.   Further  representations  were
    made on 20th April, 2010.

10.  Nothing further was heard from the  Secretary  of  State  until,  in  a
    letter dated 6th August, 2013, responding to his solicitor's letters of
    23rd February, 2009 and 20th April, 2010, the UK Border Agency advised
    that it refused to revoke  the  deportation  order.   Its  decision  to
    refuse to revoke the deportation order was dated 6th August,  2013  and
    it was against that decision that the respondent appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

11.  The respondent's appeal was considered by a  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge A K Simpson sitting with  Mrs  S  A
    Hussain) who, in a determination dated 20th April,  2014,  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal on immigration and human rights grounds

12.  The claimant challenged that decision and  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes suggested that it was  arguable
    that the Tribunal failed to properly engage with the evidence  and  the
    Immigration Rules and to note that the respondent's spouse and children
    were not British citizens, but Zimbabwean, like him.  Given that he did
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules criticism  was  made
    that the determination makes no reference to how to approach the  issue
    of the effect upon a family of deportation and in particular the weight
    to give to the best interests of  the  children  who  are  not  British
    citizens, but citizens of the country to whom the  respondent  will  be
    deported, when balancing the public interests in his deportation.

13.  Mr McVitie  told  me  he  relied  upon  the  grounds  as  drafted.   He
    suggested that at paragraph 27 of  the  determination,  the  panel  had
    sought  to  retry  the  deportation  appeal.   He  told  me  that   the
    respondent's children were now in fact both British.

14.  I have carefully read the panel's determination and do not accept  that
    the panel sought to retry the deportation appeal.  What  they  did,  at
    paragraph 27, was to note that the respondent acknowledged the offences
    which were all committed during the course of the same  incident,  that
    he has committed no further offences during the  six  years  since  his
    conviction and that given the nature of the offences,  namely  using  a
    false passport in order to work illegally, they found that  he  was  at
    low risk of reoffending.  The panel acknowledged  that  the  respondent
    has worked illegally whilst in the United Kingdom, but  concluded  that
    he had clearly demonstrated his  desire  to  support  himself  and  his
    family from his own resources, rather than to merely rely on receipt of
    benefits.

15.  The first challenge made by the respondent suggests that  the  Tribunal
    has found that the respondent's deportation would breach the guidelines
    set in the case of Maslov v  Austria  [2009]  INLR  47,  but  when  one
    actually reads paragraphs 27 and 33 it is clear that the  Tribunal  had
    in mind the advice of the  European  Court  in  Boultif  v  Switzerland
    [2001] 33 EHRR 1179 and Uner v the Netherlands [2007] INLR 273 and  the
    factors that were thought to  be  relevant  in  assessing  whether  the
    removal or deportation of a foreign  national  is  proportionate.   The
    Tribunal bore in mind that the respondent and  his  children  were,  at
    that time, all citizens of Zimbabwe and not British, although they were
    born in the  United  Kingdom  and  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    exclusively for the whole of their lives.  They formed  the  view  that
    the respondent's removal to Zimbabwe would result in both a short  term
    and longer term  impact  on  the  children's  relationships  with  both
    parents and in time the children would regard themselves as having been
    abandoned by their father.  They went on to note that the  respondent's
    removal would also mean that his wife would  be  left  alone  to  raise
    their children which was not something that she  had  ever  anticipated
    and  given  her  occupation  and  shift  pattern  it  would   lead   to
    particularly serious practical difficulties in  her  case.   Given  the
    current economic climate in the United Kingdom it was not reasonable to
    expect her to seek other occupation which will prevent her  being  able
    her to care for her children whilst earning an  income.   They  believe
    that the respondent's removal to Zimbabwe was likely  to  lead  to  his
    wife's eventual inability to continue her present job which would be to
    the detriment of both children.

16.  Both children are now acknowledged to be British subjects, although  at
    the date of the determination they were not.

17.  The  Tribunal  considered  whether  the  removal  of  the  respondent's
    children to Zimbabwe would be in the best interests of these  children,
    but noted that the older child was now a  secondary  school  pupil  and
    believed that a change in syllabus and teaching methods at  this  stage
    in her educational career was likely to have a profound effect  on  her
    GCSE achievement.  The  other  ground  suggested  that  the  Tribunal's
    proportionality reasoning was faulty.  I believe that the  grounds  are
    entirely misguided.

18.  One can quite understand a very strong public interest in  the  removal
    from the United Kingdom of foreign prisoners, but it took the UK Border
    Agency in excess of four years to reply to representations made  to  it
    on behalf of the respondent, when in September, 2008 the  Secretary  of
    State signed a deportation order. The Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department  has  now   granted   the   appellant's   children   British
    nationality.

19.  I am satisfied that the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson does not contain any error on a point of law and I  uphold  her
    determination.  The appeal by Spencer Kudita is granted.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

