

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01638/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|on 5th August 2015                    |                On 14th August 2015  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Vasco Lua-Antunes
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: No appearance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Colyer promulgated on the 6th May 2015 in  which  he  allowed
        the appeal against the order for the deportation of Mr  Lua-Antunes
        from the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. Mr Lua-Antunes is a national of Portugal born on 27th June 1994. On
        2nd May 2014 an order was made for his deportation from the United
        Kingdom following his conviction on 18th July 2014 at Leicester
        Crown Court for the offence of Robbery.
     3. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal on the
        basis of an arguably flawed assessment of risk and in relation to
        the assessment of Article 8 ECHR.




Discussion



     4. Mr Lua-Antunes failed to appear before the Upper Tribunal. He is
        aware of the hearing but refused to leave the Immigration Detention
        Centre to be brought to Nottingham. The Tribunal also received a
        fax transmission from IRC Morton Hall on 15th July 2015 containing
        text written and signed by Mr Lua-Antunes to the effect that he
        wished to "retract his appeal as soon as possible". It is
        understood a meeting has been arranged with a representative of the
        Government of Portugal today for the purposes of arranging a travel
        document to enable Mr Lua-Antunes to return to Portugal.
     5. Although his family in the United Kingdom have provided additional
        information on his behalf, including a letter from his mother
        received on 4th August 2015 and a letter from a Mr John Flynn, who
        are aware of the wish to withdraw and who ask the Tribunal to
        disregard the same, there is no evidence Mr Lua-Antunes lacks
        capacity to make such a decision for himself. In addition to the
        signed statement that he wishes to withdraw the appeal there is the
        voluntary act of refusing to be brought to the hearing which is
        illustrative of Mr Lua-Antunes position. As all parties have been
        served with the notice of hearing and in the absence of any reason
        suggesting it was not appropriate to do so, the Tribunal find it in
        accordance with the overriding objectives and fairness to proceed
        in Mr Lua-Antunes' absence.
     6. Mr Lua-Antunes entered the United Kingdom in 1994 with his parents
        and has lived here since. His father left the family and retuned to
        Portugal leaving the Mr Lua-Antunes with his mother thereafter.
     7. The Judge found in paragraph 71 of the determination under
        challenge that Mr Lua-Antunes has acquired permanent residence in
        the United Kingdom having lived in this country for over ten years.
        It is not clear if the Judge meant the level of protection is that
        available to a person with a right to permanently reside in the UK
        or that it is at the higher level available to those who have been
        in the UK and integrated here for over ten years from his wording.
        The position is clarified in the phrase in the same paragraph "As
        such his removal from this country can only be justified on
        imperative grounds of public security or public policy".  The
        question that arises is, however, how the Judge assessed the
        entitlement to the higher level of protection. There is reference
        to a supplementary refusal letter of 4th February 2015 in which the
        SSHD accepted that Mr Lua-Antunes has more than ten years
        continuous residence in the United Kingdom but the Upper Tribunal
        in MG (Prison-Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal
        [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC) found that the requisite period must be
        calculated from the date of the decision under challenge and that a
        period of imprisonment during that ten year period does not prevent
        a person from qualifying for enhanced protection if that person is
        sufficiently integrated. This element is not discussed in the
        determination which appears to base the finding of entitlement to
        enhanced protection on time in the UK without more.
     8. There is also reference to Mr Lau-Antunes not presenting the level
        of risk that is required to be posed in the case of a perosn with a
        right of permanent residence which is acquired after five years
        satisfying the relevant qualifying criteria and which is the second
        of the three levels of protection, but which is not the relevant
        test in a ten year 'imperative ground' case. Such may be applicable
        if it was not to be found the necessary degree of integration had
        been proved.
     9. Also of concern is paragraph 58 of the determination in which the
        Judge finds:


        58.  This appellant's violence appears not to have been pre-planned
             and there is no suggestion that offensive weapons were
             involved, although the kicking and punching the victim appears
             not to have had serious life changing injuries.  I note that
             this is not part of a series of offences. To his credit he
             pleaded guilty.  I find that the level of violence was seen by
             the sentencing judge to pass the custody threshold but there
             is no indication that the appellant's offending shows a
             propensity to commit serious violent crimes. It has not been
             established that he represents a genuine and sufficiently
             serious risk to the public that there is a requirement to
             deport him.


    10. Two issues arise, the first of which is that it is acknowledged
        that the offence which led to his imprisonment was pre-planned. The
        Sentencing Judge stated "I accept that your motive in committing
        the robbery was to get yourself effectively into prison because
        immediately you did it, you then took your victim to nearby police
        and told then what you had done and indeed, you told the police
        that that was your aim. What you did at 20 to ten at night was to
        run up to a 15 year old, punch him so hard in the forehead that he
        fell to the floor. When he was on the floor, you kicked him twice
        on the bottom, demanding money and when you then went to the
        police, you were, I would say, incoherent and to a degree,
        violent." This is suggestive of a deliberate act. The offence was
        also committed during the period of a suspended sentence.
    11. The second issue relates to Mr Lua-Antunes' previous convictions.
        At paragraph 35 of the determination the Judge lists Mr Lua-Antunes
        criminal convictions from July 2011 of which there are twelve
        separate entries excluding the offence which triggered the
        deportation decision. The offences include acts of violence and
        criminal damage, possession of an offensive weapon and robbery. The
        risk assessment available to the Judge also found Mr Lua-Antunes to
        present a medium risk of reoffending and medium risk of harm to the
        public which do not appear as part of the findings in relation to
        the assessment of future risk.
    12. In an EEA deportation case it is imperative that a judge starts by
        identifying the status of an appellant and supports such a finding
        with clear coherent reasons based upon relevant case law, if
        applicable. A judge is then required to identify the correct level
        of protection applicable to such status and set out clear findings
        supported by adequate reasons in relation to whether the required
        threshold is crossed or not. This should not be by reference to the
        test for a lower level of protection unless it is clearly stated
        that such a finding is made in the alternative.
    13. For the above reasons Mr Mills has made out his case that the
        determination under consideration is infected by legal error.
    14. The determination shall be set aside. Ordinarily at this stage the
        Tribunal will consider the merits of the appeal against the
        deportation decision and substitute a decision to allow or dismiss
        the appeal. It is at this stage the burden passes to Mr Lau-Antunes
        as the person bringing the appeal and to consideration of his
        request to withdraw his appeal.  As this is his stated wish, both
        in writing, by his voting with his feet and refusing to be brought
        to the Tribunal, and his voluntarily attending the member of the
        Portuguese Embassy to facilitate the issue of a travel document,
        and in the absence of evidence of a lack of capacity, his request
        is granted.
    15. Following the withdrawal of the appeal there is nothing extant
        before the Upper Tribunal upon which a decision can or is required
        to be made.


Decision

    16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. Following the withdrawal of the
        appeal there is nothing extant before the Upper Tribunal upon which
        a decision can or is required to be made.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6th August 2015












