
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01450/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2015                |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    a w y
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Divine Legal
Practice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State.  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant is a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan born in 1982.  His appeal against a deportation order under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  dated  27th  June  2013  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot and a non-legal member [the
    panel] on 16th June 2014.

2.    The  Respondent  appealed  on   the   ground   that   if   exceptional
    circumstances were properly considered in context the Appellant had  to
    demonstrate circumstances over and above those  set  out  in  paragraph
    399(a) or (b) of the Immigration Rules  to  succeed  under  exceptional
    circumstances.  The panel had failed to identify  why  the  Appellant's
    circumstances  were  exceptional  in  this  case.  The  assistance  the
    Appellant provided to his partner, although in her best interests,  did
    not amount to exceptional circumstances and in this particular case the
    Appellant's circumstances were not strong enough to outweigh the public
    interest in line with  SS  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.   It  was
    submitted that there was a strong public interest  in  deportation  and
    the panel had failed to properly balance the  public  interest  in  the
    proportionality assessment and had therefore erred  in  law.   Had  the
    Tribunal properly considered the public interest they would have  found
    that deportation was proportionate.

3.   The application for  permission  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cox on 4th July 2013 on the ground that the panel clearly had  in
    mind the considerations set out in the grounds of appeal and  the  case
    law of SS (Nigeria), AM v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 and DS (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 544 in  making  its
    assessment of proportionality and this was evident from  the  last  two
    sentences of paragraph 31 of the decision. Accordingly, the  panel  did
    not misdirect itself and whilst  it  was  possible  to  conceive  of  a
    different outcome  it  could  not  be  said  that  the  panel  arguably
    materially erred in law.

4.   The application was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  additional
    grounds were submitted.  Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kekic on 2nd September  2014  on  the  basis  that  four
    grounds were arguable:

    (i)  There was no substantive consideration of the seriousness  of  the
         Appellant's offence in the decision;

    (ii) The Tribunal failed to consider the adverse  credibility  findings
         made by a previous Tribunal, which should have  been  the  starting
         point;

    (iii)    There was  no  medical  evidence  to  support  the  Tribunal's
         finding  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  put  in  fresh
         jeopardy the mental health of a vulnerable young woman;

    (iv) The Tribunal failed to identify what was exceptional in this case.

5.   In submissions, Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Respondent relied  on  the
    case  of  SS  (Nigeria),  AJ  (Angola)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1636,  Masih
    (deportation - public interest - basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT
    00046 (IAC) and McLarty (Deportation - proportionality balance)  [2014]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC).  She submitted that the panel had failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for concluding that this was a compelling  case.   The
    additional grounds all challenge the inadequacy of reasons.

6.    The  first  set  of  grounds   were   directed   towards   exceptional
    circumstances.  In effect the panel had allowed the appeal on the basis
    of the Appellant's family life with Ms S. Her circumstances in  the  UK
    and previous history amounted to a disproportionate  interference  with
    his family life.  Those findings are found at paragraph 28 onwards.

7.   At paragraph 32, the panel concluded that Ms S was a  vulnerable  young
    lady.  It was unclear how they had reached such a conclusion given that
    there was no medical evidence before them and the oral evidence of Ms S
    was that she had a part-time job and her health  had  improved  to  the
    extent that she hoped to work full-time in the future. It was not clear
    from the  determination  how  the  panel  had  reached  the  definitive
    conclusion at paragraph 32 that she was a vulnerable young lady without
    medical evidence as to the up-to-date situation.

8.   In assessing exceptional circumstances Ms Brocklesby-Weller  relied  on
    the case of McLarty  in  which  the  Tribunal  held  "where  the  facts
    surrounding an individual who has committed a  crime  are  said  to  be
    exceptional or compelling  these  factors  are  to  be  placed  in  the
    weighing scale in order to be weighed  against  the  public  interest".
    She submitted that significant weight had to be attached to the will of
    Parliament in accordance with paragraphs 53 and 54 of SS (Nigeria). The
    Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 399 or  399A  and  therefore  the
    scales tipped  heavily  in  favour  of  the  public  interest  and  the
    Appellant had  to  show  very  compelling  circumstances  in  order  to
    outweigh the public interest.

9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on AJ (Angola) and stated that  significant
    weight must be attached to the public interest, and proportionality and
    exceptional circumstances should be assessed through the  lens  of  the
    Immigration Rules.   The  panel  had  not  dealt  adequately  with  the
    Immigration Rules and were misguided in their approach in finding  that
    the circumstances of this case were compelling. Ms S's health condition
    was  not  sufficient  to  amount  to  compelling   circumstances.   The
    proportionality balance was not a neutral balancing exercise.  Had  the
    panel properly engaged with the significant weight to  be  attached  to
    the public interest they would have come to  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's circumstances and that of his partner were not exceptional.



10.  For the applicant Ms Seehra relied on the Rule 24 response  dated  29th
    September 2014, which in summary deals with the four grounds of  appeal
    raised in the additional grounds dated 10th July 2014.   She  submitted
    that the decision was sufficiently detailed and the submissions made by
    the Respondent did not amount to an error of law. The panel found  that
    the Appellant's partner, Ms S could not relocate and they were entitled
    to reach that finding on the evidence before them. That finding was not
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.

11.  At paragraph 28 the panel appreciated that the case was  fact-sensitive
    and found that there would be a permanent separation of a  longstanding
    relationship. They acknowledged the weight to be attached to the public
    interest at paragraphs 26 and 31 and put that into the  proportionality
    balance at paragraph 31. They had recognised  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence and the fact that the low risk of reoffending was  insufficient
    to displace the public interest. The panel  considered  in  detail  the
    Appellant's offending history. This was a single offence and there were
    recent detailed reports in the Appellant's favour.

12.  At paragraph 29 of the decision the panel  considered  the  Appellant's
    relationship with Ms S and took into account the oral evidence and  her
    detailed statement. There was ample evidence before the Tribunal in the
    form of statements, letters and medical  evidence  to  enable  them  to
    reach the conclusion that they did  at  paragraph  34.  The  panel  had
    attached significant weight to the public evidence and was entitled  to
    find that there were exceptional circumstances, in light of the written
    and oral evidence, which outweighed that public interest. There was  no
    error of law in the decision.

Discussion and Conclusions

13.  I have to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error  of  law
    in allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  on  Article  8
    grounds.   Grounds  1,  2  and  3  of  the   additional   grounds   are
    misconceived.  The panel took into account the  sentencing  remarks  of
    the judge  at  paragraphs  16  and  31.  They  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's immigration history at paragraphs 3 and  6  and  they  were
    entitled to rely on the oral evidence and documentary  evidence  before
    them. The lack of up-to-date medical  evidence  did  not  preclude  the
    panel's finding at paragraph 33.

14.  Ground 4 of the additional grounds challenges the panel's finding  that
    the circumstances of the Appellant's case were exceptional.  The  panel
    failed to specify exactly what they found to be  exceptional  and  this
    amounted to an error of law.  Contrary to this ground the panel set out
    in some detail the exceptional circumstances at paragraphs 32 and 33 of
    the decision.

15.  It was clear from reading the determination as a whole that  the  panel
    properly  considered  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    attached significant weight to the public interest.  They  acknowledged
    the seriousness of the offence and the fact that  a  low  risk  of  re-
    offending was not sufficient to displace  the  public  interest.   They
    also acknowledged, at paragraph 31 of the decision, that  there  was  a
    strong public interest in terms of general deterrence  against  foreign
    criminals entering the country and committing serious criminal offences
    even where the Appellant in question may be at low risk  of  committing
    further offences.  I find that the panel clearly  attached  significant
    weight to the public interest in assessing proportionality.

16.  The panel then went on to find that the Appellant's  relationship  with
    his partner, her vulnerability and her  previous  history  amounted  to
    exceptional circumstances sufficient to satisfy paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which states:

         "The Secretary of  State  in  assessing  the  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does  not  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

17.  The  panel  set  out  the  other  factors  at  paragraphs  32  and  33.
    Therefore, I am of the view that  ground  1  in  the  original  set  of
    grounds, that the panel had made a  material  misdirection  of  law  in
    failing to identify exceptional circumstances and failing  to  properly
    apply the Immigration Rules was not made out.  I also find  that  there
    was no error of law in the panel's assessment of proportionality.  They
    clearly attached significant weight to the  public  interest  and  then
    balanced the Appellant's and his partner's circumstances against that.

18.  I find that the only arguable ground is that set out in paragraph 3  of
    the original grounds, namely, the Tribunal's finding that it was in the
    Appellant's partner's best interests that the Appellant remained in the
    UK did not amount to exceptional circumstances in order to outweigh the
    public interest. That challenge is one of irrationality.

19.  Given that the First-tier Tribunal considered the oral evidence of  the
    Appellant and Ms S, the detailed witness statements  contained  in  the
    Appellant's bundle and the medical evidence therein, I  find  that  the
    decision to find, on the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  that  the
    Appellant's circumstances were exceptional was a finding which was open
    to the Tribunal on that evidence.  I  agree  with  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cox in that it was possible to conceive of a  different  outcome,
    but the decision was not such that no reasonable  Tribunal  could  have
    come to that conclusion on the evidence before it.

20.  Accordingly, there was no error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Respondent's appeal is dismissed.   The  decision
    dated 16th June 2014 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 7th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
