
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01518/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2014                                |On 11th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                    MR MOHAMED AMIN RASHID AHMED HAFEJEE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (a panel comprising Designated Judge McClure and Dr
    T Okitikpi) promulgated on  12  February  2014  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent made on 15 July 2013 that he  is
    a person to whom Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  applies  and
    therefore must be deported.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15 January 2003 with  leave
    to enter as a fianc�.  He was subsequently granted leave to remain as a
    spouse until 23 June 2005.  That marriage  however  broke  down  around
    April 2004 and he applied for further leave to remain on  6  June  2005
    based on his human rights.  That application was  refused;  the  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed.  Subsequent to that,  in  2010  he
    submitted an application for a certificate of  approval  for  marriage,
    which was refused on 17 January 2011.

 3. The appellant has been convicted  of  a  number  of  driving  offences,
    specifically dangerous driving, driving without insurance  and  driving
    whilst disqualified.  He was disqualified  for  a  further  period  and
    again in 2009 was convicted of driving while disqualified and  using  a
    motor vehicle whilst uninsured.

 4. On 10 May 2011 the appellant was tried and convicted of  conspiracy  to
    supply crack cocaine and heroin for which he was sentenced to a term of
    imprisonment of 58 months and  two  months'  imprisonment  for  driving
    whilst disqualified.  It was as a result of these convictions that  the
    respondent concluded that the appellant was a person  to  whom  Section
    32(5) of the 2007 Act applies.

 5. The appellant has had a number of relationships in the  United  Kingdom
    in addition to the marriage and proposed marriage as referred to above.
     These are:-

      1) a relationship with AH by whom the appellant has a  child  born  15
         August 2006;

      2) a relationship with TB with whom he had a child born on 4 September
         2009;

      3) a relationship with HC with whom the appellant had a child born  on
         26 July 2011 and a second child in February 2014.

 6. The appellant's case is that his removal would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for his private and family  life
    as his deportation to India  would  interfere  significantly  with  his
    relationship with HC and his children including his children by AH.

The Respondent's Case

 7. The respondent's case is set out in the notice  of  decision  dated  15
    July 2013.  In summary the respondent considered that as the  appellant
    had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment in excess  of  four  years
    neither paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules applied to  him;
    that it would only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
    interest in deportation would be outweighed with other factors and that
    there were no exceptional circumstances raised which would outweigh the
    public interest in deporting him in the absence of documentary evidence
    to substantiate his claim that he  was  in  a  subsisting  and  genuine
    relationship with HC or had been supporting his children or had  played
    an active role in their upbringing. She considered that it was  in  the
    children's best interests to remain with their primary carer  and  thus
    on the basis of his rights to family life did not outweigh  the  public
    interests in him being deported and  that  there  was  no  evidence  or
    apparent reason why the appellant would not be able to  re-establish  a
    private life on return to India, a country where he had lived until  he
    was aged 20.  She considered that any interference would  be  justified
    and that the appellant's conviction for the possession of drugs is  one
    which is to be regarded as serious compelling her to  give  significant
    weight to the question of protecting  society  against  crime  and  the
    health and morals of others, noting that re-offending is not  the  most
    important thing to  consider  when  weighing  up  the  public  interest
    particularly in serious cases.

 8. Although noting that the appellant suffered  from  depression  and  was
    taking antidepressants she did not consider, given that  he  could  get
    appropriate treatment in India,  that  his  deportation  gave  rise  to
    exceptional circumstances.

 9.  On  appeal  the  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  the
    appellant's partner and an independent  social  worker.   The  Tribunal
    noted;

      i) that the appellant had begun a relationship with AH  in  August  or
         September 2005 [40] and by November/December 2005  she  had  become
         pregnant.  They underwent an Islamic marriage ceremony although  he
         had not yet divorced his first wife;

     ii) that the appellant moved to live with AH's  family  in  Bolton  and
         continued to do so until December 2009 [42];

    iii) that in December 2008 the appellant commenced a  relationship  with
         TB who became pregnant and gave birth to a child in September  2009
         [43];

     iv) that the appellant went to live with TB and their child in  January
         2010, subsequently putting in an application for a  certificate  of
         approval to marry [44], that application being refused as  by  that
         point the relationship had broken down;

      v) that the appellant began a relationship with HC in August 2010,  HC
         having met in June or July 2010 when the appellant,  despite  being
         disqualified, was driving around and picked up HC and her friend RC
         [46, 48];

     vi) that the appellant was arrested in connection with  drugs  offences
         in October 2010 and was detained thereafter [51]; that according to
         HC's statement, she did not get back in touch  with  the  appellant
         until 2012 as she did  not  know  the  number  to  contact  him  on
         although her friend RC was in touch with the  appellant  throughout
         the whole period [52]; that it appears from the letters between  AH
         and the appellant and HC and the appellant,  which  appear  in  the
         appellant's bundle, and were sent to him whilst he  was  in  prison
         that the appellant was in contact with AH and  that  it  was  clear
         from  the  letters  that  he  was  proposing  that  he  resume  his
         relationship with her [54] and they start to live  together  again,
         the letter being indicative that he was using  AH  to  obtain  bail
         [56];

    vii) that  at  the  same  time  he  was  seeking  to  move  forward  the
         relationship with AH  he  had  resumed  contact  with  HC  who  was
         visiting him in  September  2012  when  she  is  described  as  his
         partner, HC not being aware that AH was also in contact  and  would
         be living with the appellant in future [58]; that  HC  was  totally
         unaware of the contents of the letter which  directly  contradicted
         the evidence of the appellant that she knew  what  was  being  said
         [60] and that whilst she was visiting him the  appellant  was  also
         writing letters to AH seeking  to  re-establish  the  relationship;
         that after his release from prison around April 2013 the  appellant
         had moved in with HC and her second child was  due  [67]  (note  to
         self - evidence was also given by HC's sister and father);

   viii) that there was no contact between the appellant and his child by TB
         [85] and that the social worker, Miss Brown, had not approached the
         issues of the best interests of the children,  the  impact  on  the
         children of the removal of  the  appellant  with  independence  and
         objectivity and, had not investigated or checked evidence that  did
         not support the contention the  appellant  should  remain  for  the
         benefit of the children and at times the evidence was  obvious  and
         easily verifiable [98]; that the  appellant  was  saying  different
         things to different people about his education and his remorse  for
         his offences and  about  whom  he  was  to  establish  a  permanent
         relationship on release from prison [106];

     ix) that the appellant continued to deny the very serious drugs offence
         [108];

      x) that  upholding  the  deportation  order  would  be  a  significant
         severance of the relationship between the appellant and HC and  the
         appellant and his children [123] but this was  proportionate  given
         that the offence is so serious [124].

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the panel
    had erred;

      i) in concluding that the letters written to his former  partner,  AH,
         had been  written  at  the  same  time  as  he  had  rekindled  his
         relationship with HC, and that the quotation from a letter at  [61]
         said to be a letter to AH was in fact a letter from HC;

     ii) that the judge strongly indicated that  the  Social  Services  were
         involved with HC and the child;

    iii) that the Tribunal had unfairly doubted that  he  was  at  low  risk
         because he had not accepted the guilt  of  his  offence;  that  the
         panel had not given proper weight to the opinion of  the  probation
         officer and had assumed that the risk of reoffending was  dependent
         on admission of guilt.

11. On 3 April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Eshun granted  permission  to
    appeal stating:

         "It is arguable that the Tribunal made a  material  error  of  fact
         when they found at paragraph 61 that the  appellant  was  stringing
         along two partners when in fact  the  letter  relied  on  for  that
         finding was written to HC (the appellant's current partner) not AH.
          It is also arguable that the Tribunal erred in law in  questioning
         the appellant's risk of reoffending when he had been assessed as  a
         person of low risk.  The grounds disclose arguable errors of law."

12. The appellant was not represented  when  he  appeared  before  me.   He
    explained that he did not have the full set of papers as they  had  not
    been forwarded by his former lawyers but he was unable to  provide  any
    documentary evidence of that.  He did however have copies of the  grant
    of permission and the determination and I was satisfied that given  the
    limited  scope  of  the  hearing,  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    disadvantaged by not having a full set of papers and I offered to  give
    him a set of court papers should he require them.  In the event he  did
    not do so.

13. I consider the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

14. The starting point  for  considering  this  ground  is  the  bundle  of
    material submitted by the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal.  As  he
    submitted, it is evident from the printout of prison visits covering 28
    October 2010 to 22 April 2013 that while HC him,  visited  as  did  her
    son, L, there is no indication of visits by AH although her son appears
    to have visited on several occasions.  Ms  Johnston  did  not,  in  her
    submissions take issue with that.

15. The index to the bundle describes the letters at page  178  to  191  as
    being between HC and the appellant; the letters at pages 192 to 212 are
    between AH and the appellant. The letters are not, for  the  most  part
    clearly signed or dated, which makes it difficult to discern with  ease
    when they were written or by whom.  Given the contents of the  letters,
    however, it is evident that the authors of the letters are as  set  out
    in the index to the bundle.

16. As to the dates of the letters, those between HC and the appellant  are
    evidently from 2012, and consistent with the evidence that she only  in
    that year regained contact with the appellant.

17. Turning to the letters between AH and the appellant, the letter at page
    192 appears to have been franked on 31 March 2011,  the  other  letters
    are less clear; the letter at page 201 is clearly date stamped  11/2010
    and the subsequent letter at page 207  to  208  appears  to  have  been
    franked on 19/11/2010.  As Miss Johnstone accepted,  these  letters  do
    not appear to have been contemporaneous with the appellant's renewal of
    his relationship with HC.  She also fairly  accepted  that  the  letter
    quoted at paragraph 61 is in fact written to HC and not AH.  It is also
    evidenced that the letter referred to by the Tribunal at [62] (page 184
    to 187) in fact appears to be from HC given the reference  to  L  (page
    186), her son.

18. It is therefore evident that the Tribunal did make errors of fact as to
    when the letters were written which  led  them  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's attempts to reconcile with AH were contemporaneous with his
    re-establishing his relationship with HC.

19. It does not, however, follow that this  finding  was  material  to  the
    outcome of the  appeal.  What  concerned  the  Tribunal  was  that  the
    appellant said that HC had seen the letters between  him  and  AH,  but
    that in  her  evidence  [53]  HC  said  she  had  not  seen  them,  her
    understanding being that the appellant was in  touch  with  AH  because
    they had a child and he wanted to see the child. They record [54]:-

         "It was evident in the hearing that HC was taken much  aback  about
         the contents of some of those letters.  In the letters it is  clear
         and evident that the appellant is  proposing  that  he  resume  his
         relationship with AH and that they start to  live  together  again.
         HC was clearly not aware that that had been intended or  suggested.
         Whatever else can be said the appellant  had  not  told  the  truth
         about HC knowing of the contents of the  letters  and  having  seen
         them [my emphasis]."

    It appears from paragraph 56 that the Tribunal  thought  that  some  of
    the  correspondence  between  AH  and  the  appellant   was   in   fact
    correspondence between HC and the appellant and thus  their  conclusion
    [58] that the appellant was seeking to  put  forward  his  relationship
    with AH at the same time as having resumed a relationship  with  HC  is
    incorrect.

20. That said, it does not appear from the rest of the  determination  that
    this error of fact infected the principal  findings  of  the  Tribunal.
    Whilst they refer  [81]  to  the  contemporaneous  relationships,  that
    reference is oblique.

21. It is correct that the Tribunal did [93] state that the letters give  a
    different complexion to the appellant's  position  whilst  in  custody.
    That is sustainable because on any view the appellant had  lied  to  HC
    about that nature of his correspondence with AH and that he  had  tried
    to reconcile with her; the Tribunal's findings go only to the extent of
    the lies.  It is manifest from the letters from AH that  she  had  been
    encouraged by the appellant to believe that he wished to  resume  their
    relationship, despite his by then having had relationships with TB  and
    HC both of whom had borne him children.

22. This is not, however, the only source of the  Tribunal's  doubts  about
    the appellant's character.  They  were  clearly,  and  for  sustainable
    reasons, not impressed with the report  of  Ms  Brown,  an  independent
    Social  Worker.   Have  set  out  their  valid  criticism,  the   panel
    concluded:

         "[94]    There does not appear to be any assessment of  the  nature
                and commitment of the appellant of the relationship with  AH
                in the report.  The appellant appears clearly to  have  been
                willing to manipulate not only AH but also HC and others  in
                his efforts to further his own ends.

         [95] It is also to be noted that much of what is  set  out  is  due
                wholly to what the appellant and those immediately connected
                to him are now saying.  Given  the  appellant's  ability  to
                manipulate individuals in the past there appears  to  be  no
                checking with Social  Services,  who  appear  to  have  been
                involved with a number of these young ladies  and  children,
                or the Domestic Violence Unit or previous partners.   Indeed
                other than HC and the immediate family there is no  evidence
                from Social Services or any other young ladies  involved  as
                to the relationship of the appellant and their children."

23. Those criticisms are equally valid  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had lied to HC about the nature of his relationship  with  AH
    while in prison, and the nature of that relationship.

24.  Viewing  the  determination  as  a  whole,  it  is  evident  that  the
    conclusions  the  Tribunal  reached  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    manipulative behaviour are not based exclusively or even mainly on  the
    fact of what they wrongly thought was an attempt by  the  appellant  to
    maintain or re-develop his relationship with AH whilst  developing  his
    relationship with HC.  This is only one of a number of factors, nor  is
    it the strongest. They rightly noted that the appellant had lied to  HC
    about the nature of his relationship with AH while he was in prison.

25. It is also evident that the panel's conclusions  with  regard  to  Miss
    Brown's report are fundamental, wide-ranging and only partially related
    to her failure to engage with the appellant's apparent stringing  along
    of two women at the same time, in this case AH and HC, and it is  noted
    that there is no mistake as to the fact that the appellant had left  AH
    with a child to enter into a relationship with TB with whom  he  had  a
    child and then attempted to rekindle a relationship with AH whilst,  at
    best, no longer in contact with HC and it does show that  in  light  of
    the other concerns that the panel had [103] and [106] that the Tribunal
    fairly reached the conclusion that the appellant appeared to be  saying
    different things to different people about his education,  his  remorse
    for offences,  and about whether HC knew of  the  contents  of  letters
    between him and AH.

26. The errors and conclusions do not, however, appear to have affected the
    panel's  conclusion  [120]  that  the  appellant  has   a   significant
    relationship with HC and the child and took into account  the  positive
    aspects of the relationship. It is that  relationship  that  the  panel
    took into account in assessing proportionality.

27. It must also be borne in mind, in  assessing  the  Tribunal's  approach
    that this is case where the appellant had been sentenced to a  term  of
    imprisonment in excess of 4 years, and thus, it would  only  have  been
    where  there  was  something  compelling  which  would,  exceptionally,
    outweigh the significant weight attached  to  the  public  interest  in
    deporting a foreign criminal.

28. Accordingly, I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  error  was  capable  of
    affecting the decision in any material way.

Ground 2


29. It is not properly arguable that in recording at paragraph 95 that  "as
    there appears to be no checking with Social Services, who appear to  be
    involved with a number of these  young  ladies  and  children,  or  the
    Domestic Violence Unit  or  previous  partners  is  a  finding  by  the
    Tribunal that they were involved with HC and  were  involved  with  her
    son.  It is merely a reference to the fact that there  was  documentary
    evidence before them that there was involvement  with  Social  Services
    and other women with whom the appellant had  had  relationships.   This
    ground is therefore without merit.

Ground 3

30. Contrary to what the appellant submitted, it is not  properly  arguable
    that the Tribunal erred in concluding that the appellant was not of low
    risk.  The panel was not bound by the probation report  and  they  were
    entitled to take account of the fact that probation report was prepared
    on the basis that, as it transpired, [104] the appellant had  not  told
    the truth about his educational background.  It was also open  to  them
    on the evidence  to  conclude  that  the  appellant,  contrary  to  the
    impression he had given to the probation officer, did not fully  accept
    the guilt for his crime.

31. While I note the appellant's submission that  he  had  not  denied  his
    guilt, in his witness statement he says [71]:

         "I have pleaded not guilty to the drugs offence because I  did  not
         know that Sayied had drugs on him.   I  maintain  that  I  did  not
         assist him in his supplying the drugs or helping him in any way.  I
         think I was convicted because he  turned  prosecution  witness  and
         gave evidence against me.  It was my word against him."


    This is a clear indication that  the  appellant  does  not  accept  the
    finding by the court and the jury that he had conspired to  supply  the
    drugs.  The panel were entitled to  take  this  sustained  denial  into
    account in concluding that the appellant is not of low risk.

32. Further, and in any event, propensity to reoffend is not,  particularly
    in the case of serious offences, a matter of  great  significance.   As
    the Court of Appeal in AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 made clear,  that
    the deportation in pursuit of a legitimate aim for preventing crime and
    disorder is therefore not to be seen as one dimensional in its  effect,
    there is the effect from not only removing the risk of  reoffending  of
    the deportee himself but of deterring  other  foreign  nationals  in  a
    similar position and the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  preserves
    public confidence in a system of control whose loss would  itself  tend
    towards crime and disorder.  Again, in DS (India) [2009] EWCA  Civ  544
    the public interest goes well beyond deterrence of crimes.

    Conclusion

33. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law materially affect the outcome of the  decision.   I  uphold  the
    decision.

Signed                                  Date:  10 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


