
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01128/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 16 April 2015                              |On 27 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                             Muhammad Athar Butt


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, instructed by DV Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 1  December  2014
    of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miles.  The  decision  of  Judge  Miles
    dismissed the  appeal  against  an  automatic  deportation  order.  The
    deportation order was made after  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  3
    years' imprisonment for cheating the public revenue.

 2. There was no dispute before me that at [3] and [8]  and  thereafter  in
    the  determination  Judge  Miles  applied  an  incorrect   version   of
    paragraphs 396 to 399A of the Immigration Rules. He applied the version
    of those paragraphs brought into force by HC194 on 9 July 2012. At  the
    date of the hearing on 18 November 2015  he  should  have  applied  the
    version brought into force by HC532 on 28 July 2014.

 3. The application of the incorrect version of the Immigration  Rules  led
    Judge Miles to assess the Appellant's relationship with his wife on the
    basis of whether he had had  valid  leave  continuously  for  at  least
    fifteen  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
    decision (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  whether  there
    were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   the   partner
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  It was common ground before  me
    that the correct test to be applied from 28 July 2014  onwards  is  set
    out in paragraph 399(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  test  being
    whether "it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the  UK
    without the person who is to be deported."

 4. It was also common ground that instead of assessing, as he did at  [23]
    and [25], whether there "is no other family member who is able to  care
    for the child in the United  Kingdom"  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    should have assessed whether "it would be unduly harsh for the child to
    remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported", as  in  the
    correct version of paragraph 398(a).8

 5. Was this error material? It might seem to be where entirely  the  wrong
    test was applied. The reason for hesitating to answer that question  in
    the affirmative, however, is that at [39] Judge Miles  did  conduct  an
    "unduly harsh" assessment, that arising from the application of Section
    117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002[1].  Judge
    Miles found that the circumstances of the appellant's wife and children
    would not be "unduly" harsh as they would not be "over and  above  what
    would  ordinarily  be  the  case"  where  a  family  is  separated   by
    deportation.

 6. It was argued for the appellant that the assessment of undue  harshness
    at [39] was flawed as that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  requiring
    undue harshness "over and above what would ordinarily be the  case".  I
    did not accept that  argument.  As  in  the  respondent's  "Immigration
    Directorate Instructions Chapter 13: criminality guidance in Article  8
    ECHR cases" at paragraphs 2.5.2 and 2.5.3:

        "2.5.2    When considering the  public  interest  statements,  words
             must be given their  ordinary  meanings.  The  Oxford  English
             Dictionary defines 'unduly' as 'excessively'  and  'harsh'  as
             'severe, cruel'.

         2.5.3    The effect of deportation on a  qualifying  partner  or  a
             qualifying child must be considered  in  the  context  of  the
             foreign  criminal's  immigration  and  criminal  history.  The
             greater the public interest in deportation, the  stronger  the
             countervailing factors need to be to succeed.  The  impact  of
             deportation on a partner or child  can  be  harsh,  even  very
             harsh, without being unduly harsh, depending on the extent  of
             the public interest in deportation  and  of  the  family  life
             affected."

 7. The ordinary meaning  of  "unduly  harsh"  is  therefore  of  excessive
    severity or cruelty and Judge Miles was entitled to look for a level of
    harshness more than ordinary.

 8. It  was  also  submitted  that  the  "unduly  harsh"  assessment  under
    paragraph 399(a) and (b)  and  that  under  s.117C(5)  were  materially
    different so the finding at [39] relating to  s.117C(5)  could  not  be
    sufficient to save the earlier failure to apply the correct version  of
    paragraph 399(a)  and  (b).  As  I  understood  the  argument  for  the
    appellant, the s.117C "unduly harsh" assessment includes other  factors
    such  as  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offending   and   the
    concomitant increase in the public interest in  deportation.  That  was
    not  so  in  the  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  assessment   where   the
    difficulties for the partner and children had to be assessed  on  their
    own merits, simpliciter.

 9. I have some sympathy with that argument where the legislation set  down
    in different sources to be  applied  in  deportation  cases  concerning
    Article 8 has not proved easy to construe or apply and  has  led  to  a
    number of cases clarifying the correct approach.  It is not an entirely
    straightforward task to marry the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
    and s.117.

10. However, the introduction to paragraph 398 states:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the UK's obligation under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention
         ..."

11. Paragraphs 398 to  399D  are  therefore  expressly  stated  to  concern
    Article 8 of the ECHR. Indeed, it is now  well  understood  that  those
    parts of the Immigration Rules are  a  "complete  code"  for  assessing
    breaches of Article 8 in deportation cases.

12. The introduction to s.117 states:

          "117A Application of this Part


             (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                 to determine whether a decision made under the  Immigration
                 Acts-



                 (a)   breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                       family life under Article 8, and
                 (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                       Human Rights Act 1998."

13. Where that is so, it does not appear to me that there can be a material
    difference in the approach to the assessment of what amounts to "unduly
    harsh" circumstances in 398(a) and  (b)  and  s.117C(5).  The  relevant
    provisions of s.117 have to be taken into account when determining  the
    Article 8 claim in a deportation case. Those provisions are not  stated
    anywhere  as  not  to  be  taken  into  account  when  addressing   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. The "unduly harsh" assessment at
    398(a) and (b) is not conducted in a vacuum  from  the  relevant  s.117
    factors.

14. Judge Miles' finding that the wife and children of the appellant  would
    not face unduly harsh circumstances were he to be deported was  not  in
    error in applying too high a threshold. He was entitled to place weight
    on material factors such as the appellant's wife  having  coped  during
    his detention and having her own family members and family  members  of
    the appellant  in  the  UK  to  assist  were  she  to  experience  more
    difficulties than she has thus far after  the  appellant  is  deported.
    That finding is sustainable and remedies the failure to carry out  what
    would have been the same assessment and results under paragraph  398(a)
    and (b).

15. For those reasons despite the regrettable error in applying  the  wrong
    version of the Immigration Rules, it is my conclusion that no  material
    error arises here.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
error on the point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 19 May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
-----------------------

    [1] Section 117C(5) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

    "Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,"  and  the  effect   of   his
    "deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."


