
[pic]
IAC-HW/TH-MP/CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th January 2016                      |On 14th March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr vanse koue-bi-tra
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bobb of Aylish Alexander Solicitors of London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cary) promulgated on  16th  September
    2015 in which the Tribunal allowed the appeal of Mr Koue-Bi-Tra against
    the decision of the Secretary of State  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against  him  under  the  provisions  of  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the
    2006 Regulations").

 2. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the Respondent  as  she  was
    the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to
    Mr Koue-Bi-Tra as the Appellant as he  was  the  Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. No application  was  made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal concerning any grounds for an  anonymity
    order.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of France born on 22nd  December  1989.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent who  on  2nd  September
    2014 decided to make a deportation order against him  under  Regulation
    19(3)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The Appellant's history is not in any dispute.  He  originally  arrived
    in the United Kingdom with his parents and brothers in 1995 when he was
    approximately 5 years of age.  He has lived continuously in the  United
    Kingdom ever since that date.  He subsequently applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom with his mother, father and three
    brothers but that application was refused on 17th January 2006.  He was
    however issued with a five year residence permit.

 5. The Appellant's previous convictions can be summarised as follows:-

      i) He first came to the attention of the  police  for  shoplifting  on
         26th May 2004 when he was 14 years of age.  He received a reprimand
         for that offence on 5th January 2005.

     ii) He received a warning on 13th April 2005  for  assault  occasioning
         actual bodily harm on 2nd February 2005 and common assault on  24th
         March 2005.

    iii) He first appeared on 6th December 2005 when he appeared  at  Balham
         Youth Court for threatening behaviour on 18th November 2005 when he
         was made subject to a four month referral order.

     iv) He appeared at Oxford Crown Court on 20th October 2006 for  robbery
         (27th May 2005) and failing to surrender  to  custody  (12th  April
         2006).

      v) A few days later on 23rd October 2006 he appeared at the same court
         for attempted robbery and  possessing  an  imitation  firearm  with
         intent to commit an indictable offence (27th December  2005).   For
         all of those offences he was sentenced to a period of detention  in
         a Young Offenders Institution for three years.

     vi) The Appellant came to the attention of the  courts  on  3rd  August
         2009 when he appeared at the Magistrates  Court  for  resisting  or
         obstructing a police officer in the execution of their  duty  (17th
         July 2009).  He received a conditional discharge for twelve months.

    vii) He then appeared at the Magistrates Court on 26th October 2009  for
         travelling on a railway for which he was fined on 7th July 2009.

   viii) Approximately a month later he appeared at the Magistrates Court on
         27th October 2010 for possession of cannabis on  27th  August  2010
         for which he was fined.

     ix) This was followed by an appearance at the Crown Court on 15th March
         2011 for assault occasioning actual bodily harm  (on  27th  October
         2010).   He  was  sentenced  to  a   period   of   twelve   months'
         imprisonment.

      x) Shortly after his release he  was  found  in  possession  of  crack
         cocaine on 18th June 2011 for which he was fined �100 at Camberwell
         Green Magistrates Court on 27th June 2011.

     xi) This was followed by an appearance at the Magistrates Court on 29th
         November 2012 for the possession of heroin on 16th September  2012.
         He was fined.

    xii) On 25th January 2013 and he was convicted of supplying a controlled
         drug - class  A  (heroin),  possession  with  intent  to  supply  a
         controlled Class A drug (both heroin  and  cocaine)  and  having  a
         bladed article which was sharp pointed in a public place.   He  was
         sentenced to a period of 54 months' imprisonment  on  30th  January
         2013.

   xiii) He was released on 11th May 2015 and is on licence until 17th  July
         2017.

 6. As a consequence of that sentence of imprisonment, on 21st May 2013 the
    Appellant was notified of his liability  to  be  deported  and  on  2nd
    September 2014 the Secretary of State made a decision  to  deport  him,
    having first taken into consideration the provisions of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").

 7. The relevant decision taken on 2nd September 2014 made reference to his
    conviction on 25th January 2013 and that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    considered the offence for which he had been convicted and his conduct,
    in accordance with Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.  The decision
    set out that the Secretary of State was satisfied that he would pose  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently threat to  the  interests  of  public
    policy if he were to be allowed to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that his deportation was justified under Regulation 21.   The  decision
    went on to  state  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  decided  under
    Regulation 19(3)(b) that he should be removed  and  an  order  made  in
    accordance with Regulation 24(3) requiring  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and prohibiting him from re-entering  while  the  order  is  in
    force.  The Secretary of State proposed  to  give  directions  for  his
    removal to France, the country of which he was a national.

 8. The reasons for that decision are set out in a letter of the Respondent
    dated 2nd September 2014 (see K2 of the Respondent's bundle).

 9.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It was asserted in the Grounds of Appeal that the Respondent
    had incorrectly applied the 2006 Regulations to the  Appellant  in  the
    light of his length of residence over a period of over twenty years.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

10. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Perry)  on  6th
    February 2015.  In a decision promulgated on 5th February of that year,
    the judge dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

11. The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  seven  grounds,
    including that he was entitled  to  the  highest  level  of  protection
    against removal in view of  his  length  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and his level of integration.  The appeal was  heard  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor  on  8th  June  2005  and  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25th June 2005 gave his reasons as to why he  considered
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.

12.  It is plain from that determination at [8]  that  the  Respondent  had
    accepted before the Upper Tribunal that the First-tier had erred in its
    approach to consideration of whether the Appellant was entitled to  the
    highest level of protection (Regulation 21(4)) and that it  had  failed
    to consider whether the Appellant was a person sufficiently  integrated
    into the United Kingdom to obtain such protection irrespective  of  the
    fact that he had served a lengthy prison sentence prior to the issue of
    the deportation decision.

13.  Consequently the judge remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be determined de novo (see paragraph 12 of the  determination).   At
    [13] Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor made  reference  to  the  other  six
    grounds of appeal and  observed  that  he  had  heard  the  Appellant's
    representative in relation to only one of them as to whether the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in its consideration of the Appellant's entitlement
    to permanent residence.  The judge considered that  he  could  find  no
    error in the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of the issue given the
    evidence but nonetheless did not direct the  scope  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was any way restricted and also stated that that was an  issue
    which would be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal to determine afresh
    on evidence placed before it.  Consequently the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Perry) was set  aside  and  the  appeal  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

The second hearing before the First-tier Tribunal:

14. In accordance with that decision, the appeal came before the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cary)  on  4th  September  2015.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 16th September 2015 the judge allowed the  appeal  under
    the 2006 Regulations.  The judge heard evidence from the Appellant  and
    from two members of his family.

15. It is plain from reading the determination that the parties were  aware
    of the basis of the appeal and the reasons why the Upper  Tribunal  had
    set the previous decision aside.  At [9] the judge  set  out  that  the
    issue to be determined was that under  Regulation  21(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations relating to whether the Appellant had acquired the enhanced
    protection prior to the making of the deportation decision and  if  so,
    whether the residence was such to establish that he had integrated into
    life in the United Kingdom.

16. The judge set out his decision and reasons at paragraphs [29] to  [43].
    The judge set out the relevant legal provisions at paragraphs  [30]  to
    [34].  At [35] the judge considered the issue  under  Regulation  21(4)
    and in this context set out the relevant legal authorities of the  CJEU
    including The SSHD v  MG  Case  Number  c-400/12  CJEU  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in  MG  (prison  -  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Citizens
    Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392.  At [36] to [38] the  judge  set
    out his findings of fact  on  the  principal  issue.   He  reached  the
    conclusion, based on the findings of fact that he had  made,  that  the
    Appellant was able to establish the necessary period of residence under
    Regulation 21(4)(a) and that he could rely on the  enhanced  protection
    provided by that Regulation.  At [38] the judge recorded that whilst he
    had found that the Appellant could establish the  necessary  period  of
    residence, to succeed  in  the  appeal  the  Appellant  would  have  to
    demonstrate that the decision was  not  justified  on  the  "imperative
    grounds of public security".  In this context the judge has set out the
    decision of Land Baden-W�rttemburg v Tsakouridis (Case  C-145/09)  CJEU
    (Grand Chamber) and  other  CJEU  decisions  concerning  the  issue  of
    "imperative grounds of public security" under Article 28(3).   At  [41]
    the judge set out the sentencing remarks in relation to the Appellant's
    most recent conviction for drugs and at [42] made an assessment  as  to
    the risk of reoffending based on the written material contained in  the
    OASys assessment prepared by the Probation  Service.   The  judge  took
    into account the assessment which had provided for  a  medium  risk  of
    serious harm and assessed against that material which was considered to
    be the most up-to-date evidence relating to the stabilising factors  in
    relation to his employment,  accommodation  and  his  association  with
    those with whom he  had  previously  offended.   The  judge  reached  a
    finding of fact  that  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  that  he  had
    considered, both oral and  documentary,  that  the  Appellant  had  now
    obtained  a  form  of  employment,  he   had   also   obtained   stable
    accommodation with his sister and was no longer associating with  those
    who were involved in his most recent offending.  He reached the overall
    conclusion that there was nothing to suggest that there was  a  serious
    risk that he would revert to his previous behaviour.

17.  At [43] the judge set out his conclusion that  he  found  on  a  "very
    narrow balance" that the decision to deport him was  not  justified  on
    the imperative grounds of public security.  The  judge  concluded  that
    the degree of integration of the applicant was such  that  his  removal
    could not be justified currently particularly in  view  of  the  likely
    impact it would have on the Appellant who had  no  real  connection  to
    France other than through his citizenship.  The judge made reference to
    the OASys assessment and that he clearly posed some risk but  he  could
    not characterise such a risk  as  "exceptionally  serious".   Thus  the
    judge allowed the appeal and recorded that if the  Appellant  committed
    any further offences it would  be  inevitable  that  he  would  face  a
    further attempt to deport him which may well succeed.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

18. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 10th November  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes.

19. The written grounds on behalf of the Secretary of State are not drafted
    in the  clearest  terms  however  Ms  Brockelsby-Weller  distilled  the
    paragraphs into three grounds.  Dealing with Ground 1 (referred  to  as
    1(f)) in the written grounds), she submitted that the  judge  erred  in
    law in his assessment of the Appellant's integration into the  UK  when
    considering whether he could benefit from the  enhanced  protection  of
    21(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  She submitted that the  judge  recorded
    that the Appellant had spent seven and a half years of  the  qualifying
    ten years in prison at [29] and that he had limited  contact  with  his
    family members  in  the  UK.   She  submitted  that  whilst  the  judge
    considered in detail the authorities at [35] it was his  assessment  of
    integration and whether those links remained that  was  in  error.   In
    this context she referred the Tribunal to [43] in which the  judge  had
    stated that the bulk of the ten year period was either  in  custody  or
    licence, that he had not worked during that period of time, that  there
    had been relatively few periods when his life  had  been  trouble-free;
    that his relationship with his family had been at best tenuous  and  at
    worst non-existent, that there was nothing to suggest that he was  ever
    a law-abiding citizen and was on the  face  of  it  a  career  criminal
    resorting to crime as a means to supporting  himself  financially.   In
    essence she submitted that in the light of those findings of fact  made
    at [43] the findings set out [37] were in direct conflict and  thus  if
    the judge relied on factors which he held against the  Appellant  there
    would need to be cogent reasons to establish why the judge  found  that
    the ten year period was such to  support  his  integration.   She  made
    reference to the decision of MG and Onuekwere that a custodial sentence
    was demonstrative of a rejection of social values  and  that  in  those
    circumstances it was difficult for the judge to rely on his family  and
    time spent as a minor  and  thus  the  findings  of  the  judge  as  to
    integration were not internally consistent and  as  a  result  of  that
    there was no analysis of the issue of integration properly carried out.



20. As to Ground 2 this was set out at paragraphs  1(a)  and  1(g)  of  the
    written grounds.  It was submitted that the judge materially  erred  in
    law by finding that the decision to deport was "not  justified  on  the
    imperative grounds of public security" at [43].  She submitted that the
    judge had failed to take into account the seriousness  of  the  offence
    and that he sentence of 54 months did reach the imperative  grounds  of
    threshold.  The Appellant was convicted of either supplying  heroin  or
    cocaine on no less than six separate occasions and thus where a  person
    has been convicted of one or more violent, drugs or  sex  offences,  he
    will usually be considered to have been convicted of  an  offence  that
    has caused serious harm.  The imperative threshold she  submitted,  was
    not just for offences such as terrorism  and  that  the  Appellant  was
    dealing in drugs and that had significant repercussions on society as a
    whole.  Consequently the judge did not  properly  reason  that  in  his
    determination.

21. The third ground of challenge relates to his assessment of the risk  of
    reoffending.  She  submitted  that  there  were  no  explicit  findings
    concerning Regulation 21(5)(c) although the judge made reference to the
    OASys Reports as set out at paragraph 42 of  the  determination.   Both
    reports, she submitted demonstrated that  he  was  at  medium  risk  of
    reoffending.  She further submitted that whilst  the  judge  identified
    the risk at [42] that the judge erroneously considered the  Appellant's
    circumstances that would prevent him from reoffending including loss of
    accommodation, relationship breakdown or drug or alcohol  misuse.   She
    submitted that the Appellant had  not  demonstrated  those  stabilising
    factors and that the judge had not considered a holistic assessment  of
    risk and that the medium  risk  identified  by  the  OASys  Report  was
    sufficient to demonstrate  that  his  personal  conduct  represented  a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat".   As  the  grounds
    submitted at paragraph 1(i) that  "medium  risk"  amounted  to  a  very
    serious real risk and that the judge should have placed greater  weight
    upon this in his assessment.  Thus she submitted the judge had erred in
    law for those three reasons.

22. Mr Bobb relied upon his skeleton argument which he had produced at  the
    hearing.  As to the first ground, he submitted that  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative at the hearing  conceded  that  the  Appellant's
    case fell to be  determined  under  Regulation  21(4)(a)  which  was  a
    concession that the Appellant had been continuously resident in the  UK
    for that period of time.  He referred the Tribunal to  paragraph  9  of
    the determination and that the documentary evidence  before  the  judge
    demonstrated that the Appellant had been residing in the United Kingdom
    from 1995 when he was only 5 years of age and that the  judge,  made  a
    finding that prior to the relevant decision the Appellant  had  resided
    in the UK for just over 20 years  (at  [36]).   Whilst  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller had submitted that there had been no concession made relying  on
    [24], Mr Bobb submitted that the determination did  make  reference  to
    such  a  concession.   Nonetheless,  he  submitted   that   a   careful
    examination of the determination demonstrated that the judge  correctly
    directed himself to the requirements to  be  taken  into  account  when
    considering whether the ten year period counted back from the  date  of
    decision, has interrupted the residence and at paragraphs 7 to 9 of the
    skeleton argument he set out the relevant considerations from the  case
    law identified by the judge and in particular the following:-

         "The key question for the Tribunal to ask when considering  whether
         there had been a period  of  ten  years'  residence  prior  to  the
         decision to deport or  whether  imprisonment  involved  either  the
         transfer to another state of the centre of the personal, family  or
         occupational interests of the person concerned and/or  whether  the
         'integrative links' previously forged with the  host  Member  state
         had been broken."

    He referred the Tribunal to the findings of fact made at [36  and  37],
    namely at the date of decision he had been resident in the UK for  just
    over twenty years, he had been resident for over  eleven  years  before
    his first sentence and imprisonment, he had become well  integrated  by
    the time he had started serious offending  and  that  although  he  had
    spent time in custody during the ten years prior to the decision  which
    must have a negative impact on the Appellant's integration, it was  not
    sufficient to interrupt integration on the facts of the  case,  despite
    the persistent criminality.  The judge found he had no evidence that he
    had formed links with another country and that his  family  in  the  UK
    continued  to  have  an  interest  in  him,  although  the  extent  and
    expression of  that  interest  undoubtedly  had  fluctuated.   Thus  he
    submitted that the findings of fact were  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before him and that the conclusion that he was not deprived of
    the enhanced protection as a result of his integrative links  with  the
    UK had not been broken by his imprisonment was one reasonably  open  to
    him.

23. In answer to the Secretary of State's grounds, he submitted that whilst
    the judge had made reference to seven and a half years of the ten  year
    period in prison that was not factually correct, that in  fact  he  had
    served four years and eight months and two weeks of the relevant period
    in prison (which was calculated by  adding  together  the  three  years
    served for the 2006 offence, the six weeks served for the 2010  offence
    and the one year and seven months served of the 2011 offence).   As  to
    members of the family, it was submitted the judge rightly found on  the
    evidence that contact had been maintained although  it  had  fluctuated
    [37] he submitted that  that  was  not  unusual  when  the  law-abiding
    members of the family have a family member who was sent to prison.   He
    reminded the Tribunal that the evidence before the judge was  that  the
    family were extremely  disappointed  in  the  offending  and  thus  had
    limited contact with him at the time.  However the judge  accepted  the
    evidence at the hearing of reconciliation between the family members of
    the Appellant.  He submitted  that  whilst  there  appeared  to  be  an
    apparent contradiction between paragraphs [37 and 43] the determination
    should be read as a whole and  that  this  was  an  Appellant  who  had
    demonstrated that he had no links in France and that he had not  broken
    the level of integration that he had prior to his  imprisonment.   Thus
    the first ground is not made out.

24. As to the second  ground,  he  submitted  that  the  challenge  to  the
    findings of the judge that his conduct did  not  amount  to  imperative
    grounds of public security were open to the judge who properly  applied
    the relevant case law and in particular the decision  of  the  CJEU  in
    Tsakouridis.  In this context, he submitted on the facts  of  the  case
    the Appellant was not part of an organised group of  drug  traders  and
    that the circumstances of his offence could be  properly  distinguished
    from the circumstances in the case of Tsakouridis who was dealing  with
    large quantities of drugs as part of an organised group.  He  submitted
    the level of offending was not the same  and  that  he  was  in  effect
    dealing on a street corner and whilst it was serious did not breach  or
    come within "imperative grounds" and thus the judge correctly  directed
    himself and was entitled to reach that conclusion.

25. As to Ground 3 and the risk of reoffending, he submitted that the judge
    had proper regard to the OASys assessment and the risk of  harm  posed.
    It was open to the judge to consider the risk of harm if the  Appellant
    was unable to find employment, however the judge found him to have been
    able to do so.  Furthermore there was evidence before the judge of  the
    lengths that he had gone to rehabilitate himself during the  period  of
    imprisonment and thus it was open to the judge to find that he had  not
    represented a propensity to  reoffend  notwithstanding  that  he  posed
    "some risk" (see[43]).  Mr Bobb made reference to the  work  undertaken
    in prison to address his offending behaviour; the number  of  offending
    behaviour courses, including enhanced thinking skills and the work done
    with the Geese Theatre Company.  He submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds in which it  was  stated  that  the  evidence  did  not
    demonstrate he had a stable career, but it was open  to  the  judge  to
    make the finding at [42] based  on  the  evidence  of  his  employment.
    Furthermore the finding as to his accommodation  and  living  with  his
    sister was a matter that the judge was entitled to  take  into  account
    when considering the assessment of risk of  reoffending.   Consequently
    he submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    disclosed no error of law and that the appeal should be dismissed.

26. I reserved my determination.

Discussion:

27. The relevant provisions of both the EEA regulations and  the  Directive
    as they implement into domestic law, the  Citizens'  Directive  2004/38
    ("the Directive") are annexed to this decision.  For  present  purposes
    it is sufficient to note that the effect  of  these  provisions  is  to
    provide three levels of protection against removal, depending upon  the
    extent to which the EEA national has demonstrated  becoming  integrated
    into the United Kingdom as a result  of  continuous  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

28. The EEA regulations  provide  enhanced  levels  of  protection  against
    removal for EEA nationals who have become integrated in the host Member
    State as a consequence of living for a sufficiently lengthy  period  of
    time in that Member State.  Thus, regulation 21(3) provides that an EEA
    national with a permanent right of residence, which is  acquired  as  a
    consequence  of  completing  five  years'   continuous   residence   in
    accordance with the regulations, cannot be removed except upon  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security.  Regulation 21(4) provides
    the highest level of protection for an EEA national who has "resided in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least ten years  prior
    to the relevant decision".  Such a person cannot be removed except upon
    imperative grounds of public security.

29. It is, therefore, necessary to examine what is required to  access  the
    highest level of protection against deportation on  the  basis  of  ten
    years residence.

30. In SSHD v MG (C-400/12) the Court of Justice was concerned, inter alia,
    with the question of whether  the  ten  years'  residence  demanded  by
    Article 28 in order to  have  the  benefit  of  the  highest  level  of
    protection against deportation had to be continuous  and  unbroken,  or
    whether it could comprise an overall period of residence punctuated  by
    periods of imprisonment but amounting to ten  years  after  periods  of
    imprisonment had been deducted.  The Court concluded that:

         "... on a proper construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
         2004/38, the 10 year  period  of  residence  referred  to  in  that
         provision must, in principle, be continuous and must be  calculated
         by counting back  from  the  date  of  the  decision  ordering  the
         expulsion of the person concerned."

    But the Court went on to indicate that the absence of a continuous  and
    unbroken period of 10 years residence did not necessarily disqualify  a
    person from having the benefit of the highest level of protection:

         "As for the question of the  extent  to  which  the  non-continuous
         nature of the period of residence during the 10 years preceding the
         decision to expel the person concerned prevents him  from  enjoying
         enhanced protection, an overall assessment must  be  made  of  that
         person's situation on each occasion at the precise  time  when  the
         question of expulsion arises  (see  to  that  effect,  Tsakouridis,
         paragraph 32).

         ...

         ...Article 28(3)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a period of imprisonment  is,  in  principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding  the  grant  of  the  enhanced  protection  provided  for
         thereunder, even where the person concerned  resided  in  the  host
         Member State for the 10 years prior to imprisonment.  However,  the
         fact that the person resided in the host Member State  for  the  10
         years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration as part
         of the overall assessment required in order  to  determine  whether
         the integrating links previously forged with the host Member  State
         have been broken."

31. The decision of the Court of Justice in SSHD v MG was considered by the
    Upper Tribunal in MG (prison-Article 28(3)(a)  of  Citizens  Directive)
    Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC).  The Tribunal concluded that:

         "The judgment should be understood as  meaning  that  a  period  of
         imprisonment during those 10 years does not necessarily  prevent  a
         person from qualifying for enhanced protection if  that  person  is
         sufficiently integrated.  However, according to the same  judgment,
         a period of imprisonment must have a negative impact in so  far  as
         establishing integration is concerned."

32. The questions that the CJEU had to determine were  fourfold.   Firstly,
    does a period in prison  following  sentence  for  a  commission  of  a
    criminal offence by a union citizen break the residence period  in  the
    host Member State required for that person to benefit from the  highest
    level of protection against expulsion under  Article  28(3)(a)  of  the
    Directive or otherwise preclude the person relying  on  this  level  of
    protection?  Secondly, does reference to previous ten years in  Article
    28(3)(a) mean that the residence has to be continuous in  order  for  a
    union citizen  to  be  able  to  benefit  from  the  highest  level  of
    protection against expulsion?  Thirdly,  for  the  purpose  of  Article
    28(3)(a) is the requisite period of ten  years  during  which  a  union
    citizen must have resided in the host Member State  calculated  (a)  by
    counting back from the expulsion decision, or (b) by  counting  forward
    from the commencement of the citizen's residence  in  the  host  Member
    State?  Lastly, if the answer to question 3(a) is  that  the  ten  year
    period is  calculated  by  counting  backwards  then  does  it  make  a
    difference if the person has accrued ten years' residence prior to such
    imprisonment?

33. The answer to question 3 was that the period of ten  years  had  to  be
    considered by counting back from the expulsion decision  and  that  the
    residence  had  to  be  one  which  was  not  tainted  as  it  were  by
    imprisonment.  The answer to question 4 in general terms, was  that  it
    did not make a  difference  if  ten  years'  residence  prior  to  such
    imprisonment had been accrued  in  the  sense  that  it  did  not  mean
    automatically that the individual was able to rely  on  such  residence
    but it was a material factor.  The crucial finding in relation  to  the
    second and third questions was set out in paragraph 28 as follows:-

         "In the light of all the foregoing the answer to questions 2 and  3
         is that on a proper construction of Article 28(3)(a) the  ten  year
         period of residence referred to in that provision must in principle
         be continuous and must be calculated by counting back from the date
         of the decision ordering the expulsion of the person concerned."

34. They went on to consider the answer to questions 1 and  4  deciding  in
    paragraph 38 that Article 28(3)(a) must be interpreted as meaning  that
    a period of imprisonment is in principle capable both  of  interrupting
    the continuity of the period of residence  for  the  purposes  of  that
    provision and of affecting the decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the
    enhanced protection provided for even when the person concerned resided
    in the host Member State for  the  ten  years  prior  to  imprisonment.
    However the fact that the person resided in the host Member  State  for
    the ten years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration  as
    part of the overall assessment required in order to  determine  whether
    the integrating links previously forged with the host Member State have
    been broken thus forming part of what has been described as the "maybe"
    category of MG.

35. In each reference made to the effect of  imprisonment,  the  words  "in
    principle" are used.  This demonstrates that  periods  of  imprisonment
    will not automatically mean that the highest  level  of  protection  is
    lost.  Thus it is necessary  to  consider  the  whole  history  of  the
    individual's residence in the host nation and if he has for a period of
    at least ten years before any sentence of imprisonment resided in  this
    country,  has  integrated  into  the  country  so  as  to  fulfil   the
    requirements of the Preamble (and Article 16 of  the  Directive),  then
    that  can  be  taken  into  account  and  can,  depending  on  all  the
    circumstances, mean that despite having been sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment, he does not lose his enhanced protection.

36. The decision in MG (as cited) therefore appears to state  that  whether
    the enhanced protection should still exist is a question which must  be
    made on an overall assessment of  the  individual's  situation  and  is
    therefore dependent on the findings of fact made by the Tribunal.

37. It is therefore necessary to consider  the  findings  of  fact  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  At paragraph [35] the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge set out  the  relevant  legal  principles  and  directed
    himself in accordance with the decision of SSHD v  MG  (as  cited)  and
    also the determination of the Tribunal  (when  considering  MG  on  its
    return from the decision of  the  European  Court).   Furthermore,  the
    judge considered the issue of integration at  [35];  (page  11  of  the
    decision) when reviewing the case law and set out what he described  as
    the "key question":-

         "The key questions for the Tribunal to ask when considering whether
         there had been a period  of  ten  years'  residence  prior  to  the
         decision to deport were whether imprisonment  involved  either  the
         transfer to another state of the centre of the personal, family  or
         occupational interests of the person concerned, and/or whether  the
         'integrating links' previously forged with the  host  Member  State
         had been broken."

38. The judge then set out his findings of fact on the relevant  issues  at
    [36].  The judge made findings of fact from  the  evidence  (which  are
    unchallenged) that the applicant had arrived in  the  UK  when  aged  5
    years  2  months  and  had  arrived  with  his  family   therefore   in
    February/March 1995 and at  the  date  of  the  decision  he  had  been
    resident in the UK for just over twenty years.  He further  found  that
    the Appellant received his first custodial sentence  in  October  2006,
    when he had been present in the United Kingdom for over eleven years.

39. At [37] the judge went on to consider  the  issue  of  integration  and
    found as a fact that the Appellant had lived with  his  family  members
    (from the age of 5) until 2002 living in  the  London  area.   He  then
    moved to a further area with his mother and younger siblings and  at  a
    later date his behaviour began to deteriorate.  The judge however found
    that on the evidence before him that  he  was  satisfied  that  he  had
    become integrated into life in the UK by the time he  had  started  his
    serious offending in 2006 and that "indeed he was 17 years of age  when
    he  was  first  sentenced  to  imprisonment  in  a   young   offenders'
    institution."

40. Thus the judge found that from the  ages  of  5  to  17  years  he  had
    demonstrated his integration in the UK; he had resided in the UK during
    that period, he had undergone his education in the United  Kingdom  and
    had lived with his family members during that period of  time  and  had
    not been to France, nor had he left the UK or forged any links with his
    country of citizenship.

41. Furthermore the judge took into account the Appellant's conduct  during
    the ten years prior to the decision to make a deportation  order  which
    he later referred to at [43] as a period where he had not  been  a  law
    abiding citizen and had spent the bulk of that period either in custody
    or on licence.  The judge found that was  likely  to  have  a  negative
    impact on the Appellant's  integration.   However,  he  concluded  that
    whilst that period of time between 2005 and his release  was  one  that
    could be properly described as "chaotic" that it  was  insufficient  to
    interrupt that period so as to deprive him of the  enhanced  protection
    or that it was sufficient to disrupt his links with the UK despite that
    criminality.  He found as a fact that there was no evidence that he had
    formed any links with any other country and  that  his  family  members
    (all of whom were based in the UK) continued to have an interest in him
    although the extent of that had fluctuated.

42. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the findings as to integration made
    at [43] were in direct conflict with those of [37] and that  there  was
    no analysis of the issue of integration.  I have  therefore  considered
    whether in fact they are opposing findings of fact.   It  seems  to  me
    that  in  deciding  that  question  it  is  important   to   read   the
    determination as a whole and  in  particular  paragraph  [37]  and  the
    concluding part of [43].  At paragraph [37] as  summarised  above,  the
    judge set out his findings on the issue of integration having  properly
    directed himself to the relevant legal principles.  At  paragraph  [43]
    the judge set out the factors relevant to the ten  year  period  before
    the expulsion decision was made but went on to consider (in  the  light
    of his findings at [37] and his consideration of the  circumstances  of
    the offence [41] and the risk of reoffending at [42]) that he found  on
    a "very narrow balance" that the decision to deport the  applicant  was
    not justified on imperative grounds of public security.   He  concluded
    on the issue of integration that his degree  of  integration  was  such
    that his removal could not be justified in view of the likely impact it
    would have on the applicant who had no real connection with France  and
    in light of the findings made cumulatively at [37], [41] and [42].

43. I am therefore satisfied that the findings, when read together, are not
    internally inconsistent as the Secretary of State contends but that the
    judge did consider the issue of integration, did make  an  analysis  of
    that issue and made findings of fact that  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  Thus Ground 1 is not made out.

44. Dealing with Grounds 2  and  3,  it  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the judge erred in  law  by  finding  that  the
    decision to deport was not justified  on  the  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security" as he had failed to take into account the  seriousness
    of the offence and did not properly reason this in  the  determination.
    It is further asserted that the judge failed to consider  the  risk  of
    reoffending in accordance with the OASys  Report  and  had  erroneously
    considered the Appellant's present circumstances.

45. The judge at [38] reminded himself that whilst he had  found  that  the
    Appellant had established that he could rely on the enhanced protection
    of Regulation 21(4)(a), the Tribunal would have to  be  satisfied  that
    the decision was not justified on  the  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security.  At  [39]-[40]  of  the  determination,  the  judge  properly
    directed himself to the decision of Tsakouridis (as  cited)  and  other
    relevant case law.  The questions put to the  court  in  that  decision
    involved whether the expression "imperative grounds of public security"
    is to be interpreted as meaning that only irrefutable  threats  to  the
    external  or  internal  security  of  a  Member  State  could   justify
    expulsion, that it is only to  the  existence  of  the  state  and  its
    essential institutions, their ability to function, the survival of  the
    population, external relations and the peaceful coexistence of nations.
     If that was the appropriate test it would be set at a very high level.



46. In answering those questions, the court was concerned on the  facts  of
    that case with involvement in dealing in drugs.  The  court  stated  as
    follows:-

         "41.  The  concept  of  'imperative  grounds  of  public  security'
             presupposes not only the  existence  of  a  threat  to  public
             security, but also that such a threat  is  of  a  particularly
             high degree of seriousness, as reflected by  the  use  of  the
             words 'imperative reasons'.

         42.  It is in this context that the concept of 'public security' in
             Article  28(3)  of  the  Directive  2004/38  should  also   be
             interpreted.

         43.  As regards public security,  the  court  has  held  that  this
             covers both a Member State internal and its external  security
             (and he cites a number of cases).

         44.  The court has also held that a threat to  the  functioning  of
             the institutions and essential public services and survival of
             the population, as well as the risk of a  serious  disturbance
             to  foreign  relations  or  to  the  peaceful  coexistence  of
             nations, or a risk to military interests,  may  affect  public
             security (and refers to a number of other cases).

         45.  It does not follow that objectives such as the  fight  against
             crime in connection with dealing in narcotics as  part  of  an
             organised group are necessarily excluded from that concept and
             it appears that if one follows the language of  that,  it  was
             intended that the  fight  against  dealing  in  narcotics  was
             capable  of  being  considered  to  be  a  threat  in  foreign
             relations or peaceful coexistence of foreign relations but  it
             matters not because clearly it is not necessary from what  the
             court says that there should be any  cross-border  element  in
             the criminal conduct which leads to deportation on  the  basis
             of Article 28(3)."

47. At paragraph [49] the court set out the following:-

         "49. Consequently,  an  expulsion  measure  must  be  based  on  an
             individual  examination  of  the  specific  case  and  can  be
             justified on imperative grounds of public security within  the
             meaning of Article 28(3) of  the  Directive  only  if,  having
             regard to the exceptional seriousness of the  threat,  such  a
             measure is necessary for the protection of  the  interests  it
             aims  to  secure,  provided  that  that  objective  cannot  be
             attained by less strict means, having regard to the length  of
             residence of the union citizen in the host Member State and in
             particular to the serious negative consequences such a measure
             may  have  for  union  citizens  who  have  become   genuinely
             integrated into the host Member State."

48. The court went on to state that when  applying  the  Directive  that  a
    balance must be struck between the "exceptional nature of the threat to
    public security as a result of  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned, assessed  if  necessary  at  the  time  when  the  expulsion
    decision is to be made", by reference in  particular  to  the  possible
    penalties and the sentences imposed, the degree of involvement  in  the
    criminal activity and, if appropriate the risk of reoffending.

49. Thus the court confirmed that the  expression  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security" creates a  considerably  stricter  test  than  "merely
    serious grounds" but since the application of the test is primarily for
    the Member  State  concerned,  which  must  take  into  account  social
    conditions as well as the various factors the Directive itself  refers,
    the question is likely to turn to larger extent on the particular facts
    of the case.  It is also plain that the Tribunal must  give  effect  to
    the Regulations  which  themselves  must  be  interpreted  against  the
    background of the right of free movement and the need  to  ensure  that
    derogation from it are construed strictly.  Thus even  in  cases  where
    removal is prima  facie  justified  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security the decision maker must consider amongst other things  whether
    the offender has a propensity to offend in a similar way (see paragraph
    [24] of the decision SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245).

50.  The judge at [41] went on to apply those principles having  regard  to
    the nature of the offence committed and by  referring  to  the  judge's
    sentencing remarks and at [42] considered the risk of  reoffending.  As
    submitted by Mr Bobb, it was open to the judge  to  consider  that  the
    circumstances  of  the  appellant's  offending,  whilst  serious,   was
    distinguishable for the facts of Tsakouridis;  the  appellant  was  not
    part of an organised group of drug traders.  In respect of  the  issues
    of risk of re-offending the judge made reference to three  reports  and
    summarised them noting that the Appellant had been assessed as a medium
    risk and made direct references to that assessment and  the  conclusion
    that "the offender has the potential  to  cause  serious  harm  but  is
    unlikely to do so unless there is a change in  his  circumstances,  for
    example,  failing  to   take   medication,   loss   of   accommodation,
    relationship breakdown and alcohol misuse."  The  judge  also  recorded
    the assessment whereby it stated that the nature of the risk  would  be
    greater as a result of the Appellant being "unable to  find  meaningful
    employment which would provide an income and occupy his time and/or  if
    he becomes 'reacquainted who have pro-criminal associations.'"  It  was
    also said that a failure to engage with offending behaviour  programmes
    and/or  continued  association  with  offending  peers  was  likely  to
    increase the risk and that the completion of  intervention  and  future
    planning measures to include employment and housing would  be  said  to
    reduce the risk.

51. The judge had the opportunity to hear oral evidence from the  Appellant
    and from the  family  members  concerning  his  present  conduct  since
    release and found on that evidence that his circumstances  had  changed
    and that he had now a  form  of  employment,  he  had  obtained  stable
    accommodation with his sister and was no longer associating with  those
    in the area who had been involved in the most recent offending.  As  Mr
    Bobb  submitted,  the  judge  had  before  him  evidence  of  the  work
    undertaken whist in prison to address  his  offending  behaviour  which
    included a number of  offending  behaviour  courses  such  as  the  ETS
    (Enhanced Thinking Skills) and the work done with the Theatre Company.

52. Contrary to the submissions  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  judge
    therefore considered that he had demonstrated those circumstances which
    could be described as the "stabilising  factors"  and  which  had  been
    identified in the OASY's  report  as  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    ongoing risk.  Whilst  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submits  that  the  judge
    erroneously considered the Appellant's circumstances that would prevent
    him from reoffending,  those  were  specifically  referred  to  in  the
    material before the  judge  and  it  was  open  to  him  to  reach  the
    conclusion on the evidence that presently the conduct of the  Appellant
    demonstrated that those stabilising factors were present.  As  set  out
    in the decision of SSHD v Straszewski (as cited) at paragraph [25],  it
    required an evaluation to be made  of  the  likelihood  that  a  person
    concerned would offend again and the consequences if  he  did  so.   In
    addition, the need for the conduct of the person concerned to represent
    a "sufficiently serious" threat to one of the fundamental interests  of
    society required the decision maker to balance the risk of future  harm
    against the need to give effect to the right of free movement.

53.  A careful reading of the determination demonstrates that the judge was
    not saying there was no risk (see paragraph [43]) nor was he  departing
    from the contents of the report but had considered the reports  against
    the background of the Appellant's offending but in  the  light  of  the
    present evidence as a whole, including the evidence  of  the  Appellant
    and the witnesses which he had summarised earlier in the determination.
     Thus he had considered  the  factors  identified  as  going  to  risk;
    namely of employment,  accommodation,  relationship  with  family,  and
    continuing links to offending peers and found that they were no  longer
    present and that this had affected the  risk  assessment  and  as  such
    overall the circumstances were such that the  decision  to  deport  the
    Appellant was not justified.

54.  Whilst the judge had not expressly referred to Regulation 21(5)(c)  it
    is plain that this was  in  his  mind  in  those  paragraphs  where  he
    considered the issue of risk of reoffending.  Thus the judge did  carry
    out an evaluative exercise of the evidence in this regard.   As  stated
    in the decision  of  Straszewski,  in  any  given  case  an  evaluative
    exercise of this kind may admit  of  more  than  one  answer.   If  so,
    provided all the appropriate factors have been taken into account,  the
    decision cannot be impugned unless it is perverse or irrational,  in  a
    sense of falling outside the range of permissible  decisions.   It  has
    not been advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State that the decision
    of the judge or his findings of fact were either irrational or perverse
    and in light of  the  foregoing,  the  judge  properly  considered  the
    appropriate factors and made findings of fact  based  on  the  evidence
    before him.  Whilst it may be said it was a generous  decision,  it  is
    not one that fell outside the range of permissible decisions and was  a
    decision open to him on the evidence presented before him.  He  clearly
    found this to be a finely balanced case  and when balancing the factors
    reached the conclusion that  it was on a "very narrow balance" that  he
    found the decision to deport him was not justified  on  the  imperative
    grounds of public security and at [43] made it plain to  the  Appellant
    the consequences of  any  further  offending.   Therefore  the  grounds
    advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State are not made  out  and  do
    not demonstrate any error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and the decision stands.



No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



ANNEX: The relevant provisions:


Directive 2004/38

Recitals 23 and 24 in the preamble to Directive 2004/38 read as follows:-

    "23. Expulsion of Union citizens and their family members on grounds of
         public policy or public security is a measure  that  can  seriously
         harm persons who, having  availed  themselves  of  the  rights  and
         freedoms conferred on them by the  Treaty,  have  become  genuinely
         integrated into the host Member State.  The scope for such measures
         should therefore be limited in accordance  with  the  principle  of
         proportionality to take account of the degree of integration of the
         persons concerned, the length of their residence in the host Member
         State, their age, state of health, family  and  economic  situation
         and the links with their country of origin.


    24.  Accordingly, the  greater  the  degree  of  integration  of  Union
         citizens and their family members in the  host  Member  State,  the
         greater the degree of protection against expulsion should be.  Only
         in exceptional circumstances where there are imperative grounds  of
         public security, should an expulsion measure be taken against Union
         citizens who have resided for many years in the  territory  of  the
         host Member State, in particular  when  they  were  born  and  have
         resided there throughout their life.  In addition, such exceptional
         circumstances should also  apply  to  an  expulsion  measure  taken
         against minors, in order to protect their links with their  family,
         in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the  Rights  of
         the Child, of 20 November 1989."

Article 27(1) and (2) of the Directive provide:-

    "(1) Subject to the provisions  of  this  Chapter,  Member  States  may
         restrict the freedom of movement and residence  of  Union  citizens
         and their family members, irrespective of nationality,  on  grounds
         of public policy, public security or public health.  These  grounds
         shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.


    (2)  Measures taken on grounds of  public  policy  or  public  security
         shall comply with the principle of  proportionality  and  shall  be
         based  exclusively  on  the  personal  conduct  of  the  individual
         concerned.  Previous criminal convictions shall not  in  themselves
         constitute grounds for taking such measures.


         The personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests  of  society.   Justifications  that  are
         isolated  from  the  particulars  of  the  case  or  that  rely  on
         considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted."

Under Article 28 of the Directive:-

    "(1) Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds of public policy or
         public security, the  host  Member  State  shall  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual  concerned  has
         resided on its territory, his/her age, state of health, family  and
         economic situation, social and cultural integration into  the  host
         Member State and the extent of his/her links with  the  country  of
         origin.


    (2)  The host Member State may not take an expulsion  decision  against
         Union  citizens  or   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
         nationality, who have the  right  of  permanent  residence  on  its
         territory, except on serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
         security.


    (3)  An expulsion decision may not be  taken  against  Union  citizens,
         except if the decision is based on  imperative  grounds  of  public
         security, as defined by Member States, if they:


         (a)  have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous  ten
             years; or


         (b)  are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for the best
             interests of the child, as provided for in the United  Nations
             Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989."

The 2006 Regulations

    "Decisions taken on public policy, public security  and  public  health
    grounds:

    21-(1)   In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
           taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
           health.


       (2)    A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


       (3)    A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a  person
           with a permanent right of residence under regulation  15  except
           on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


       (4)    A relevant decision may not be  taken  except  on  imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


           (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
               of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


           (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
               necessary in his best interests,  as  provided  for  in  the
               Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General
               Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.


       (5)    Where a relevant decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
           policy or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying
           with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-


           (a)     the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
               proportionality;


           (b)    the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
               conduct of the person concerned;


           (c)     the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
               represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
               affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;


           (d)    matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
               which relate to considerations of general prevention do  not
               justify the decision;


           (e)    a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
               themselves justify the decision.


       (6)    Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of  public
           policy or public  security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
           resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take
           account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of  health,
           family and economic situation of the person, the person's length
           of residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  person's  social  and
           cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent  of
           the person's links with his country of origin.


       (7)    In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of public
           health-


           (a)    a disease  that  does  not  have  epidemic  potential  as
               defined by the relevant  instruments  of  the  World  Health
               Organisation or is not a disease (listed in  Schedule  1  to
               the Health Protection (Notification Regulations 2010)  shall
               not shall not constitute grounds for the decision; and


           (b)    if  the  person  concerned  is  in  the  United  Kingdom,
               diseases occurring after the three month period beginning on
               the date on which he arrived in the United Kingdom shall not
               constitute grounds for the decision."


