
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 2 December 2015                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MARTIN SAMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the  Appellant:      Mr  N  Bramble  -  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    In person.


                            Decision and Reasons

      1. Mr Sama appeared  before  the  Tribunal  in  person.  He  has  been
         represented in the past by Pickup Scott Solicitors who in a  letter
         dated 11 September 2015 wrote:

             "We refer to previous  correspondence.  We  note  there  is  a
             further hearing of the appeal on the 14 September 2015 at 2.00
             p.m.  However we are still without instructions as we  advised
             in our letter dated 5th August 2015 and will not be  attending
             the hearing.  As mentioned previously we should be grateful if
             you would take the content of our letter dated  3rd  February,
             2015 into account when making the decision whether or  not  to
             allow the Home Office appeal."

      2. The letter of 3rd February 2015 is Mr Sama's Rule 24 reply  to  the
         Secretary of States application for permission to appeal. It states
         that even if Judge Lloyd made an error of law it was not  material.
         The letter acknowledges that Judge Lloyd made an error in referring
         to  the  wrong  immigration  rules  at  paragraphs  25-30  of   the
         determination but claims this is not material as on  the  basis  of
         the findings of fact made by the Judge the appeal would  have  been
         allowed applying  the  correct  Rules.  The  letter  sets  out  the
         submissions that  would  be  made  on  Mr  Sama's  behalf  had  the
         solicitor attended.

      3. Mr Sama was asked why he failed  to  instruct  his  solicitors.  He
         claimed he was saving up to meet their fees. The last  occasion  he
         saw his solicitor was when they were last in court. Mr Sama claimed
         to have saved towards the �1,900 required but no proof of this  was
         available. He made enquires of other solicitor to see if they could
         assist but they too wanted money. No evidence of such enquires  has
         been provided or of a firm willing to represent Mr Sama.

      4. Although Mr Sama would have liked more time it has not been  proved
         it is unfair to refuse the adjournment  request.  He  has  had  the
         benefit of legal representation. His previous solicitors have  made
         detailed written submissions on his behalf which shall  be  treated
         as a 'speaking statement' for him. His is able to answer  questions
         and explain his position as many appearing in person before  courts
         and tribunals have to in light of legal aid cuts. The hearing shall
         proceed. The overriding objectives considered.

      5. The above respondent, Mr Sama, is a citizen of Sierra  Leonne  born
         on the 20 November 1987. He entered the United Kingdom aged  10  to
         join his father who arrived in 1996.

      6. Mr Sama has  a  considerable  history  of  criminal  activity  from
         November 2004 and was warned about the consequences of his  conduct
         by the  Secretary  of  State  in  2007.  His  immigration  history,
         including details of thirteen convictions for  forty  one  offences
         and cautions, is set out in the Secretary of States letter prepared
         by the Criminal Casework Directorate for the purposes of the appeal
         before the Frist-tier Tribunal.

      7. On 30 October 2012 Mr Sama was convicted at Winchester Crown  Court
         of two counts of burglary and one count of possession  of  Class  B
         drugs, namely cannabis resin, for which he  was  sentenced  to  two
         sentences of  42  months  imprisonment  to  run  concurrent  on  27
         November 2012. A copy of the sentencing remarks can be found within
         the Secretary of States appeal bundle.

      8. On 9 June 2014 Mr Sama was made the subject of a deportation  order
         pursuant to UK Borders Act 2007.  His appeal  against  removal  was
         heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  B  Lloyd  sitting  at  Columbus
         House Newport on 10 November 2014.

      9. Judge  Lloyd  set  out  his  findings  from  paragraph  48  of  the
         determination. At paragraph 51 it is stated:

             "Having regard to the evidence before me of the strong  family
             support  which  the  Appellant  now  enjoys  in  the  UK,  the
             increased closeness and intensity of the relationship with his
             daughter, what I believe  is  the  unfailing  support  of  his
             partner Ms Griffin and even it has to be said the  support  of
             former partner Ms Spratley, I am drawn to the conclusion  that
             there is a compelling case to allow the Appellant's appeal  on
             Article 8 grounds. "

     10. At paragraph 56 it is stated:

             "For all these reasons I conclude the removal of the Appellant
             to Sierra Leone would result in a breach of his  rights  under
             Article 8 which would be  disproportionate  to  the  need  for
             proper immigration control and the  public  interest  in  this
             case. My view does not lessen the  seriousness,  historically,
             of what he has  done  but  looking  at  the  evidence  in  its
             totality I  do  not  consider  that  his  deportation  is  the
             proportionate solution in this case."

     11. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

     12. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal
         on the basis  it  was  arguable  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
         Immigration Rules in force at the date of the hearing,  leading  to
         the judge erring in applying  the  wrong  threshold  to  Mr  Sama's
         circumstances and failing to establish  his  deportation  would  be
         unduly harsh or there would be significant  obstacles  to  his  re-
         integration.

     13.   Guidance  in  relation  to  the  approach  to  be  adopted   when
         considering an appeal  against  a  deportation  decision  has  been
         provided by the Court of Appeal in a number of leading cases. In YM
         (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 it was found that  it  is  the
         Immigration Rules in force at the date of hearing which  are  those
         to be applied.

     14. In MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  the  Master  of  the  Rolls
         indicated that where the "new rules" (in force from  9  July  2012)
         apply (in a deportation case), the  "first  step  that  has  to  be
         undertaken is to decide whether deportation would be contrary to an
         individual's article 8 rights on the  grounds  that  (i)  the  case
         falls within para 398 (b) or (c)  and  (ii)  one  or  more  of  the
         conditions set out in para 399 (a) or (b) or para 399A (a)  or  (b)
         applies.  If the case falls within para 398 (b) or (c) and  one  or
         more of those conditions applies, then  the  new  rules  implicitly
         provide that deportation would be contrary to article 8" (paragraph
         35, underlining added).  Paragraphs 399 and 399A can be thought  of
         as setting out the exceptions to deportation (see paragraph 14).

     15. In YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 it  was  confirmed  that
         the 2012 Rules were a complete  code  for  dealing  with  a  person
         facing deportation under the Immigration Acts, and who claimed that
         deportation was contrary to his Article 8 rights.

     16.  In MM (Lebanon) and others [2014] EWCA Civ 985 it  was  said  that
         where the relevant group of IRs, upon  their  proper  construction,
         provide a "complete code" for dealing with  a  person's  Convention
         rights in the context of a particular IR  or  statutory  provision,
         such as in the case of  "foreign  criminals",  then  the  balancing
         exercise and the way the various  factors  are  to  be  taken  into
         account in an individual case must be done in accordance with  that
         code, although references to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the
         code will nonetheless entail a proportionality exercise.

     17. In CG (Jamaica) [2015] EWCA Civ 194 it was again confirmed that the
         Rules relating to deportation constitute a complete code.

     18. In SSHD v AQ (Nigeria) CD (Jamaica) and TH (Bangladesh) [2015] EWCA
         Civ 25 it was held that when a foreign criminal appealed against  a
         deportation order on the ground that the  public  interest  in  his
         deportation was outweighed by his private or family life in the UK,
         the tribunal would need to examine the factors  that  would,  under
         the Respondent's policy  in  part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
         outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  Ultimately,  the
         assessment of proportionality was for the tribunal or the court  to
         make, but national policy as to the strength of the public interest
         in deporting foreign criminals was a fixed criterion against  which
         other factors and interests had to be measured.

     19. This principle has been reinforced by the Court of  Appeal  in  the
         more recent judgment in SSHD v Boyd [2015] EWCA Civ 1190  in  which
         the Court set out reference to case law in the following terms:

             "26. My above remarks would apply to a case that preceded  the
             introduction of paragraphs 398  to  399B  of  the  Immigration
             Rules. However, these provisions did apply to the decision  of
             the Secretary of State in relation to the Respondent, and were
             referred to by the First-tier Tribunal. In Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department v AJ (Angola) and AJ  (Gambia)  [2014]
             EWCA Civ 1636, Sales LJ set out those Rules  at  paragraph  9.
             Having referred to the judgment of this Court  in  MF  Nigeria
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544, Sales LJ  said,  in  a
             judgment with which the other members of the Court agreed:

                  "39. The fact that the new rules are intended  to  operate
                  as a comprehensive code is significant, because  it  means
                  that an official or a tribunal should seek to take account
                  of any Convention rights of an appellant through the  lens
                  of the new rules themselves, rather than looking to  apply
                  Convention rights for themselves in  a  free-standing  way
                  outside the new rules. This feature of the new rules makes
                  the  decision-making  framework  in  relation  to  foreign
                  criminals different from that in relation to  other  parts
                  of the Immigration Rules, where  the  Secretary  of  State
                  retains a general discretion outside the Rules in exercise
                  of which, in some circumstances, decisions may need to  be
                  made in order to accommodate certain claims for  leave  to
                  remain on the basis of Convention rights, as explained  in
                  Huang and R (Nagre) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                  Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

                  40.  The requirement that claims  by  appellants  who  are
                  foreign criminals  for  leave  to  remain,  based  on  the
                  Convention  rights  of  themselves  or   their   partners,
                  relations or children, should be assessed  under  the  new
                  rules and through their lens is important, as the Court of
                  Appeal in MF (Nigeria) has emphasised. It seeks to  ensure
                  uniformity  of  approach  between   different   officials,
                  tribunals and courts who have to assess  such  claims,  in
                  the interests of fair and  equal  treatment  of  different
                  appellants with  similar  cases  on  the  facts.  In  this
                  regard, the  new  rules  also  serve  as  a  safeguard  in
                  relation to rights of appellants under Article 14 to equal
                  treatment within the scope of Article 8.  The  requirement
                  of assessment through the lens of the new rules also seeks
                  to ensure that  decisions  are  made  in  a  way  that  is
                  properly informed by the considerable weight to  be  given
                  to  the  public  interest  in   deportation   of   foreign
                  criminals, as declared by Parliament in the 2007  Act  and
                  reinforced by the Secretary  of  State  (as  the  relevant
                  Minister  with  responsibility  for   operation   of   the
                  immigration system), so as to promote public confidence in
                  that system in this sensitive area."

                  In LC (China) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
                  [2014] EWCA Civ 1310,  this  Court  again  emphasised  the
                  points made in both SS  (Nigeria)  and  MF  (Nigeria).  It
                  dismissed an appeal from the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  had
                  allowed an appeal from the FTT. This Court held  that  the
                  FTT in that case "clearly erred" in its understanding  and
                  application of the new rules, by considering the case of a
                  foreign criminal based on Convention  rights  outside  the
                  new rules (see para. [14]), just as the Upper Tribunal has
                  done in both the cases before us. As in the  cases  before
                  us, the error had occurred because the decision of the FTT
                  had been made before the judgment  of  this  Court  in  MF
                  (Nigeria) was handed down. At para.  [17],  Moore-Bick  LJ
                  (giving the leading judgment) said this:

                      "Two points of importance emerge from  the  decisions
                      in  SS  (Nigeria)  and  MF  (Nigeria).  First,   both
                      emphasise the great weight  to  be  attached  to  the
                      public  interest  in  the  deportation   of   foreign
                      criminals and the importance of the  policy  in  that
                      regard to which effect has been given  by  Parliament
                      in the UK Borders Act 2007, a weight  and  importance
                      neither of which seem to have been fully  appreciated
                      by the First-tier Tribunal in this case.  The  second
                      is that it is  wrong  to  consider  the  question  of
                      infringement of article 8 rights outside the terms of
                      the Immigration Rules,  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                      did.""

         27. More recently, in MA (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 48, Richards LJ
             said:

                  "17. It follows from MF (Nigeria) that  MA's  case  should
                  have been considered only within the Immigration Rules and
                  on the basis that  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in
                  favour of deportation and that something  very  compelling
                  is  required  to   outweigh   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation.""

     20. This issue arises as the judge  appears  to  have  concentrated  on
         assessing the merits of the claim by reference to  Article  8  ECHR
         rather than within the structure of the correct Rules  as  per  the
         guidance provided.

     21. It is accepted the judge makes mention of paragraphs 398,  399  and
         399A which are set out at paragraphs 23 to 30 of the  determination
         but those are not the versions of these rules in force at the  date
         of the hearing. Those were as follows:

             'Deportation and Article 8

             A398. These rules apply where:

                  (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation  claims  that
                  his deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;

                  (b) a foreign criminal applies  for  a  deportation  order
                  made against him to be revoked.

             398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

                  (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

                  (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or

                  (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because,  in
                  the view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has
                  caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who
                  shows a particular disregard for the law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

                  (a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                      (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                      at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case

                           (a) it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported; and

                           (b) it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported; or

                  (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a  British  Citizen
                  or settled in the UK, and

                      (i) the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                      person (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and  their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                      (ii) it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      live in the country to which  the  person  is  to  be
                      deported, because of  compelling  circumstances  over
                      and above  those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                      Appendix FM; and

                      (iii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.

             399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

                  (a) the person has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  for
                  most of his life; and

                  (b) he is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK;
                  and

                  (c) there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.'

     22. In paragraph 25 the judge noted:

             'Paragraph 399A applies if -

          a) The person has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least
             twenty years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  has  no
             ties (including social, cultural or family) with  the  country
             to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or

          b) The person is aged under 25 years of age he has spent at least
             half his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
             preceding the date of the  immigration  decision  (discounting
             nay periods of imprisonment) and he  has  no  ties  (including
             social, cultural or family) with the county to which he  would
             have to go if required to leave the UK.'

     23. The version of the Rules the judge should have applied is  arguably
         tougher, requiring  an  applicant  to  demonstrate  that  they  can
         satisfy all three of the specified criteria.

     24. By virtue of paragraph 398(b) the deportation of Mr Sama  from  the
         UK is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
         because he has been convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  he  was
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years  but  at
         least 12 months.

     25. As 398(b) is met the judge needed to assess the merits of the human
         rights element of the case by reference to the criteria set out  in
         paragraph 399 and make a specify finding in relation to whether  Mr
         Sam had shown he was able to succeed under the Rules or not. I find
         the judge erred in his application of the wrong  Immigration  Rules
         and in assessing the merits of the case by reference to  Article  8
         ECHR rather than by the  correct  Rules  which  meant  insufficient
         consideration being given to the Secretary of State's case in  this
         matter.

     26. To consider whether  the  error  is  material,  as  the  judge  did
         consider many relevant aspects under the Article 8 ECHR assessment,
         the following conclusions arise:

             399(a) requires  Mr  Sama  to  prove  he  has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age of
             18 years who is in the UK. The judge  noted  in  paragraph  38
             that it was accepted that Mr Sama had a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with his young daughter.

             399(b)(i) - the chid is a British citizen.

     27. The correct version of the Rules  then  requires  consideration  of
         whether (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in  the
         country to which Mr Sama is to be deported; and  (b)  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the child to remain in the  UK  without  Mr  Sama.
         Judge Lloyd found at paragraph 54  of  the  determination  that  it
         would not be reasonable to expect the young child to leave  the  UK
         and that, in any event, her mother would not permit this to happen.
         Reasonableness is not the test set out in the Rules.

     28. The term 'unduly harsh' has been the subject to  two  decisions  of
         the Upper Tribunal which  some  commentators  have  suggested  take
         opposing views. In MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA  [2015]  UKUT
         00435 (IAC) it was held that (i) the phrase "unduly harsh" in  para
         399 of the Rules (and s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not import  a
         balancing exercise requiring the  public  interest  to  be  weighed
         against the circumstances  of  the  individual  (whether  child  or
         partner of the deportee).  The focus is solely upon  an  evaluation
         of the consequences and impact upon the individual concerned;  (ii)
         Whether the consequences of deportation will be "unduly harsh"  for
         an individual  involves  more  than  "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging"
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold; (iii) The consequences for an individual will be "harsh"
         if they are "severe" or "bleak" and they will  be  "unduly"  so  if
         they are 'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account
         of all the circumstances of  the  individual.  (MK  (section  55  -
         Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at [46] and BM
         and others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]
         UKUT 293 (IAC) at [109] applied.)

     29. In KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  00543  the
         panel declined to follow MAB and held that the  Immigration  Rules,
         when applied in  the  context  of  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
         criminal, are a complete code. Where an assessment is  required  to
         be made as to whether a person meets the requirements of  para  399
         of the Immigration Rules, as that comprises an assessment  of  that
         person's claim under article 8 of the ECHR, it is necessary to have
         regard, in making that assessment, to  the  matters  to  which  the
         Tribunal must have regard as a consequence  of  the  provisions  of
         s117C. In particular, those  include  that  the  more  serious  the
         offence  committed,  the  greater  is  the   public   interest   in
         deportation of a foreign criminal. Therefore, the word "unduly"  in
         the phrase "unduly harsh" requires consideration of whether, in the
         light of the seriousness of the offences committed by  the  foreign
         criminal and the public  interest  considerations  that  come  into
         play, the impact on the child, children or partner of  the  foreign
         criminal being deported is inordinately or excessively harsh.

     30. The observation that there is a need to consider the  impact  of  a
         decision by reference to the  effect  upon  an  individual  of  the
         proposed action is necessary to ascertain if the result  is  harsh.
         This is a fact sensitive assessment for what may  be  harsh  for  a
         person with a partner, children, and/or health issues  may  not  be
         for a healthy single person. The term 'unduly' is suggestive  of  a
         proportionally/balance assessment in which the relationship to  the
         reason(s) the issue is having to be considered must be discussed. A
         minor shoplifting offence is  not  likely  to  warrant  a  person's
         removal per se if the  consequences  are  harsh  whereas  a  repeat
         offender or a person committing more serious offences will have  to
         accept that the bar for them is set somewhat higher.  This  is  the
         approach I have adopted for the purposes of this  determination  in
         light  of  the  fact  the  proportionally  assessment  has  to   be
         considered within the Rules.

     31. When Mr Sama was asked why he should not be deported he  stated  it
         was because he has a child. He claims to be  working  and  to  have
         "moved forward with his life". He claims his daughter will grow  up
         without a father and will miss her  father.  It  has  accepted  the
         child's mother is her main carer. He also claims the  mother  works
         and he makes a financial contribution.

     32. What the above did not identify is anything  unique  to  this  case
         that could be factored into the equation. It is  accepted  Mr  Sama
         has contact with his daughter and that if he is removed such direct
         contact will cease. It is accepted his daughter is likely  to  miss
         him but it must also be accepted that it has  not  been  shown  the
         child's mother is unable to provide for the needs of the  child  by
         way of financial, emotional and physical security.  Although  Judge
         Lloyd concluded, at paragraph 57 of  his  determination,  that  the
         daughter's interests are best served by her having the  opportunity
         to grow up in the close emotional bond she has developed  with  her
         father, he fails to make any finding upon the consequences of  such
         opportunity being lost other than the loss of  the  opportunity  to
         strengthen the bond and the  disadvantage  of  having  to  grow  up
         without the physical presence of her father. The  judge  does  note
         that it has only been "quite  recently"  that  the  bond  has  been
         supported by physical contact.   The child was aged 8 at  the  date
         of the hearing before Judge Lloyd.

     33. It was not found the child's mother is unable or unwilling to  help
         the child understand the fact her father is unable to  continue  to
         see her and for the child to understand it is not as  a  result  of
         something she has done. Judge Lloyd noted at paragraph  13  of  the
         determination that the child was informed of her father's situation
         a week before the appeal and visited him in  prison  and  that  the
         child has been made aware that her father  faces  the  prospect  of
         being returned to his home country. There is  no  evidence  of  the
         impact of this information being shared with the child suggesting a
         harsh adverse reaction.  It has not been shown that if  the  mother
         requires additional help  that  this  is  not  available  from  the
         medical or educational services in the UK. It has  not  been  shown
         that the loss of opportunity to strengthen the bond with her father
         will result in an adverse impact upon  the  child  that  after  the
         initial distress can be categorised as  being  'harsh',  let  alone
         unduly harsh on the facts if Mr  Sama  is  removed  and  the  child
         remains in the UK.

     34. It is noted the child's mother, who on the one hand  claims  to  be
         supportive to the extent she arranged a job for Mr  Sama  and  took
         their daughter to  see  him  in  prison  and  who  must  have  been
         supportive of the reinstatement of face to  face  contact,  claimed
         that if Mr Sama was deported she would not permit indirect contact.
         If such contact was in the best interests of the chid as a means of
         maintaining the bond it appears to be a contradictory approach.  In
         any event if such contact was all that was  available  and  in  the
         best interests of the child, it has not been  shown  that  Mr  Sama
         will not be able to make an application to the Family Court  for  a
         Family  Arrangement  Order  to  enable  indirect  contact   to   be
         maintained.

     35. The failure to adequately examine this element of the  Rules  is  a
         material legal error such  that  the  determination  shall  be  set
         aside.

     36. In re-making the  decision  the  above  analysis  is  carried  over
         although as per the case law it is necessary for me  to  apply  the
         Rules in force at the date of the hearing. In relation to the child
         these state:

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported;
                      and

                      (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported;

     37. I find it has not been established that it would  be  unduly  harsh
         for the child to remain in the UK with her mother  if  Mr  Sama  is
         deported.

     38. In relation to a partner:

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

     39. The evidence shows Mr  Sama  had  a  former  relationship  with  Ms
         Spratley who is the mother of their child. There is no evidence  of
         an ongoing relationship between Mr Sama and  Ms  Spratley  although
         she has been supportive of him  in  the  appeal  process  and  gave
         evidence that she has  strong  personal  and  business  connections
         which has enabled her to secure a job opportunity for Mr Sama in  a
         call centre. It has not been shown Mr Sama  is  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with Ms Spratley.

     40. Mr Sama has a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms  Griffin,
         a British citizen. It is said they have been in a relationship  for
         three years having met in 2011 and cohabited from 2012.  They  hope
         to start a family although Ms Griffin  suffered  a  miscarriage  in
         2012. Paragraph 399(b) contains  a  number  of  other  requirements
         which must be met.

     41. In relation to whether the relationship was formed at a  time  when
         the person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their  immigration
         status was not precarious; Mr Sama was granted ILR. The deportation
         order was made on 9 June 2014. The relationship with Ms Griffin was
         therefore formed at a time when Mr Sama had lawful leave to  remain
         and his immigration status was not precarious.

     42. In relation to whether it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
         live in the country to which the person is to be deported,  because
         of compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
         paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM;  the  starting  point  must  be  to
         consider the terms of EX.2 which at the date of this hearing  which
         stated:

             "EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner."

     43. The evidence recorded by Judge Lloyd from Ms Griffin, in  paragraph
         16 of the original determination, included the fact Mr Sama had not
         told her of his past criminality which she only discovered when  he
         was  arrested  for  the  index  offence   and   faced   trial   and
         imprisonment. It was also stated:

             "16. ... She is wholly  committed  to  the  Appellant  as  her
             partner and she will do anything to support  him;  financially
             or in any other way. She is a qualified dental  nurse  and  is
             very ambitious to make the best of her  career  opportunities.
             She is undertaking further studies and  experience  so  as  to
             qualify  as  an  orthodontic   therapist.   Her   professional
             qualifications however are not recognised in Sierra Leonne and
             it would be too massive a  sacrifice  for  both  her  and  the
             Appellant if she were to accompany him to Sierra Leone. She is
             also a British citizen and her way of life in the  UK  is  all
             that she has known.  The  Appellant's  deportation  to  Sierra
             Leone would almost  inevitably  mean  an  enforced  indefinite
             separation for them"

     44. It is arguable the above statement is based upon  conscious  choice
         of lifestyle and fails to establish that even the threshold of EX.2
         is met It is not shown Mr Sama  and  Miss  Griffin  are  unable  to
         resettle in Sierra Leone or obtain work to support themselves  even
         if UK based qualifications are not recognised in Sierra  Leone.  It
         has not been shown Ms Griffin is unable to retrain  to  pursue  her
         chosen profession.

     45. The requirement is for  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
         those referred to in EX.2 which have not been proved  to  exist  on
         the facts.  It has not been shown to be unduly harsh  for  Mr  Sama
         and Ms Griffin to continue their relationship in Sierra Leonne. The
         fact she is saying she will not follow him is a matter for her  but
         does not change this assessment.

     46. In relation to whether it would be unduly harsh for Ms  Griffin  to
         remain in the UK without Mr Sama,  it  has  not  been  proved  this
         requirement can be satisfied.  There is  insufficient  evidence  to
         show this is the case. Ms Griffin herself has also stated she  will
         chose to remain, putting  career  choice  above  the  relationship,
         indicating she does not consider this an unduly harsh option.

     47. Ms Sama has failed to discharge the burden of  proof  upon  him  to
         show he is entitled to succeed by reference to paragraph 399.

     48. Paragraph 399A applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if (a)
         the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his
         life; and (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
         and  (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
         integration into  the  country  to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
         deported.

     49. Mr Sama entered the United Kingdom aged 10 on 31 July 1998 and  has
         lived here for most of his life. Mr Sama is integrated into life in
         the UK. Mr Sama claimed to have lost his mother and  three  sibling
         in Sierra Leone and  to  have  no  support  network  there.  It  is
         reasonable to conclude that the knowledge Mr Sama has  of  life  in
         Sierra Leone is limited and reintegration will  not  be  easy,  but
         that is not the test. It is  not  significant  obstacles  but  very
         significant obstacles that need to be established on the  evidence.
         It is accepted  that  until  established  Mr  Sama  may  experience
         hardship but he is an intelligent individual, educated in  the  UK,
         with experience of employment. It has not been shown he  is  unable
         to work or obtain accommodation. Despite  claiming  she  would  not
         come to Sierra Leonne with Mr Sama, Ms Griffin did state she  would
         support him financially or in any other way.  His  father  is  from
         Sierra Leonne.  It has not been proved that Ms Sama will be without
         support which, in financial terms,  may  assist  him  in  obtaining
         accommodation and  meeting  his  basis  needs.  Even  without  such
         support Mr Sama has not shown that very significant obstacles exist
         to his reintegration. Mr Sama has failed to show he is entitled  to
         succeed under the Immigration  Rules.  Accordingly  the  appeal  is
         dismissed.

   Decision

     50. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
         follows. This appeal is dismissed.

     51. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.  I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




    Signed.......................................................
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


    Dated the 25 November 2015
