
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01027/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Harrison Q.C. instructed by Wilson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal concerns HA, a Nigerian citizen born 25 December  1977,
         who successfully appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
         decision of the Secretary of State dated 22 May  2014  refusing  to
         revoke a Deportation Order. In this appeal we shall  use  the  same
         terminology as used by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  refer  to
         HA as the appellant.

      2. By decision dated 23 January 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer
         held that the appellant had  established  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a Convention reason and that his return to  Nigeria
         would constitute a breach  of  Article  3  of  the  Convention.  He
         therefore allowed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  and  on
         human rights grounds.

      3. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  the
         decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  a  single  ground,
         namely a failure to give reasons,  or  adequate  reasons,  for  his
         findings on material matters.

    Background

      4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2005  on  a
         visitor's visa but overstayed. In March 2009 he  was  convicted  at
         Newcastle Crown Court of an  offence  of  being  concerned  in  the
         supplying of cannabis and was subsequently sentenced to a period of
         14 months imprisonment.

      5. Three days before his conviction the appellant was interviewed  and
         served with a Notice of Liability to Remove as an  illegal  entrant
         and on 8 April 2009 he claimed asylum and a screening interview was
         conducted. In light  of  further  developments  it  was  not  until
         October 2010 that he was finally interviewed for  the  purposes  of
         his asylum claim.

      6. The appellant was served with a Notice of Liability  for  Automatic
         Deportation in July 2009 and on 27 August 2009, after  his  release
         from prison, he entered immigration detention. Whilst in  detention
         he  developed  a  serious  psychotic  mental  illness,   eventually
         diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenia.  He  required  hospitalisation
         for a time but, after his condition was stabilised, he was returned
         to an Immigration Removal Centre. In December 2010 he was  released
         from detention.

      7. In February 2011 judicial review proceedings were commenced  which,
         in due course, established that the appellant had been  subject  to
         inhumane and degrading treatment in breach  of  Article  3  of  the
         Convention during his detention on account of the deterioration  in
         his mental state. The appellant also raised proceedings before  the
         First-tier Tribunal  but  this  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds  by  a  decision
         dated 30 November 2011. Around  that  same  time  he  travelled  to
         Switzerland using a friend's identity card, and the name  Ken  Eze,
         where he came to make an asylum claim on a significantly  different
         factual basis from that previously made in the United Kingdom.

      8. In May 2012 the appellant  was  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom,
         detained and then subsequently released again on bail.  By  further
         decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  29  May  2013,  the
         appellant's appeal  against  the  30  November  2011  decision  was
         allowed,  to  the  extent  that  it  was   remitted   for   further
         consideration on the basis of  the  availability  of  new  evidence
         which had not been before the previous Tribunal. The  Secretary  of
         State therefore reconsidered the appellant's appeal on  asylum  and
         human rights grounds and refused it by letter dated  22  May  2014,
         which decision the appellant then successfully appealed before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

    First-tier Tribunal Hearing.

      9.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   uncontested
         psychiatric evidence was led establishing that the appellant lacked
         the capacity  to  conduct  the  proceedings  as  a  consequence  of
         paranoid schizophrenia and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. At  that
         time he  was  under  the  care  and  supervision  of  a  consultant
         psychiatrist and a care coordinator at a  community  mental  health
         facility in Haringey. He did not attend the hearing.

     10. In the circumstances the First-tier Tribunal Judge took account  of
         the various witness statements which the appellant had provided  in
         the earlier proceedings which were to the effect that:

          i. In November 2004 his father,  mother  and  siblings  were  all
             killed in an incident of religious unrest in his village;

         ii. With the exception of his uncle, who was  Muslim,  his  family
             were all Christian and he believed that  his  uncle  had  been
             responsible for their deaths;

        iii. The police were informed but nothing was done;

         iv. He was threatened by his uncle to become a Muslim or the  same
             thing would happen to him;

          v. The following month he was kidnapped at gunpoint and  tortured
             by a group of people who wanted him to convert to Islam;

         vi. He then went into hiding with an aunt who lived  in  Abuja  in
             the north of the country before leaving Nigeria with the  help
             of that aunt around three months later.

     11. Oral evidence was  led  from  Dr  Wilhelm  Skogstad,  a  consultant
         psychiatrist, who had provided a number of medical reports  on  the
         health of the appellant. His evidence was to the following effect:

          i. The appellant continues  and  will  continue  to  suffer  from
             paranoid schizophrenia, which is a severe and enduring  mental
             illness, leaving  him  highly  vulnerable  to  further  severe
             psychotic states;

         ii. On World Health  Organisation  information  it  was  extremely
             unlikely that  he  would  receive  necessary  and  appropriate
             treatment in Nigeria;

        iii. The appellant's condition had deteriorated very  significantly
             since August 2013 and he would be  unable  to  cope  with  the
             massive change  in  his  circumstances  and  environment  that
             removal to Nigeria would bring about and this  would  cause  a
             severe relapse in his condition.

     12. Medical evidence was also led in the  form  of  a  report  from  Dr
         Arnold dated 5 May 2013, in which he noted that the  appellant  was
         found to be suffering from thirty-eight scars, many  of  which  had
         the  appearance  of  being  inflicted  through   torture   by   the
         application of lit cigarettes. His report noted that  his  physical
         examination of the appellant  led  him  to  conclude  that  it  was
         overwhelmingly probable that the appellant  had  been  tortured  in
         Nigeria in some or all of the ways he described, namely being  tied
         up, beaten, kicked, burned with cigarettes and cut with a blade.

     13. Evidence was also led in the form of a Country Expert  report  from
         Professor Aguilar of St Andrews University, which was, on the basis
         of the detailed information contained  within  it,  to  the  effect
         that:

          i. The appellant's account was consistent  with  the  nature  and
             extent of religious violence and tensions in Nigeria;

         ii. The appellant would be at a very high risk of Muslim  violence
             at the hands of Islamic extremists in the state of Kaduna;

        iii. The Nigerian police force is not capable of protecting people;

         iv. The  possibility  of  relocation  for  a  Christian  resisting
             conversion to Islam is very difficult because of  the  attacks
             by  Muslim  fundamentalist  groups  on  Christians  throughout
             Nigeria and the police would be likely to respond to  pressure
             from the  appellant's  uncle  and  his  Muslim  associates  to
             disclose his presence at any other part of the country;

          v. The appellant would be unlikely to get access to any inpatient
             medical care if his condition deteriorated;

         vi. Because  of  the  close  cultural  connection  between  mental
             illness and witchcraft  in  Nigeria  the  appellant  would  be
             socially rejected resulting in  the  possibility  of  violence
             against him from other Nigerians.

     14. It is plain from the terms of  his  decision  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge was  very  careful  to  take  full  account  of  the
         findings of fact made in the previous decision  dated  30  November
         2011. He appreciated that some of those  were  adverse  credibility
         findings and that the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds had been
         dismissed.  However,  as  he  noted,  there  had  been  substantial
         developments since that previous hearing. In the  first  place  the
         Secretary of State now made the  significant  concession  that  the
         appellant had been subjected to ill treatment  in  Nigeria  in  the
         past. In addition, there was now considerably more medical evidence
         available concerning the appellant's condition. There was also  the
         expert report and the report from Dr Arnold himself, which had  led
         to the  concession  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  In  these
         circumstances, as he explained in paragraph 38 of his decision, the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that he would not be deviating
         from the principles set  out  in  the  decision  in  Devaseelan  by
         considering the appellant's  credibility  again  in  light  of  the
         evidence which he had heard.

     15. Having decided to deal with the matter in this fashion, the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  given  a
         consistent account over time of the facts at the core of his  case.
         He found that the appellant's account of religious persecution  and
         torture was consistent  with  the  report  prepared  by  Dr  Arnold
         documenting the injuries to his  body  and  with  the  evidence  of
         Professor Aguilar as set out in his country  report.  He  proceeded
         upon the presumption that in light of the evidence as to  past  ill
         treatment (and the concession thereon) there was a future  risk  of
         further persecution. He accepted the evidence before him concerning
         the high rate of communal religious violence in the state of Kaduna
         and the evidence that the appellant would be at risk  if  returning
         to his home area as a Christian.

     16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  the  appellant's  evidence
         that the police  did  nothing  when  he  and  his  family  reported
         difficulties with his uncle in the past and the  evidence  that  no
         action was taken when the deaths of his family  were  reported.  He
         also  accepted  the  expert  evidence  to  the  effect   that   the
         authorities would be unable  to  afford  the  appellant  sufficient
         protection and concluded  that  no  area  would  be  safe  for  the
         appellant to return to as a Christian.

     17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a  number  of  findings  as  a
         consequence  of  the  evidence  as  to  the   appellant's   medical
         condition. He concluded that even a threat of  harm  and  the  more
         generalised threat of religious conflict would cause the  appellant
         serious harm. He did so because of the appellant's vulnerability to
         further extreme relapse, and that his delusional conduct, which was
         at times linked with his religious beliefs, would increase the risk
         of him being  exposed  to  religious  hostility  and  violence.  He
         concluded that even if internal flight might be possible to an area
         in which Christians were in the majority, it would be unduly  harsh
         to expect the  appellant  to  do  so  given  the  likelihood  of  a
         catastrophic deterioration in his mental health which would  result
         as a consequence of such a change to his environment.

     18. Lastly in relation to the appellant's  medical  circumstances,  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that the level of vulnerability
         to which the appellant was exposed as  consequence  of  his  severe
         medical condition was such that even if he had not  been  satisfied
         in regard to his credibility he would still have allowed the appeal
         under Article 3 of the Convention. He arrived at this view  on  the
         basis of the evidence as to  the  difficulty  which  the  appellant
         would have in obtaining relevant medical treatment and the evidence
         concerning the stress which he would be exposed to in returning  to
         Nigeria and the evidence of the risk of  a  relapse,  resulting  in
         serious danger to his health.

     19. In light of the evidence which he accepted the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge upheld the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and on  human
         rights grounds.




    The Appeal From The First-tier Tribunal Judge's Decision.

     20. The single ground of appeal on which the  Secretary  of  State  was
         given permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is:  "Failing  to
         give  reasons,  or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on   material
         matters." In the application for  leave  to  appeal  five  separate
         points are itemised in support of that ground. The first point is a
         general contention that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
         provide adequate reasons for his decision that the appellant  would
         be at risk upon return to Nigeria and that  his  Article  3  rights
         would be breached because of being at substantial risk of suffering
         relapse which would seriously endanger his health. The second point
         is predicated upon an absence in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
         decision of any  reference  to  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  in
         Switzerland, or any reference to him travelling there at all. It is
         contended that the making of an asylum claim on a  different  basis
         in Switzerland ought to have cast doubt upon the credibility of the
         claim made in the United Kingdom and that his  failure  to  explain
         the weight given to this factor resulted in the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge's findings being flawed. The third point concerns the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge's decision on adequacy of protection. It argues
         that insufficient, if any, weight was  given  to  the  respondent's
         evidence as to availability of protection, arguing that  the  judge
         gave  undue  weight  to  the  report  from  Professor  Aguilar  and
         asserting that he failed to address  the  possibility  of  internal
         flight. The fourth point argues that there was no evidence  of  the
         appellant ever having sought assistance from the police in  Nigeria
         and extends the earlier argument on  adequacy  of  protection.  The
         fifth point concerns the findings in relation to medical  care  and
         asserts a lack of reasoning by the judge  in  his  finding  on  the
         availability of appropriate medical care in Nigeria.

     21. It seems clear from this summary that, despite the way in which the
         Secretary of State's single ground is headed, the argument in  fact
         goes beyond mere adequacy of reasons and extends to assertions that
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider  certain  evidence
         at all or made decisions in the absence of any evidence  and  thus,
         in those ways, separately erred in law.

    The Hearing Before The Upper Tribunal

     22. In support of the appeal Mr Tarlow took us through the five  points
         mentioned above and expanded upon  them  by  emphasising  that  the
         evidence specified in the Secretary of State's decision  letter  of
         22 May 2014 demonstrated that there was a functioning police  force
         in Nigeria. The material in that same letter  also  made  it  plain
         that, whatever  deficiencies  there  might  be,  there  was  "some"
         medical care available in that country. Mr  Tarlow  criticised  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge for relying on  the  report  prepared  by
         Professor Aguilar on the premise that he had based his  assessments
         on the  account  given  to  him  by  the  appellant  and  upon  the
         submission that there was only scant  consideration  given  to  the
         question of internal relocation.

     23. On behalf of the appellant Ms Harrison commenced her submissions by
         drawing our attention to paragraph 13 of  the  appellant's  written
         response submitted in terms  of  Rule  24  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules. She explained that the content of  that  paragraph
         was included in light of the second point identified in the  ground
         of appeal concerning the appellant's trip to Switzerland. The terms
         of paragraph 13 are as follows:

             "The  FFT  gave  the  HOPO  at  her  request  time   to   seek
             instructions on what  points  in  the  appeal  she  wished  to
             positively advance in light of all of the evidence produced by
             HA. The SSHD made a decision  and  took  no  issue  with  HA's
             credibility and account of past events, placed no reliance  on
             the events in Switzerland, made no submissions on  this  issue
             in the context of either the asylum  and  (sic)  human  rights
             claim."

     24. In these circumstances Ms Harrison submitted that it was unfair and
         inappropriate of the Secretary of State  now  to  characterise  any
         absence  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision   of   an
         assessment  of  the  appellant's   credibility   based   upon   the
         circumstances of his trip to Switzerland as an  error  of  law.  No
         such assessment was undertaken but this is explained  by  the  fact
         that  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative   took   specific
         instructions on the issue and decided that nothing would be made of
         it.

     25. In relation to the remaining points made in support of  the  appeal
         Ms Harrison's submissions, in summary,  were  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge had dealt well with the evidence  presented  to  him
         and had set out his conclusions  in  a  cogent  and  well  modelled
         fashion. She submitted that the criticisms of  Professor  Aguilar's
         report were misconceived and  the  contention  that  there  was  no
         evidence  of  the  appellant  seeking  assistance  was  wrong.  She
         submitted that Professor Aguilar had provided evidence  on  absence
         of protection, which was consistent with the  information  provided
         by the Secretary of State, and emphasised that  the  concern  which
         arose out of the medical evidence was not just the availability  of
         medication but an issue about environment.

    Discussion

     26. As mentioned above, it is correct to observe  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  makes  no  mention  of  the  appellant's  trip  to
         Switzerland in 2011, nor of the asylum claim which he  made  there.
         The information available to us discloses that the claim was indeed
         made on a completely different factual basis to that  made  in  the
         United Kingdom. It might be described as a rather grandiose account
         in which the appellant apparently sought to pass himself off as the
         son of a very important and wealthy  individual,  who  had  been  a
         friend of the Nigerian president. By this  stage,  of  course,  the
         appellant  had  been   diagnosed   as   suffering   from   paranoid
         schizophrenia, had been in receipt of compulsory care and  required
         to take constant medication to keep his symptoms under control.  It
         is obvious that there must be an explanation for the absence of any
         reference to the Switzerland episode in the  decision,  but  it  is
         worthy of note that there is no record of  any  submissions  having
         been made on the Secretary of State's behalf on this matter either.
         It seems to us  that  the  most  obvious  explanation  is  the  one
         provided by Ms Harrison. We should observe that on being  asked  to
         provide a response, Mr Tarlow explained that he did not  know  what
         instructions had been taken by the presenting officer at the First-
         tier Tribunal, nor whether any decision had been made to abandon an
         attack on the credibility of the appellant's claim based  upon  the
         circumstances of his trip to Switzerland. His position was that the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge ought to have dealt with the point, given
         that it was relied upon in the decision letter of 22 May 2014, even
         if it was just to the extent of recording that  it  was  no  longer
         relied upon. As Ms Harrison observed, the Secretary  of  State  had
         been given intimation of the appellant's Rule 24 Response in  March
         of this year and we agree with her  that  it  is  simply  not  good
         enough for the appeal to the Upper Tribunal to commence in November
         with no enquiry ever having been made as to  the  accuracy  of  the
         information provided in that Response concerning the decisions made
         at the previous hearing.

     27. It might  have  been  better  had  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         recorded in his decision that the Secretary of State was placing no
         reliance on the events in Switzerland.  That  would  have  had  the
         benefit of making the circumstances plain to those who might become
         involved at a  subsequent  stage.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         cannot though be said to have made an error of law, as is argued in
         point two of the ground of appeal, in failing to  take  account  of
         events which were expressly discounted before him. We are  entirely
         satisfied that we should proceed upon the basis that this  is  what
         occurred  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge,   given   the
         explanation provided by Ms Harrison who was present  and  conducted
         those proceedings. We  therefore  see  no  merit  in  the  argument
         advanced under point two in the ground of appeal.  Furthermore,  it
         is  difficult  to  see  the  logic  of  the  underlying  contention
         specified in this second point given the concession in the  22  May
         decision letter that the appellant was likely to have suffered  ill
         treatment in Nigeria and  the  evidence  which  patently  supported
         this.

     28. Once the events in Switzerland are removed from consideration it is
         perfectly plain why the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that
         the appellant would be at  risk  upon  return  to  Nigeria.  As  he
         explains in paragraphs 39 - 44 of his  decision,  he  accepted  the
         appellant's account of the fate which befell  his  family  and  his
         account of the subsequent torture to which  he  was  subjected.  He
         noted that his account was supported by  medical  evidence  and  by
         Professor Aguilar, who commented in his report at paragraph 9  that
         the appellant's account was consistent with his  own  knowledge  of
         the nature  and  extent  of  religious  violence  and  tensions  in
         Nigeria, and at paragraph  10  that  the  appellant's  account  was
         consistent with other contemporary human rights reports,  which  he
         specified. The Judge also took account of the passages in Professor
         Aguilar's report in which he drew attention to the evidence to  the
         effect that violence by extremist  Muslims  against  the  Christian
         community  has  substantially  increased  in   recent   years   and
         demonstrating a high rate of religious violence in Kaduna. None  of
         this evidence was disputed and, as the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         recorded at paragraph 42 of his decision, the Secretary of  State's
         concession that the appellant had been subject to ill treatment  in
         the past led to a presumption of future risk based  upon  what  had
         been said in the case of Karanakaran.

     29. The evidence as to the appellant's mental health  is  described  by
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 17 - 28 of his decision.
         We have summarised, the import of it at paragraph  9  above.  There
         was no competing evidence as  to  the  extent  of  the  appellant's
         condition. As Ms  Harrison  reminded  us,  the  evidence  which  Dr
         Skogstad gave demonstrated that the appellant's  mental  state  had
         deteriorated very significantly over the last  two  years  and  the
         renewed   threat   of   deportation   had   contributed   to   this
         deterioration. It seems obvious that the appellant is  very  unwell
         but it is important to appreciate that the risk of  severe  relapse
         and  serious  endangerment  to  the  appellant's  health  was   not
         predicated only on a concern about the availability of  medication.
         As Ms Harrison submitted, an important aspect of the evidence which
         Dr Skogstad provided concerned the appellant's  inability  to  cope
         with any form of change and the risk of severe breakdown which  was
         associated with a change in his environment. It was  this  evidence
         which persuaded the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  conclude,  as  he
         explains in paragraph 45 of  his  decision,  that  the  appellant's
         severe psychiatric state meant that even the threat of harm and the
         more generalised threat  of  religious  conflict  would  cause  him
         serious harm as he would be vulnerable to further  extreme  relapse
         in such an environment. We therefore  find  that  in  the  detailed
         references to the evidence led before  him,  which  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge sets out in his decision, and in paragraphs 39 to 45
         where he explains his conclusions on that evidence, the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge has provided  perfectly  adequate  reasons  for  his
         decision that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  upon  return  to
         Nigeria. We therefore see no merit in the argument  advanced  under
         the first part of point one of the ground of appeal.

     30. We consider that the criticisms which were made of the  quality  of
         Professor Aguilar's evidence were misconceived. The submission  set
         out in the written grounds, and repeated before us,  was  that  the
         Professor's report was based on the appellant's own evidence, which
         in turn was  not  credible.  At  paragraph  9  of  his  report  the
         Professor noted: "I find his account of events  in  Nigeria  to  be
         entirely plausible and consistent with my knowledge of  the  nature
         and extent of religious violence and tensions in Nigeria." He  then
         goes on to explain in detail the circumstances of religious tension
         and violence as he knows them to be from his experience  and  draws
         upon  contemporary  accounts   and   reports   from   international
         organisations. There is  no  sense  in  which  Professor  Aguilar's
         report can be criticised in the manner suggested. He is an  eminent
         expert who provided an independent  report  expressed  in  familiar
         fashion. We are satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
         entitled to accept and act upon this evidence to the  extent  which
         he did.

     31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  explains  in  paragraph  46  of  his
         decision that he accepted  the  evidence  which  Professor  Aguilar
         provided concerning the inability of the Nigerian police to provide
         appropriate levels of protection. The  Professor  dealt  with  this
         issue at paragraphs 44 to 51 of his own report where  he  explained
         the concerns he had and quoted from  a  number  of  recent  reports
         prepared by Amnesty International. Whilst  the  written  ground  of
         appeal included the contention that insufficient  weight  had  been
         given to the Secretary of State's evidence as  to  availability  of
         protection, as set out in the decision letter of 22  May  2014,  no
         submissions were made as to how  this  evidence  differed  from  or
         contradicted that of Professor Aguilar. Having re-read her decision
         letter we do not consider that the information relied upon  by  the
         Secretary of State was to any material extent  different  from  the
         evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  Professor
         Aguilar's report. We cannot see any valid criticism to be  levelled
         against the First-tier tribunal Judge in accepting and relying upon
         his evidence. Furthermore, as is set out at  paragraph  46  of  the
         decision, the appellant's evidence to the effect that no action had
         been taken by the police following the report by him of  the  death
         of his family members was accepted. The  assertion  in  the  fourth
         point of the ground of appeal that the appellant never  claimed  to
         have sought assistance from any police station appears to be simply
         incorrect. We therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
         provided appropriate and  sufficient  reasons  for  his  conclusion
         concerning adequacy of protection and that there was ample evidence
         before him entitling him to reach the view which he did.

     32. A further aspect of the complaint  levelled  against  the  evidence
         provided by Professor  Aguilar  in  the  third  point  is  that  he
         concerned himself only with the circumstances in Kaduna  state  and
         failed to consider whether the appellant may be  able  to  relocate
         elsewhere. Again this is simply  incorrect.  Paragraph  53  of  the
         Professor's report is headed "Relocation".  As  one  would  expect,
         this is then the  subject  which  is  addressed  in  this  and  the
         following three paragraphs. Professor Aguilar  makes  it  plain  in
         this section of his report that the possibility of relocation for a
         Christian resisting conversion  to  Islam  is  very  difficult  and
         explains why that is so. He also draws attention to the  fact  that
         Nigerian society operates through a system of kinship  and  family-
         based networks which are able to locate individuals who  move  from
         their home area. Such networks, he explained, can  also  bribe  the
         police to help them locate a family member. Professor Aguilar draws
         attention to the important difference to be understood between  the
         environment in Nigeria and that  found  in  Western  locations.  He
         emphasised that even  in  the  largest  cities  strangers  are  not
         welcome and it was common for the local residents to work  out  who
         any incomers were and where they were  from.  News  would  then  be
         passed and would travel quickly  concerning  the  circumstances  of
         such individuals.

     33. It was the evidence from these paragraphs  of  Professor  Aguilar's
         report which the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted and relied upon
         in making the findings on internal relocation which he set  out  at
         paragraph 47 of his decision. In doing so he  also  considered  and
         gave full weight to the Country of Origin Information Report relied
         upon by the Secretary of State. It is therefore plain, in our view,
         that  there  was  compelling  information  before  the   First-tier
         Tribunal Judge on this matter which he was entitled  to  rely  upon
         and his reasons for doing so cannot be criticised. It  should  also
         be borne in mind that, as he  explained  in  paragraph  49  of  his
         decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   also   accepted   the
         unchallenged   evidence   of   Doctor   Skogstad   concerning   the
         catastrophic effect on the appellant's health  which  would  likely
         follow  if  there  was  to  be  any  significant  change   to   his
         environment. On the basis of this evidence the judge concluded that
         it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to  engage  in
         internal flight, even if that was possible. This  finding  was  not
         challenged in the Secretary of State's ground of  appeal.  For  the
         reasons set out in this and the preceding three paragraphs  we  are
         satisfied that there is no merit in the argument advanced under the
         third and fourth points of the ground of appeal.

     34. The final aspect of the ground of appeal is addressed in  both  the
         first and the fifth points. It concerns the extent of the  risk  to
         the appellant's health should he be returned  to  Nigeria  and  the
         availability of medical treatment in  that  country.  The  argument
         seems to be in two parts. First, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
         has failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
         appellant's Article 3 rights would be breached if  he  were  to  be
         returned to Nigeria. Secondly, it appears  to  be  argued  that  no
         regard was had to the information concerning  the  availability  of
         medical treatment referred to in the Secretary of State's  decision
         letter, or at least that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  failed
         to provide adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  available
         treatment would not be sufficient.

     35. The import of the unchallenged evidence concerning the  appellant's
         mental health is  mentioned  in  paragraph  9  above  and  we  have
         referred to it a number of times. The Secretary of State  proceeded
         upon the assessment of the appellant's condition as it was in  2013
         (see  para  67  of  the  decision  letter).   His   condition   has
         deteriorated since then though and, as is explained in paragraph  9
         of this decision, by the date of the hearing  in  January  2015  he
         lacked  the  capacity  to  participate.  The  evidence  as  to  the
         appellant's current mental health condition could not  be  clearer.
         In his reports, and in oral evidence, Dr Skogstad gave unchallenged
         evidence as to the impact of removal.  He  explained  that  factors
         such  as  the  state  of  religious  tensions  within  Nigeria  and
         attitudes towards mental  health  would  impact  adversely  on  the
         appellant's condition, and that subjective factors,  including  the
         way in which  the  appellant  experienced  threats,  would  have  a
         similarly adverse impact. As he explained in paragraph 4.7.6 of his
         report, Dr Skogstad was concerned that the appellant's  own  terror
         of being killed by his  Muslim  uncle  and  other  extremists  was,
         whether or not objectively likely to happen, sufficient to cause  a
         deterioration in his mental condition  resulting  in  relapse  into
         severe psychotic state.  Moreover,  in  his  evidence  Dr  Skogstad
         emphasised  the  importance  of  stability   in   the   appellant's
         circumstances as a factor which enables  his  condition  to  remain
         managed. He explained the need for an environment  in  which  there
         was an absence of threat, a level of support from  family,  friends
         or professionals and a stable life situation. The general import of
         Dr Skogstad's evidence is noted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in
         paragraph 17 - 28 of his decision. At paragraph 21 of his  decision
         he notes Dr Skogstad's evidence that, in his opinion,  any  attempt
         at forced removal would lead to a very serious mental breakdown for
         the appellant, who would be unable to cope with the change  in  his
         circumstances and environment that removal to Nigeria  would  bring
         about.

     36. It is correct  that  information  concerning  the  availability  of
         mental health treatment was provided by the Secretary of  State  in
         her decision letter, which included information to suggest that the
         medication currently prescribed to the appellant is available.  The
         information which she provided also included evidence to the effect
         that shortages of pharmaceutical and medical supplies were endemic,
         that the health system was ranked 187  out  of  191  nations,  that
         there is limited availability of mental health  services  and  that
         only around 10% of those  with  severe  mental  illnesses  such  as
         schizophrenia received treatment.

     37. In his  report  Dr  Skogstad  also  dealt  with  this  subject.  At
         paragraph 1.2. he listed the information which he had taken account
         of which included the World Health Organisation Mental Health Atlas
         2011, the World Health Organisation Report on Mental Health  System
         in Nigeria 2006, the UK Border Agency Country of Origin Information
         Report on Nigeria dated 2012 and the contents of a survey conducted
         in a Nigerian teaching hospital concerning  attitudes  towards  the
         mentally ill published in the South African Journal  of  Psychiatry
         in 2010. At paragraph 4.7.2 of his report, Dr Skogstad quoted  from
         the World Health Organisation Mental Health  Atlas  to  the  effect
         that there is hardly any provision for the mentally ill in  Nigeria
         and drew attention to the highly stigmatising attitudes referred to
         in  the  article  published  in  the  South  African   Journal   of
         Psychiatry. He also made reference  to  the  content  of  Professor
         Aguilar's report, who also drew attention to the lack of  provision
         for treating mental health conditions. In light of the  information
         available to him Dr Skogstad expressed the view at paragraph  4.7.3
         of his report that it is  extremely  unlikely  that  the  appellant
         would receive necessary and appropriate treatment  for  his  severe
         and enduring illness in Nigeria with the result that his  condition
         would deteriorate very  rapidly.  In  the  following  paragraph  he
         expressed the view that the  combination  of  the  lack  of  mental
         health services and professionals even partially trained in  mental
         health issues, taken  along  with  highly  stigmatising  attitudes,
         meant that any response  to  a  deterioration  in  the  appellant's
         condition would be highly inappropriate.

     38. The evidence concerning the appellant's mental health required  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge to weigh more than just the  question  of
         whether the medication which he currently receives is available  in
         Nigeria. In our view it is obvious  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge gave careful consideration to all of the evidence  concerning
         the appellant's mental condition and the impact on that  of  change
         in his environment. At paragraph 45 of his decision he explains  he
         concluded that the threat of further  violence  and  a  significant
         change in his environment would each lead to a deterioration in the
         appellant's mental health. At paragraph 52 he explains that such  a
         deterioration  as  was  envisaged  would  seriously  endanger   the
         appellant's health. These conclusions were validly made in light of
         the medical evidence led.

     39. In our view therefore it is  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge has given due weight  to  the  totality  of  the  information
         available to him concerning  the  appellant's  mental  health,  the
         impact on his health of return to Nigeria and the extent  to  which
         his condition could be managed in that country. In paragraph 52  of
         his decision he explains that in allowing the appeal under  Article
         3 on the basis of the appellant's medical condition he took account
         of the decisions in Bensaid v The United Kingdom [2001] 3  EHRR  10
         and Aswat v The United Kingdom (Application no. 17299/12).  We  can
         detect no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  approach
         and it is not contended in the ground of appeal that  the  evidence
         led did not permit him to reach the decision which he  arrived  at.
         In  these  circumstances  we  are  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge has given adequate reasons  for  concluding  that  a
         return to Nigeria would seriously endanger the  appellant's  health
         and thus breach his rights in terms of Article 3 of the Convention.
         Equally, he has adequately dealt with the evidence  concerning  the
         availability of medical treatment in Nigeria and  given  sufficient
         reasons for the weight which he attached to that evidence.  We  are
         therefore satisfied that there is no merit in the argument advanced
         under the second part of the first point or in the fifth  point  of
         the ground of appeal.

    Conclusion

     40. For the reasons which we have given above we are satisfied that the
         making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law and the decision dated  23
         January 2015 shall stand.

    Notice of Decision

     41. The appeal is dismissed.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed: Alan D. Turnbull


    Date: 24/11/2015
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal
