


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01918/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                    Decision and Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                              |
|On 6 October 2015                     |                    On 22 October 2015   |
|                                      |                                         |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                          HASSAN MOHAMMED SULEIMAN
                                     aka
                                MARIO ALTMAN
                                     aka
                               Khalid Shehadi
                                     aka
                            Hamza M Y Shamallakh

                            (nO anonymity ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Malik instructed by Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant says he was  born  the  son  of  an  UNWRA  refugee,  in  a
   Lebanese refugee camp, in 1979.  He appeals with permission  against  the
   decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana,   who   dismissed   the
   appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  to  deport  him  to
   Lebanon, which on the appellant's account is one of his two countries  of
   former habitual residence,  the  other  being  the  Palestinian  Occupied
   Territories.

Appellant's history

2. The appellant's account is that his parents, originally from Gaza in  the
   Occupied Territories, fled to Lebanon in 1967 because  of  the  dangerous
   conflict in the region at the time. The family  lived  in  three  refugee
   camps in Lebanon over the next 18 years: first in  the  Bint  Jlal  camp,
   then in Rashidieh camp (which was destroyed by  Israeli  missiles  during
   the time when they lived there), and later in a camp in Sida.

3. When he was 7 years old, the  appellant  returned  with  his  parents  to
   Gaza, where the family remained until he was 15 (in 1994 or thereabouts).
    He went to school and made friends.   He  had  three  brothers  and  two
   sisters.

4. His father decided to take the family back to  Lebanon.  The  appellant's
   experience there was that first-generation UNWRA refugees who  had  moved
   to Lebanon directly in 1948 were better treated and had more rights  than
   his family. Two brothers are now in Brazil, albeit  without  status,  and
   the third lives in Abu Dhabi. His mother and one sister remain  in  Gaza:
   his father has died. The appellant continued studying in  Lebanon  for  a
   further two years (until  1996)  before  leaving  to  visit  two  of  his
   brothers in Brazil, who are living  there  without  status.   It  is  his
   understanding that Brazil has no asylum  system,  so  he  made  no  claim
   there.

5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 March 2001,  travelling
   on a French passport to which he was not  entitled.   He  claimed  asylum
   that day.  The asylum claim was  refused  the  next  day:  the  appellant
   appealed, but he did not attend the asylum hearing because he  could  not
   afford to pay his solicitors to represent him  and  he  could  not  speak
   English.  The appeal was dismissed in his absence.

6. Thereafter, the  appellant  worked  as  an  office  cleaner  and  kitchen
   porter, using as his identity document another passport to which  he  was
   not entitled.  He reported as  required  until  2007  when  his  employer
   became unhappy with the appellant's absences from work to report,  so  he
   stopped. He was living in shared accommodation.

7. The appellant has used a number of identities since coming to the  United
   Kingdom: he has presented as a Greek citizen (he could not read Greek); a
   Lebanese citizen; and he has used  two  Palestinian  identities,  one  in
   which he had worked, and one in which this appeal  proceeds.  The  latter
   name was known to the respondent, who treats him as Palestinian but seeks
   to remove him to Lebanon, his country of former habitual residence.

8. On 5 June 2008, the appellant was arrested by  the  police.   He  gave  a
   false name matching the false passport he used for his work (he also  has
   a bank account in that name).  He later gave the police what he now  says
   is his real name.

9. The police searched his home and found 8 forged passports, some with  the
   appellant's photograph, and about 50 credit and debit cards,  which  were
   not considered to be anything to do with the appellant.  They  also  took
   the appellant's original birth certificate.  The appellant was  sentenced
   to 2 years in prison for the forged passports.  He has not been permitted
   to work since then.  He is supported by his mosque, and by friends.

Respondent's position

10. On 12 December 2008 the appellant was served with  notice  of  liability
   to  automatic  deportation  pursuant  to  section  33  of  the   Borders,
   Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   He  completed  his  custodial
   sentence n 17 June 2009 and thereafter was in immigration detention.   On
   25 June 2009 he was served with  a  deportation  order,  certified  under
   section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  with  an
   out of country right of appeal only.  On 8 September 2009, the  applicant
   applied to return  to  Gaza  under  the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme.   A
   language analysis report on 17 October 2009 found that he spoke a variety
   of Arabic found amongst Palestinians in Lebanon and Galilee.

11. On 7 December 2009, the respondent wrote to the appellant  in  detention
   at IRC Oakington, stating that the Lebanese Embassy had refused to  issue
   him with an Emergency Travel Document and  that  an  interview  with  the
   Palestinian General Delegation would be arranged.

12. On 20 September 2011, the Secretary of State made  a  deportation  order
   against the appellant as a foreign criminal pursuant to section 33 of the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  She acknowledged that  he
   had an asylum claim pending. The appellant made further submissions on  5
   March 2010, 2 June 2010, 2 September 2010  and  8  March  2011.   He  was
   represented by McLee & Co, solicitors at this stage.

13. In her asylum refusal letter of 11 April 2012, the  respondent  set  out
   the complex legal position of Palestinians in Lebanon.   She  noted  that
   through his former  solicitors,  Pillai  Solicitors,  the  appellant  had
   submitted documents confirming his father's UNRWA registration number and
   that he was named on his father's registration card, and that  his  birth
   certificate confirmed  his  birth  in  Rashidieh  camp  in  Lebanon.   If
   returned, she considered that the appellant would be able to register and
   travel within Lebanon. He was not an undocumented Palestinian  and  would
   be able to register with the Lebanese Ministry of Interior's  Directorate
   of Political  and  Refugee  Affairs,  giving  him  the  right  to  travel
   internally within Lebanon and also as a Palestinian born in  Lebanon,  to
   work. The appellant appealed that decision.  The first  decision  of  the
   Immigration Judge (as he then was) is not before us and  was  not  before
   Judge Chana in the second decision hearing.

14. On 21 September 2011, Mr Naim Samara, Deputy  Head  of  Mission  at  the
   Palestinian Diplomatic  Mission  in  London,  wrote  to  the  appellant's
   representatives,  McLee  &  Co,  stating  that  Gaza  was  under  Israeli
   occupation and Israel had full control over its borders, including  entry
   of Palestinians.  Accordingly, the Diplomatic Mission had no authority to
   assist the appellant in returning to Gaza. That is not in terms a refusal
   to recognise him as Palestinian, but a refusal to offer travel assistance
   or documents to enable the appellant to return there, because  the  entry
   of Palestinians to the Occupied Territories is a matter for  the  Israeli
   authorities, not the Palestinian Diplomatic Mission.

15. On 2 October 2014, in a further refusal  letter,  the  respondent  noted
   that the appellant now claimed to be stateless.  At paragraphs  67-70  of
   her letter, she said this:

           "67.  You have stated that your client is not able to return  to
           Lebanon or Palestine and as such he is granted leave due to  him
           being stateless. The Lebanese  Embassy  have  rejected  the  ETD
           application made on behalf of your client as  they  believe  the
           subject to be Palestinian. ...

           69.   Therefore, your  client's  removal  is  dependent  on  the
           Palestinian General Delegation Office accepting him  as  one  of
           their citizens ...

           71.   However, it is not accepted that your client is stateless.
            Rather, it is believed that your client has failed to establish
           his nationality.   Your  client  has  not  had  his  citizenship
           revoked by the Palestinian Diplomatic Mission, rather  that  the
           Palestinian Diplomatic Mission has  yet  to  receive  supporting
           information to be satisfied that your client is  accepted  as  a
           national of Palestine.   As  such,  your  client  has  not  been
           rendered stateless, rather he has not  yet  conclusively  proved
           his nationality. ..."

   On 7 October 2014, the  respondent  refused  to  revoke  her  deportation
   order.  That is the decision against which the present appeal lies.

16. The appellant subsequently made a  formal  claim  to  be  recognised  as
   stateless under Part 14 of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended),
   inserted therein by HC1039 from 6 April  2013,  subject  to  savings  for
   applications made before that date. The definition  of  statelessness  in
   paragraph 401 of the Rules is 'a  person  who  is  not  considered  as  a
   national by any State under the operation of its law'.  The appellant has
   yet to receive from  the  respondent  a  decision  on  his  statelessness
   application.

Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

17. There was a decision by an Immigration Judge in 2003  which  is  not  on
   the file and which was not before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chana  when
   she considered the appeal in 2015.  It appears that  the  Judge  in  that
   decision, in the absence of the appellant and probably also of his  legal
   representatives, found his account to lack credibility.

18. Nevertheless, Judge Chana considered that she could deduce the  contents
   of that decision from excerpts in the  respondent's  refusal  letter  and
   treated the negative credibility finding and other matters  reflected  in
   the refusal letter as her Devaseelan starting point. She too  found  that
   the appellant was neither a truthful nor a credible witness.

19. At paragraphs 54-57, the Judge noted that the appellant  said  he  could
   not return to Lebanon because he did not  wish  to  use  false  passports
   again.  His parents had split up, with his father  choosing  to  live  in
   Lebanon and his mother, originally a Lebanese citizen,  living  in  Gaza.
   Judge Chana considered that the appellant was not stateless and that  she
   was not satisfied that he could not return to Lebanon or  that  he  would
   face persecution if he did so.

20. The Judge found that the appellant had continued to work  unlawfully  in
   the United Kingdom and that his Article 8 ECHR rights  did  not  outweigh
   the United Kingdom's right to control immigration.  She  found  that  the
   appellant had not made sufficient attempts on his own account  to  return
   to Palestine or Lebanon and that, like  other  Palestinian  refugees,  he
   could go to Jordan and either  live  there,  free  from  persecution,  or
   travel from there to Lebanon or Gaza.  It was unclear on what  basis  the
   Judge considered that the appellant would be  able  to  enter  Jordan  to
   attempt the onward journey to either of those countries.  The  respondent
   had not advanced Jordan as a country of either  nationality  or  habitual
   residence for this appellant, and that formed no part of the  appellant's
   case.

Permission to appeal

21. The appellant successfully sought permission to  appeal  that  decision.
   Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy  granted  permission  on  all  the  grounds
   advanced, but placed particular weight on the  Judge's  failure  to  take
   into account the refusal of both countries to admit him for  return,  and
   also her failure to take account of  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as it was arguable that there  would  be
   very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into  the
   country to which he was to be deported, in this case Lebanon.

22. That was the basis on which the appeal came before us.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. At the hearing today, there was a discussion in which the above  history
   of the various refusals and  appeals  was  established.   The  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge had not taken account of the established non-returnability
   of the appellant to Lebanon, the country to which the  respondent  sought
   to return him.  We also considered it to be legally erroneous to treat as
   a  Devaseelan  starting  point  the  credibility  finding  in  the   2003
   determination which was not before the Tribunal,  albeit  quoted  in  the
   refusal letter, and which followed a hearing at which the  appellant  had
   been neither present nor represented.  There  were  other  matters  which
   concerned us, but that was sufficient to establish a  material  error  of
   law in the First-tier Tribunal decision, without which there  can  be  no
   onward appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

24. The  Tribunal  considered,  and  the  parties'  representatives  at  the
   hearing agreed, that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot
   stand.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside. We remake the  decision  by
allowing the appeal to the extent that it remains before the respondent  for
a lawful decision as whether the appellant is stateless or whether there  is
a country or countries of which he is a national or was formerly  habitually
resident and in which  he  is  not  at  risk  of  being  persecuted  nor  of
treatment  entitling  him  to  humanitarian  protection  pursuant   to   the
Qualification Directive or of a breach of Article 3 ECHR.


Anonymity Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. There  has  been
no application for an anonymity order in these proceedings and  we  make  no
anonymity order.

Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |







