
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01678/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 March 2014                              |On 16th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN



                                   Between

                              MR ALUSINE KAMARA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Mustapha, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, HOPO

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtTJ  Tipping  and  Mrs  M
    Padfield  JP)  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against   the
    respondent's decision made on 8 August 2013 to deport him as a  foreign
    criminal as defined in Section 32(1) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tipping and Mrs M Hadfield JP.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 29  September  1987.
    He arrived in the UK on 23 October 1993, when he was 6 years  old.   He
    was brought to the UK by his half-sister who had  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK as it was claimed that his father and  sole  carer  in
    Sierra Leone had died.  He was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the UK on 30 August 1995.

3.   On 23 November 2011, the appellant  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of
    possession of a Class A drug (crack cocaine) with intent to supply  and
    sentenced to three and a half years' imprisonment.  In  his  sentencing
    remarks, the trial Judge noted that the amount of cocaine found on  the
    appellant was relatively small, but remarked that the courts regard the
    supply of Class A drugs as very serious.  The appellant had changed his
    plea to guilty only at the last moment, for which the trial  Judge  was
    able to reduce the sentence by only one eighth.  The trial Judge  noted
    that the appellant already had a conviction for a similar offence  and,
    at Southwark Crown Court in June 2008, had been leniently in the  trial
    Judge's view, sentenced to a community order which he had  subsequently
    breached.  The trial Judged noted that the appellant was not himself  a
    drug user but was simply concerned to make money.

4.    The  respondent  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision by UTJ Kopieczek on the basis that the Tribunal did
    not give adequate consideration to the public interest  in  deportation
    going  beyond  the  risk  of  re-offending,  as  expressed  in  various
    authorities.  There was reference to this aspect of the public interest
    in the determination but it is arguable  that  the  issue  should  have
    received more detailed consideration.  Furthermore it was arguable that
    the Tribunal's finding that the appellant's removal would amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with his  family  life  as  well  as  his
    private life disclosed an error of law due to the lack of  evidence  of
    family life.  The Upper Tribunal Judge did not rule out  grounds  which
    sought to re-argue factual matters.

.
5.   Ms Mustapha sought to argue that the Tribunal properly directed  itself
    to the public interest at paragraphs 17, 18, 24 and  29  where  it  can
    also be seen that the Tribunal had the public interest uppermost in its
    mind. The Tribunal did not have to repeat in mantra  fashion  what  the
    public interest was.     I  do  not  accept  Ms  Mustapha's  submission
    because whilst the Tribunal made references to the public  interest,  I
    find that they did not attach sufficient weight to the public  interest
    in the deportation of foreign criminals as emphasised by the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.   The  Tribunal  placed
    significant weight on the appellant's low risk  of  re-offending.   The
    Tribunal failed to consider and place weight on the assessment  in  the
    OASYs report that he was at medium risk of harm  to  the  public.  They
    rather placed more weight on the appellant's "bitter remorse" over  his
    offences and his regret over the damage that  they  have  inflicted  on
    what appeared to be a promising career in design.  The Tribunal  failed
    to have regard to the comment made by the Court of Appeal in DS (India)
    2009 EWCA Civ 544, that event if it could properly be said  that  there
    was no risk of re-offending the respondent would be entitled to say  in
    appropriate circumstances that the removal  of  an  offender  from  the
    country was in the public interest. There  was  no  discussion  by  the
    Tribunal about the seriousness of the offence and  the  need  to  deter
    others and to prevent serious crime generally and to uphold the  public
    abhorrence of such offending.

6.   The Tribunal had doubts as to the credibility  of  the  Footlocker  job
    offer.  Ms Mustapha said she explained to the  Tribunal  that  she  had
    spoken to the lady who made the offer and had asked  her  to  give  her
    something in writing and hence the email which confirmed the job offer.
                   She acknowledged that  this  evidence  was  not  in  the
    determination.  In any event I find that Ms Mustapha as Counsel for the
    appellant could not give evidence on his behalf.

7.    The  Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  matters  raised  on   the
    appellant's  behalf  as  constituting  exceptional  circumstances.   In
    finding that the appellant has no ties to Sierra  Leone  and  that  his
    mother would not be traceable now, the Tribunal failed to consider  his
    assertion at page 45 of the OASYs report that he is in contact with his
    mother.  Ms Mustapha said that she asked the appellant to explain  this
    statement at the hearing but it  appears  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
    record his explanation or make a finding on it.

8.   I find that the Tribunal construed the existence of family  members  in
    the UK as amounting to family life.  The appellant is now 26 years old.
     There was no evidence as to what sort of relationship he had with  his
    sister Memuna and other members of his family.  There was no finding by
    the panel as to whether the appellant's relationship  with  his  sister
    and other members of the family  constituted  family  life  within  the
    meaning of  Kugathas,  whether  there  was  a  dependency  between  the
    appellant and his sister and other family members which went beyond the
    normal emotional ties between adult members of the family.

9.   In light of these errors, I find that the  Tribunal's  decision  cannot
    stand.  I set it aside in order for it to be re-made.

Directions

The appeal is remitted to be reheard by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
than Judge Tipping and Mrs M Padfield JP, at Taylor House.

Time Estimate - 3 hours

No. of witnesses - to be notified by appellant's solicitors

No interpreter required

Any further documents the appellant wishes  to  rely  on  should  reach  the
Tribunal and the respondent 7 days before hearing.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
