

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/01206/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision signed:   20.04.2015        |
|on    20.04.2015                     |sent out:  22.04.2015                |


                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                         Mohd. Arshaar Dawood SILAR
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Rudolph Spurling  (counsel instructed by Raj Law)
For the respondent: Mr Sebastian Kandola


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Graham Perry), sitting at Hendon on 15 January, to   on
    Article 8 grounds a deportation appeal by a citizen of Mauritius,  born
    3 April 1994, and sentenced on 24 April 2013 to two years' detention in
    a  young  offenders'  institution  [YOI]  for  a  number  of  offences,
    including robbery.

 2. It is agreed that a re-hearing is required, mainly  because  the  judge
    allowed  the  Article  8  appeal  without  fully   considering   either
    paragraphs 399 - 399A of the Immigration Rules, or sections 117B  or  C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (inserted  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 ) at all. There was also a  mis-statement  of  the
    standard of proof at paragraph 39, setting it out as if  it  were  that
    appropriate to asylum/Article 3 cases; but this was not  a  case  where
    much depended on that.

 3. So far as the facts are concerned, it seems to me that the  judge  also
    decided the case on a basis which was wrong in the  light  of  his  own
    finding that the appellant's father had failed to show he was a  French
    citizen; the judge nevertheless went on to  deal  with  the  Article  8
    claim as if the appellant's whole family were entitled to go on  living
    here indefinitely. As the only basis for such a right was the French ID
    produced by his father, about whose authenticity the judge found  there
    were "quite specific" and reasonable doubts, this approach  was  in  my
    view wrong in law too.

 4. I have been told that there are judicial review proceedings pending  on
    the part of the appellant's mother; but there is no further information
    about that case, in which Mr Spurling has not so far  been  instructed.
    It would be a very good thing if the issue of  the  family's  right  to
    remain as EEA citizens or dependants could be decided before there is a
    re-hearing of this appellant's deportation appeal. I suggest that  both
    sides should keep the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  informed
    about what is  happening:  unless  there  are  clear  signs  that  this
    question is about to be resolved, then the Tribunal  should  have  this
    case listed for directions three months from now.


Home Office appeal
Fresh hearing before First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Perry)


                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



