
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01631/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 April 2014                               |On 8 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         JOAO NELIO RIBEIRO CATANHO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:  No legal representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of  a  panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer and Mr J H
    Eames, non-legal member), which allowed Mr Catanho's appeal against her
    decision to deport him.  For ease of reference, I shall throughout this
    determination refer to the Secretary of State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr Catanho, who was  the
    original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant, who was born on 8 March 1977,  is a citizen of  Portugal.
    As recorded by the panel at  paragraph  2  of  its  determination,  the
    claimant appears to have  claimed  to  have  arrived  in  this  country
    variously in 1994, 1996/7 or 1999.    Other than by virtue of  what  he
    says, there is no documentary (or indeed any other)  evidence  to  show
    when in fact he did arrive, other than it is clear that he was in  this
    country by 2008.

 3. The reason why it can be said  with  certainty  that  he  was  in  this
    country in 2008 is because on 3 June 2008 he committed  an  offence  of
    theft.  He was subsequently sentenced for that offence on 4  July  2008
    when he was given a twelve months conditional discharge.

 4. Thereafter, the claimant committed numerous offences.  On 10 March 2009
    he was sentenced at Kingston-upon-Thames Crown Court  for  robbery  and
    breach  of  his  previous  conditional  discharge,  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment.  Then on 9 April 2010, which must have been  within  only
    months after his release, he  was  sentenced  at  Hounslow  Magistrates
    Court for failing to surrender to custody at an appointed time.    Then
    three days later he was sentenced at that court for theft.

 5. On 4 November 2010  the  claimant  was  sentenced,  again  at  Hounslow
    Magistrates Court, on two counts of theft and again at that court on 12
    November 2010, he was sentenced for destroying  or  damaging  property.
    He was conditionally discharged for a year at that time.

 6. Then on 19 April 2011, again at  Hounslow  Magistrates  Court,  he  was
    fined for using disorderly behaviour  or  threatening/abusive/insulting
    words likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress and  on  16  August
    2011 he was sentenced at Uxbridge Magistrates' Court on two  counts  of
    theft.  Again, he was dealt with other than by  means  of  a  custodial
    sentence.

 7. On 25 August 2011, at Uxbridge Magistrates'  Court,  the  claimant  was
    sentenced to a suspended  term  of  imprisonment  of  twelve  weeks  in
    respect of two further counts of theft.  He was also required to do 100
    hours unpaid work and made subject to a curfew requirement.

 8. On 1 November 2011, the claimant was sentenced at Hounslow  Magistrates
    Court for failing to comply with the  community  requirements  of  that
    suspended  sentence  order,  and  was  sentenced   to   eleven   weeks'
    imprisonment, which is said to have been  the unserved remainder of the
    previous suspended sentence.

 9.  Then on 18 February 2012 the claimant was  sentenced  at  West  London
    Magistrates Court  to  two  further  counts  of  theft  (to  one  day's
    detention) and on 10  March  2012  he  was  sentenced  at  West  London
    Magistrates Court for yet another count of  theft,  for  which  he  was
    conditionally discharged for twelve months.

10. Then on 16 March  2012  the  claimant  was  sentenced  at  West  London
    Magistrates Court for theft, again to one day's detention.

11. On 13 April 2012 the claimant was sentenced at West London  Magistrates
    Court for using disorderly behaviour again and fined.  Then on 26  July
    2012 he was sentenced at West London Magistrates Court for  failing  to
    attend or remain for the duration of a follow up assessment following a
    test for Class A drugs and theft.  Again he was dealt with leniently by
    being sentenced to one day's detention only.

12. Then, on 8 January 2013, the claimant was sentenced at Isleworth  Crown
    Court to two months' imprisonment for destroying property.

13. Then, on 22 November 2012, the  claimant  was  convicted  at  Isleworth
    Crown Court of robbery, for which he was sentenced on 13 March 2013  to
    sixteen months' imprisonment.  It appears from the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks that the claimant pleaded guilty "at a very late  stage".   The
    claimant did not appeal against the sentence and  he  has  remained  in
    custody since then.

14. Accordingly, it appears that from the time the claimant's  presence  in
    this country can be confirmed until now, he has never remained  outside
    custody for any length of time without continuing to  commit  offences.
    According to the NOMS assessment,  to  which  reference  will  be  made
    below, the claimant has fifteen convictions recorded against him for 24
    separate offences.  In  the  decision  letter,  at  paragraph  36,  the
    respondent calculates that between 4 July 2008 and 30 March  2013,  the
    claimant had in fact received a total of seventeen convictions  for  26
    offences.  Whichever is correct, it is certainly a very  large  number,
    and the decision letter, at paragraph 36, continues as follows:

         "Your conviction history clearly indicates an anti-social  attitude
         towards the public and community. You have  shown  no  remorse  for
         your behaviour and you appear to have  given  no  consideration  to
         the time and public funds spent each time you  offend  -  from  the
         resources spent by the police investigating  your  crimes  to  your
         victims spending time in reporting the offences  and  in  addition,
         the high costs involved in taking you to court."

15. At paragraph 37 of the decision letter it is noted that the  claimant's
    convictions, "include sixteen  theft  offences,  which  were  committed
    between 3 June 2008 and 31 August 2012",  and  that  these  convictions
    "strongly indicated an  established  pattern  of  repeated  acquisitive
    offending".

16. The Secretary of State continues by asserting that

         "The fact that you have continued to offend, without being deterred
         by previous convictions or sentences, indicates  that  you  have  a
         lack of regard for the law, a lack of remorse  for  your  offending
         behaviour, and a lack of understanding of the negative impact  your
         offending behaviour has on others."

17. The Secretary of State also considers that there was an  escalation  in
    seriousness of the offences committed and also (at paragraph  39)  that
    "the nature of your offences suggests that you are  unable  to  support
    yourself  in  the  United  Kingdom  without   resorting   to   criminal
    activities".

18. In the decision letter, the Secretary of State considered (at paragraph
    30) that the  claimant  had  failed  to  establish  that  he  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in this country for a continuous period of  at
    least five years, and so  had  not  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
    residence in this country.  On  that  basis,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that deportation was warranted on grounds of  public  policy
    or public security.

19. The Secretary of State had in mind the relevant  Regulations  contained
    within the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,  the
    relevant Regulations being as follows:

         "Permanent right of residence


         15 (1) The following person shall acquire the right  to  reside  in
             the United Kingdom permanently


             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;


                  ...


             Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


             ...


        19 (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and  (5)  [not  relevant  to  this
        appeal] an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom ...  may
        be removed if -


             (a)   that person does not have or ceases to have  a  right  to
             reside under these Regulations; or


             (b)   the Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health in accordance with Regulation 21 ...


             Decisions taken on public policy, public security  and  public
             health grounds


             21-(1) In this Regulation a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health.


                 (2)   A relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  to  serve
                  economic ends.


                (3)   A relevant decision may  not be taken in respect of a
                  person  with  a  permanent  right   of   residence   under
                  Regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  or public security.


               (4)    A relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  except  on
                  imperative grounds of public security in respect of an EEA
                  national who -


                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; ...




               (5)    Where a relevant decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security it shall, in addition  to
                  complying  with   the   preceding   paragraphs   of   this
                  Regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with  the  following
                  principles -


                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;


                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;


                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society;


                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;


                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision.


             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security in relation to  a  person
                  who is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision  maker
                  must take account of considerations such as the age, state
                  of health, family and economic situation  of  the  person,
                  the person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,
                  the person's social  and  cultural  integration  into  the
                  United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
                  his country of origin ...".

20. The Secretary of State had in mind the provisions  of  paragraph  6  of
    Schedule 4 to the Regulations whereby the time spent in accordance with
    the Regulations, prior to the coming into effect of these  Regulations,
    would be taken  into  account.   However,  as  is  clear  from  current
    jurisprudence, time spent in custody breaks the  continuous  period  of
    residence so that in  order  to  acquire  permanent  residence,  it  is
    necessary for an applicant to have been present in  this  country  both
    exercising treaty rights, and not being in custody,  for  a  continuous
    period of five years.

21. Although it is the claimant's case that he has been  resident  in  this
    country since (variously) sometime between 1994 and 1999, this was  not
    accepted by the Secretary of State, who stated as follows at paragraphs
    29 and 30 of her decision letter, which is dated 31 May 2013:

         "Residence - permanent right to reside

         29.  As stated above, you have failed to provide  details  of  when
             you first entered the UK. However, it is noted that  you  have
             previously claimed to have been residing in the UK  since  the
             age of 17, which would have been   since  approximately  1994.
             You have also more recently claimed to have been  residing  in
             the UK  for  fourteen  years,  which  would  have  been  since
             approximately 1999.

         30.   In any event, you have failed to provide any evidence of your
             date of  entry  to  the  UK,  of  your  length  of  continuous
             residence in the  UK,  or  that  you  have  been  legitimately
             working, studying, or otherwise exercising your Treaty  Rights
             in the UK for a continuous period of at least five  years.  In
             light of the information available, it is considered that  you
             have not acquired the right  of  permanent  residence  in  the
             United Kingdom."

22. Accordingly consideration was given as to whether or not the claimant's
    deportation "is  warranted  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security" (at paragraph 31 of the decision letter) in  accordance  with
    the principles set out in  Regulation  21(5).   Having  considered  the
    claimant's criminal history  and  the  assessment  of  risk  of  future
    offending set out  in  the  NOMS  1  report,  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded (at paragraph 44) that "all the available evidence  indicates
    that you have a propensity  to  re-offend  and  that  you  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
    justify your deportation on grounds of public policy".

23. At paragraph 45, the reasons for deporting this claimant were put  even
    higher, as follows:

         "45.     Given the nature of the  offence  you  have  committed  [a
             robbery] and the threat  that  you  pose  to  society,  it  is
             considered that, even if you have  permanent  residence  as  a
             result of  five  years  continuous  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom, or for a continuous period of at least ten years, the
             requirement for serious grounds of public policy or imperative
             grounds of  public  security  respectively,  would  have  been
             satisfied."

24. The claimant appealed against this decision  and  as  noted  above  his
    appeal  came  before  a  panel  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   whose
    composition has been set out, and  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11
    February 2014 following a hearing at Kingston Crown Court on 29 January
    2014, the panel allowed his appeal.

25. It is fair to say that the panel's determination is very  short,  being
    about three pages, excluding the heading, and being thirteen paragraphs
    in all.  The findings are set out at paragraphs 11 and 12 as follows:

         "11.  The appellant had not documentary  evidence  to  support  the
             period of time he had been   in  the  United  Kingdom  or  the
             periods of time  he  had  worked.   However,  there  was  some
             support for his contentions, albeit not independent  from  the
             NOMS report, which made  reference  to  the  appellant  having
             informed the probation officer that he had last worked in 2007
             and  previously  he  had  worked  at  Heathrow  Airport  doing
             deliveries and as a porter at Westminster  Hospital  where  he
             worked for some seven years.  The appellant maintained that he
             had been married and the marriage  ended in 2008 and  that  he
             had a wife and two daughters in the United Kingdom.  We  found
             the appellant to be credible, both in relation to  the  period
             of time he had been  in the United Kingdom which was at  least
             since  1999  if  not  earlier.   Although  there   were   some
             inconsistencies as to the precise date, on any  interpretation
             of the appellant's evidence, he has been in the United Kingdom
             for a continuous period of at least ten  years,  allowing  for
             the periods of time he had spent in custody.  We also  accept,
             even though there was no documentary evidence to  support  it,
             that the appellant had been working  for  substantial  periods
             prior to 2007 after which he first became involved in alcohol,
             drugs and offending.

         12.  We note the judge's sentencing remarks which accept  that  the
             offence, although serious, was not at  the  most  serious  end
             because there was no weapon used and no injury was  caused  to
             the victim, although we do not  minimise  the  seriousness  of
             this  offence,  or  indeed  the  history  of  the  appellant's
             offending.  However, as we find to the relevant standard  that
             the appellant has been in continuous residence in  the  United
             Kingdom for a period in excess of ten years,  and  bearing  in
             mind the  respondent's  concession  in  this  regard,  if  the
             appellant is able to establish that fact,  we  find  that  the
             respondent is unable to establish  to  the  relevant  standard
             that the deportation decision can properly  be  maintained  as
             the respondent is either able to establish that the  appellant
             has a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15  should
             be  removed  under  Regulation  21(4)  and  (5)  of  the  2006
             Regulations, namely that the respondent cannot show imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA  national  who
             has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of
             at least ten years and nor  does  the  appellant  represent  a
             genuine present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one
             of the fundamental interests of society."

26. Although the syntax in parts of paragraph 12  is  confusing,  it  seems
    that the panel was trying to say that because the claimant had acquired
    the right of permanent residence, or had even been  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of 10 years, in order  to  justify  his  removal  the
    Secretary of  State  needed  to  establish  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 21 (3) or even (4) of  the  Regulations  was  satisfied,  and
    could not do so.

27. The Secretary of State has  appealed  against  this  decision  and  her
    grounds are set out succinctly within the grounds  of  appeal.   It  is
    submitted that the panel had failed to give reasons or adequate reasons
    for its findings.   In particular,  it  is  submitted  that  the  panel
    failed to provide adequate reasons for its  findings  at  paragraph  11
    that the claimant had resided in the UK for a continuous period  of  at
    least ten years and had been exercising treaty rights  throughout  this
    period.  It is noted that the panel itself had found that there was  no
    documentary evidence to substantiate  the  claimant's  claims  in  this
    regard and that the only evidence in support of this was oral testimony
    he had given to his Offender Manager "which was without any independent
    evidence to support it".  Further, even if it  was  accepted  that  the
    claimant had resided in this country for the length  of  time  claimed,
    there  was  no  independent  documentary  evidence  that  he  had  been
    exercising his treaty rights in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations.
    Furthermore, the fact that the claimant claimed to have been paid  cash
    in hand suggested that any employment he might have had in this country
    "was merely sporadic, temporary and unlawful".

28. In these circumstances, it was the Secretary of State's case  that  the
    claimant had not provided sufficient evidence to establish that he  had
    resided in the UK lawfully in accordance with the  Regulations  and  so
    any residence he might have had in this country "cannot be relied  upon
    when assessing his continuous residence".

29. With regard to the risk posed by the claimant, it  was  submitted  that
    the panel did not address his behaviour, drug or alcohol habit and  had
    simply "failed to consider his propensity to re-offend  and  escalation
    in seriousness of offences" such that "even if it is accepted that  the
    [claimant] can only be deported under either grounds that he represents
    a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  [on]  grounds  of
    public policy or public security" he was still subject  to  deportation
    under these Regulations.

30. With regard to the assertion by the claimant that he  had  children  in
    the UK, the claimant had produced no evidence of this, no evidence that
    they currently resided in the UK  and  no  evidence  that  he  had  any
    contact with them.

31. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson,
    who set out her reasons as follows:

         "...

         2.   The respondent argues that:

             (a)  The Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for  finding
                  that the [claimant] had resided in the United Kingdom  for
                  a continuous period of at least ten years or that  he  had
                  been  exercising  his   treaty   rights   throughout   his
                  residence;

             (b)  The [claimant] had failed to show that his  stay  in  the
                  United Kingdom was lawful prior to Schedule 4 of the  2006
                  EEA Regulations;

             (c)      Failed to consider  the  [claimant's]  propensity  to
                  reoffend;

             (d)  The [claimant] had failed to provide any evidence that he
                  has children in the United Kingdom or that he has  contact
                  with them.

         3.   As to 2(b), as Portugal joined the EEA on 1 January 1986,  the
             [claimant's] stay in the United Kingdom must always have  been
             lawful under the 2006 Regulations.  As to ground (a)  however,
             the [claimant's] evidence was  that  he  had  worked  at  West
             Middlesex Hospital between 1999 and 2003/04 as  a  porter  and
             had also worked at Citro Star in  about  2006/07.   While  the
             Tribunal was entitled to accept that he  had  resided  in  the
             United Kingdom for more than ten years, his oral evidence  was
             that he did not claim benefit between jobs and thus he may not
             have been a qualified person throughout his  residence.   This
             is material as he may not be entitled  to  a  permanent  right
             [of] residence. ..."



The Hearing

32.  I first heard submissions from Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of
    State and by the claimant in person with regard to whether or not there
    was an error of law in the  panel's  determination  such  that  it  was
    necessary to set aside its decision and remake it.  Having  found  that
    there was an error of law, for reasons which I will give  below, I then
    heard evidence from the claimant, who was cross-examined.  I then heard
    further  submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  and  reserved  my
    decision.

33. I recorded the submissions and the evidence I  heard  contemporaneously
    in the Record of Proceedings, and shall not set  out  below  everything
    which was said to me during the course of the hearing, but only such of
    the evidence and submission as is necessary for the  purposes  of  this
    determination. I have, however, had regard to everything which was said
    to me as well as to all the documents which are  contained  within  the
    file.



Submissions as to Error of Law

34. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Walker  reminded  the  Tribunal
    that it was the claimant's evidence that he had  been  working  between
    1999 and some time in 2003/4 as a porter at  West  Middlesex  Hospital,
    and before then had worked at Heathrow Airport.  However, the panel had
    given no consideration to the claimant's failure to provide any tax and
    national insurance documentation  for  either  period,  which  must  be
    relevant because in either of these employments these  documents  would
    have  been available.

35. With regard to the claimant's claim to have a  daughter  born  in  this
    country, again this could have been supported by  documentary  evidence
    such as a birth certificate, but there was no evidence with  regard  to
    this either.

36. The panel should not have found that he had been  here  prior  to  2006
    exercising his treaty rights.

37. With regard to the finding that this claimant  had  been  resident  for
    more than ten years continuously, there was no reasoning to support the
    proposition that any such residence was "lawful", which in the  context
    of this appeal meant in accordance with the Regulations.

38. With regard to the risk posed  by  the  claimant,  the  panel  had  not
    considered the evidence that he had not addressed his drug problem.  It
    had made no finding on this point.

39. The claimant then told the Tribunal that he had come to this country in
    1997 with his ex-wife and daughter who was now 19.  He had made  a  few
    mistakes after he had  lost  his  brother  eleven  years  ago  and  had
    "started doing drugs and crime".  However in "the last couple of years"
    he had "grown up".  He thought he deserved another chance.



Reasons for Finding Error of Law

40. In my judgement the panel's determination is not sustainable.  First of
    all, even though matters of weight were for  the  panel,  it  does  not
    appear that the panel gave any weight at all to  the  fact  that  other
    than what the claimant said, there was simply no  evidence  to  support
    his claim that he had been in this country a long time.  As  the  panel
    noted, at paragraph 11, there were  "some  inconsistencies  as  to  the
    precise date" when the claimant had come to this country;  in  fact  he
    has never given a consistent account of when it was that he arrived  in
    this country.  At paragraph 2 of its determination the panel had  noted
    that he had variously claimed to have arrived "in either  1994,  1996/7
    or 1999" but nonetheless stated that "we  found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible, both in relation to the period of time he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom which was at least since 1999 if not earlier".

41. Given that as the panel acknowledged, there was no documentary evidence
    to support the length of time he claimed to have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom or the period of time he had worked and no independent evidence
    beyond what he had himself stated in his various  accounts,  and  given
    also that the claimant  had  given  inconsistent  accounts,  I  do  not
    consider the finding that the claimant  was  "credible"  (without  even
    making a finding as to which of his various accounts was  accepted)  to
    be adequately reasoned.

42. Further, the panel was, in my judgement, wrong in stating that "on  any
    interpretation of the appellant's evidence, he has been in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of at least ten  years,  allowing   for
    the periods of time he had spent in custody" because if (as  the  panel
    found might be the case) the claimant had not arrived into the UK until
    some time in 1999,  it  could  not  even  be  said  that  he  had  been
    continuously in the UK for ten years prior to being sent to  prison  in
    March 2009.  Furthermore, there was simply no proper basis  upon  which
    the panel could   properly  have  found  that  the  claimant  had  been
    exercising treaty rights consistently during this period.   The panel's
    finding "that the appellant had been working  for  substantial  periods
    prior to 2007" does not even  amount to a  finding  that  he  had  been
    exercising treaty rights for a  continuous  period  of  at  least  five
    years, which would be necessary for the claimant to have  acquired  any
    permanent right of residence.    In the absence of such a finding,  the
    panel's subsequent finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  not
    justify removal on imperative grounds or even on  "serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security" is beside the  point.   Before  these
    higher tests come into play, it is first necessary for the claimant  to
    establish that he has been exercising treaty rights for  the  requisite
    period continuously, which the panel did not find.

43. It follows that the panel's decision will have  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.



Further Evidence

44. The further evidence I heard did  not  take  the  claimant's  case  any
    further.  He told the Tribunal that he had not provided any information
    as to where his daughters live or how often he saw them because "I have
    a very bad memory".  Although his daughters had  come  to  see  him  in
    person, he could not adduce any independent evidence of  that,  because
    he had not even known that he was due to  be  in  court  on  this  day.
    Although he had asked to see a duty solicitor, no one had ever got back
    to him.

45. In cross-examination he said that his daughters had both visited him in
    prison two weeks previously.

46. Although he had had wage  slips  when  he  worked  as  a  porter  in  a
    hospital, he did not have  them  any  more.   He  had  worked  for  the
    hospital in his proper identity but was still  unable  to  produce  any
    wage slips.  He had been registered with a doctor in Hounslow, but  had
    no independent evidence of this either.

47. With regard to his employment at Heathrow,  again,  although  he  would
    have had wage slips, he did not have them now.   When he had  moved  he
    could not keep everything so he lost most of his "stuff".   He had kept
    them in the first place in case he needed them in the future.   He  had
    used to keep his paperwork together, but when he went to jail  he  left
    all his property behind.   He had  not  given  this  to  his  daughters
    because he did not know he was going to jail.

48. When it was put to the claimant that he had been convicted  of  robbery
    and so it could not have been a surprise when he received  a  custodial
    sentence, he replied that he had been taken into custody when arrested.
    When he was asked why he had not asked his  daughters  to  collect  his
    property for him, he then said that he had but the friend he  was  with
    did not live there any more.

49. The claimant said he did have a Portuguese passport, but he thought  he
    had lost it.  He believed his daughter was born in this country  on  11
    May 1998 at the West Middlesex Hospital, but  he  had  not  obtained  a
    birth certificate.  However, "I can get it if I have to".

50. With regard to his marriage, he had been married in  Portugal  in  1996
    when he was 17.  He had been born, he said, on 8 March 1977.oHowHo

51. When asked how it was if he was born in 1977, and married in  1996,  he
    was 17, the claimant replied that he might have got  the  dates  wrong,
    but he was young.

52. In closing submissions, Mr Walker referred to  the  NOMS  1  report  in
    which originally it had been said that the claimant was a  "high"  risk
    of reoffending although he had been marked  in  the  end  as  "medium".
    With regard to whether or not the claimant can  properly  be  said,  in
    accordance with the Regulations, to be "integrated" the Tribunal had no
    evidence of the periods in which the claimant had lived and  worked  in
    this country.  There was no documentary evidence  regarding  his  work,
    which he said was for the health authority and at Heathrow.  There  was
    no evidence he had paid tax or national insurance, all of  which  would
    have been obtainable.   There was no evidence he  had  been  registered
    with a doctor which again would have been  obtainable.   There  was  no
    evidence of his daughter's birth;  a birth certificate should have been
    available, naming him as the father.

53.  The  claimant  had  not  provided  any  evidence  as  to  friends   or
    acquaintances, which again would have been obtainable if he  had  truly
    been here since the 1990s.  In essence, there was no  evidence  of  his
    having been in this country at all until 2008 when he was arrested.

54. In the circumstances of this case,  given  his  history  of  persistent
    offending, he was a real risk.  The only time that the claimant had not
    been offending during the period when it was known he  was  present  in
    this country was when he was in prison.

55. The claimant then said that people did know who he was, although he did
    understand that he had not produced any evidence on  own  account.   He
    wanted to say he was sorry and that "I deserve one  more  chance".   In
    the last fifteen months he had changed a lot.



Discussion

56. The claimant has not adduced credible evidence to establish that he has
    been resident in this country for any significant period prior to 2008.
     The evidence he has given at various times has been  inconsistent  and
    if true it is extraordinary that he has not  even  produced  the  birth
    certificate in respect of his daughter.  That evidence would have  been
    readily available.  He would also have been able  to  obtain  documents
    corroborating his account to have been employed by the health authority
    and at Heathrow Airport.  Although it is not incumbent on an  applicant
    to provide corroboration, in a  case  such  as  this,  when  the   only
    evidence to support the claim are  inconsistent  accounts  given  by  a
    person who has been shown by his  criminal  records  to  be  thoroughly
    dishonest, it is open to  a Tribunal to reject that account.   Although
    one would not lightly interfere with a finding made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in my judgement there was simply no proper basis  upon  which
    the admittedly inconsistent evidence of this claimant could be accepted
    as truthful.

57. Moreover, even if I did accept the panel's finding  that  the  claimant
    had been here since 1999, given that he was  taken  into  custody  when
    arrested (on his own account) and  received  a  custodial  sentence  in
    March  1999,  he  clearly  could  not  establish  that  he   had   been
    continuously resident for ten years before going to  prison.   Nor,  on
    the evidence before either the panel or this  Tribunal,  could   it  be
    established that he had been exercising treaty rights continuously  for
    at least five years.  Even if I were to uphold the panel's finding that
    the claimant "had been working for substantial periods prior  to  2007"
    in the absence of any finding that  he  had  been  so  employed  for  a
    continuous period of five years or more (and I  do  not  consider  that
    such a  finding  could  be  sustained  on  the  evidence)  he  has  not
    established that he was exercising treaty rights.  Accordingly, whether
    or not he was present in this country, he has failed to establish  that
    such presence would have been "lawful" in the  sense  that  it  was  in
    accordance with the Regulations.

58. It follows that under Regulation 19(3)(b) the claimant may  be  removed
    if "the Secretary of State has decided that  the  person's  removal  is
    justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health
    in accordance with Regulation 21".

59. The Secretary of State decided that it  was  so  justified  and  in  my
    judgement she was right so to decide.  It is clear  that  the  decision
    was taken on grounds  which  are  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
    conduct of this claimant, and in my  judgement  it  was  proportionate.
    Having had regard to the  NOMS  1  report,  I  too  consider  that  the
    personal conduct of this claimant  must  indeed  "represent  a  genuine
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".

60. I have in mind in  particular  when   considering  the  "likelihood  of
    reconviction" that the writer of the report stated that  "although  his
    static factors indicate on OASys Report that he poses a medium risk  of
    reoffending, in my view  his  dynamic  factors  suggest  that  if  [the
    claimant] is released into the community his risk of reoffending  would
    be imminent".  The risk factors are set out.

61. The robbery conviction is particularly serious, and it should be  noted
    that according to the victim, the claimant kicked her whilst she was on
    the ground.   Given the history of  persistent  offending,  which  only
    stopped when the claimant  was  sent  to  prison,  this  claimant  must
    present a serious risk to  the  public  if  he  is  released  into  the
    community.

62.  When considering  proportionality,  I  must  have  in  mind  that  the
    claimant has provided no evidence of any private life in  this  country
    and that although he claims to have  daughters  here,  other  than  his
    saying that he does, there has been no evidence regarding this  either.
    In those circumstances, he has failed to put before  the  Tribunal  any
    meaningful argument that  his  removal  would  be  disproportionate  by
    reason of the strength of any family or private life he might  have  in
    this country, in light of my finding that his continued  presence  here
    represents a significant risk to the community.

63. Accordingly, and purely on the basis of the present risk posed by  this
    claimant, I consider  that  his  removal  is  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations as set out above, and is proportionate. It follows that the
    panel's decision must be set aside and the  Tribunal  must  remake  the
    decision by dismissing the claimant's appeal.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal which  had  allowed
the claimant's appeal and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
deport him is dismissed.






Signed:                                 Date: 30 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

