
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01586/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     T T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Chapman, of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appellant is a 42-year-old citizen of Sri Lanka who entered the
         United Kingdom in May 1999, made an asylum claim at that  time  and
         has lived in this country ever  since.  He  suffers  from  paranoid
         schizophrenia and since November 2011 has lived in the Maison  Moti
         care home, which is described as an intensive rehabilitation  unit.
         He has appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  24  June  2015,
         following a hearing at Taylor House on 27 may 2015.  The  principal
         focus of the appeal is the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  assessment
         of the appellant's claim that his rights in terms of Article  3  of
         the European Convention on Human Rights would be  breached  by  his
         return to Sri Lanka in light of his enduring mental illness.

      2. The appellant has a lengthy immigration history which is set out in
         detail in paragraph 2 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.
         In summary, it is this. His initial claim for asylum was refused in
         January 2000 and by various appeal processes his challenge to  that
         decision was dismissed, allowed and  dismissed  again,  his  asylum
         claim being finally refused by decision dated 10 April 2003.

      3. The appellant has a lengthy history of mental health disorder which
         has, at times, been associated with offending. In November 2000  he
         was convicted of assault, a disposal under the  Mental  Health  Act
         1983 was pronounced and he remained in hospital for a period of two
         years. After a short period of being supported  in  the  community,
         and after the final successful appeal by the Home Office  resulting
         in the rejection of his asylum claim, the appellant  was  then  re-
         admitted on a voluntary basis to hospital. Whilst  in  hospital  he
         committed a further offence in February 2004 in which  he  broke  a
         chair and struck a fellow patient on the head with part of  it.  He
         was subsequently convicted in October  of  that  year  of  Grievous
         Bodily Harm and a further order  detaining  him  under  the  Mental
         Health Act was imposed.

      4. In light of these convictions  notice  of  a  decision  to  make  a
         deportation order was communicated to the appellant on 28  February
         2007 and an appeal against his proposed deportation  was  dismissed
         on 30 July 2007. He remained detained under the Mental  Health  Act
         order until 3 November 2011 when he was discharged to the care home
         where he presently lives. After various  other  procedures  he  was
         served with a letter dated 24 July  2014  giving  reasons  for  the
         Secretary of State's refusal to revoke the  deportation  order.  It
         was that refusal to revoke which was the subject of appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

    A summary of the relevant previous decisions

      5. It may be helpful to set  out  a  brief  summary  of  the  relevant
         previous decisions concerning the appellant.

    The 2003 decision finally refusing the appellant's claim for asylum

      6. The import of the 10 April 2003 determination is summarised by  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  paragraph  6  (b)  of  his  decision
         (although he incorrectly refers to it as the decision which allowed
         the appellant's asylum appeal). It is noted  that  the  appellant's
         claim was that he had supported the LTTE, had been detained by  the
         army, beaten and released after his parents paid a  bribe.  He  was
         subsequently detained again by the  army,  again  beaten  and  ill-
         treated and after a further bribe was paid he was  released  on  an
         undertaking that he would no longer  be  involved  with  the  LTTE.
         After spending some time in a refugee camp he travelled to  Colombo
         where, with the assistance of an agent,  he  made  arrangements  to
         leave Sri Lanka. It was accepted that the  appellant's  mother  had
         been detained and convicted after  trial  but  it  was  noted  that
         neither she nor any other member of her family was of  interest  to
         the authorities after her release. The appellant himself was  never
         charged and it was held that he would not be  of  interest  to  the
         authorities on his return to Sri Lanka.

    The 2007 decision refusing the appellant's appeal against a decision to
    make a deportation order

      7. By the time of the 2007 decision a body  of  information  from  the
         doctors who had been treating the  appellant  over  the  years  was
         available. It was noted that he had given varying accounts  of  his
         experiences to his  treating  doctors  which  were  odds  with  his
         witness statement and with his account of being active  within  the
         LTTE. By this stage a report was also available from Professor Good
         expressing support for the view that the appellant would be at risk
         on return. In relation to the appellant's medical condition it  was
         concluded that  his  symptoms  were  under  control,  that  he  had
         exhibited no psychotic symptoms since early 2005  and  that  mental
         health hostels were available in Colombo. It was decided  that  the
         authorities would have no particular interest for political reasons
         in the  appellant  on  his  return,  that  the  appellant  was  not
         suffering from the advanced  stage  of  a  terminal  and  incurable
         illness, that even if the medication which he was  taking  was  not
         available the withdrawal of more  sophisticated  medicine  did  not
         amount to inhuman treatment and that he had  not  established  that
         there were exceptional circumstances such that his removal would be
         in breach of his Article 3 rights.

    The Secretary of State's decision of 24 July 2014

      8. In explaining the decision to  refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation
         order the Secretary of  State  took  account  of  the  report  from
         Professor Good and an update which he  had  subsequently  prepared,
         along with various  other  reports  concerning  the  situation  for
         suspected LTTE sympathisers and failed  asylum  seekers.  She  also
         observed that the situation in Sri Lanka had improved  considerably
         and relied upon  the  decision  in  GJ  and  Ors.  (post-civil  war
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319.  Having  done  so  the
         Secretary of State concluded that the appellant  would  not  be  of
         interest to the Sri Lankan authorities if he was returned and  that
         in any event his account of being involved with the LTTE  had  been
         disbelieved in the previous appeal proceedings and therefore it was
         not accepted that his Article 3 rights would be breached if he  was
         returned.

      9. The Secretary of State also considered whether there were  suitable
         facilities in Sri Lanka to remove the appellant to. She noted  that
         the appellant was being treated with Clozapine and  that  this  was
         readily available in  Sri  Lanka.  Relying  on  Country  of  Origin
         Information and the World Health Organisation Mental  Health  Atlas
         2011, she observed that whilst  any  facilities  available  in  Sri
         Lanka may not be of the same  standard  as  that  provided  in  the
         United Kingdom suitable treatment facilities  would  be  available.
         Having drawn attention to what she considered to  be  the  relevant
         case law the Secretary of State concluded that there was nothing to
         indicate that the treatment available  for  the  appellant  in  Sri
         Lanka would be of sufficiently poor quality  as  to  amount  to  an
         effective denial of treatment or to engage Article 3 or Article 8.

    The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

     10. Two issues were the subject of evidence and submissions before  the
         First-tier  Tribunal.  The  first  was  the  extent  to  which  the
         appellant might be at risk if returned to  Sri  Lanka.  The  second
         encompassed the extent  of  his  mental  health  difficulties,  his
         current treatment and level of support, the impact  on  his  mental
         health if deported and the extent to which appropriate  care  might
         be available in Sri Lanka.

    The first issue.

     11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised that the appellant had not
         been found credible on issues concerning his association  with  the
         LTTE when his asylum claim was rejected,  nor  in  his  deportation
         appeal in 2007. Keeping in mind the principle stated in the case of
         Devaseelan the  Judge  was  not  prepared  to  except  the  varying
         accounts before him of the appellant's claimed involvement with the
         LTTE. He did though give consideration to the  appellant's  present
         profile in light of the guidance given in GJ and Ors. He noted that
         the appellant was not an activist and that his name would not be on
         a computerised "stop" list as someone against  whom  there  was  an
         extant court order or arrest warrant. He concluded that  there  was
         nothing in the appellant's profile which would cause him to  be  of
         interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

     12. The Judge also considered the evidence  which  suggested  that  the
         appellant might come to be detained because of  his  mental  health
         problems and a submission, based upon what was  said  in  paragraph
         168 of GJ, that in detention he would be subjected to  severe  ill-
         treatment. The judge concluded that the reference in that paragraph
         of the Upper Tribunal's decision to individuals being  at  risk  in
         custody was a reference  to  those  with  a  political  profile  as
         perceived Tamil activists, and to former members of the LTTE  going
         through a process  of  so-called  rehabilitation.  Accordingly,  he
         rejected the submission that the  appellant  would  be  subject  to
         persecution if he found himself in detention having  been  returned
         to Sri Lanka.

    The second issue

     13. The second issue before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  perhaps
         the one upon which most reliance was placed by the  appellant.  The
         appellant relied upon an  up-to-date  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
         Obuaya which noted a previous conclusion that the  appellant  would
         require lifelong mental health treatment, including  input  from  a
         Community Mental Health Team,  structured  daytime  activities  and
         supported accommodation. Dr Obuaya expressed his own  opinion  that
         24 hour supervision was likely to be required  in  the  appellant's
         case due to the risk to his health and to other people arising from
         his mental disorder when he was unwell. His long-term prognosis was
         likely to be moderate if psychosocial stresses could  be  minimised
         and a treatment plan adhered to. Dr Obuaya's  report  included  his
         opinion that if the appellant was to be deported there would  be  a
         need for the same level of  psychiatric  support  as  he  currently
         received,  otherwise  it  would  be  very  likely  that  he   would
         experience a relapse into his  schizophrenic  illness  which  would
         make it very difficult for him to engage in  the  tasks  needed  to
         establish a new life for himself. He considered the appellant would
         be at particular risk of self-neglect and exploitation by others if
         his mental state deteriorated without adequate support.

     14. The appellant also relied upon a report from Dr Chris  Smith  which
         addressed current  circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka,  with  particular
         reference to the availability of mental health facilities. Dr Smith
         confirmed that the medication Clozapine presently  being  taken  by
         the appellant was available in Sri Lanka.  He  explained  that  the
         only secure mental  health  facility  available  was  the  National
         Institute of Mental  Health,  a  government  run  establishment  in
         Angoda, Colombo. In his report Dr Smith also described the level of
         stigma associated with mental health in  Sri  Lanka  and  commented
         upon how this impacted on the provision of, and access to, relevant
         services. He referred to a study on the  attitudes  of  Sri  Lankan
         doctors  suggesting  that  they  endorsed  stigmatising   attitudes
         towards mental illness. Dr Smith concluded that whilst in principle
         mental  health  workers  were  available  in   Sri   Lanka,   their
         professional standards were likely to be so poor as to be less than
         worthwhile.

     15. Before the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary of State  relied  upon
         the Sri Lankan National Institute of Mental  Health  Annual  Report
         2013. This report noted that whilst the  Institute  in  Angoda  had
         previously been a mental institution with a custodial role  it  had
         now been upgraded to a National Institute. The  report  noted  that
         1,500 inpatient beds were available  providing  treatment  for  all
         types of mental illnesses and that more than  8,000  patients  were
         admitted to the National Institute of Mental  Health  annually  for
         acute or intermediate treatment as well  as  specialised  services.
         The report noted that a Community Psychiatric Unit, a Day Treatment
         Centre, an Occupational Therapy Unit and a Psychiatric Social  Work
         Unit were all also available.

     16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out a note of what he  considered
         to be the relevant case law in paragraphs 23 to 30 of his decision.
         From these cases he sought to identify the legal principles  to  be
         applied in considering a health  case  which  was  said  to  engage
         either Article 3 or 8 of the Convention. He then went on to explain
         how he  applied  those  principles  to  the  circumstances  of  the
         appellant's case in paragraphs 31 to 35.

     17. In his analysis of the case law the First-tier Tribunal Judge  drew
         attention to Baroness Hale's comment in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, that
         only the most compelling humanitarian considerations are likely  to
         prevail over the legitimate aims of immigration control  or  public
         safety. He also referred to Lord Hope's comment in N v SSHD  [2005]
         UKHL 31, that for an alien to  be  able  to  claim  entitlement  to
         remain  in  order  to   benefit   from   medical   assistance   the
         circumstances must be exceptional. The Judge  noted  that  in  D  v
         United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 425,  the  exceptional  circumstances
         were that fatal illness had reached a critical stage.  He  referred
         to the decision of N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453, in which  it
         was said that in medical cases  Article  3  applied  only  in  very
         exceptional circumstances and to  GS  (India)  and  Others  v  SSHD
         [2015] EWCA Civ 40, which he saw as providing further  support  for
         the proposition that Articles 3 or 8 were not infringed by  removal
         from the United Kingdom to a  destination  state  with  a  lack  of
         adequate health care, save in the most exceptional case.

     18. Drawing together the guidance in these and the other cases to which
         he referred, the First-tier Tribunal Judge then arrived at a number
         of conclusions, which he set out at paragraphs 31  and  32  of  his
         decision. First, he concluded that the  appellant's  situation  was
         not a deathbed or critical case scenario.  Secondly,  he  concluded
         that the appellant's case was that he should be allowed to continue
         receiving  health  care  in  the  United  Kingdom  because  of  the
         disparity between that treatment and that to  be  expected  in  Sri
         Lanka. Thirdly, he concluded that before any such disparity  should
         be considered the appellant required to bring  himself  within  the
         critical deathbed scenario. Fourthly,  he  concluded  that  in  any
         other exceptional case which  would  engage  Article  3  or  8  the
         relevant exceptionality would still require to be something akin to
         a critical or deathbed scenario.

     19. Having arrived at these conclusions the Judge  noted  that  in  any
         event the evidence available to him from the report relied upon  by
         the Secretary of State demonstrated that some of the evidence in Dr
         Smith's report concerning the facilities in  the  Angoda  Institute
         was out of date and misleading. As he noted in the last sentence of
         paragraph 31 of his decision, he  was  satisfied  that  significant
         improvements had now been made in the  facilities  which  would  be
         available to the appellant.

     20. In light of his conclusions the Judge held that the  appellant  had
         failed to  establish  that  his  deportation  to  Sri  Lanka  would
         constitute a disproportionate interference with  his  rights  under
         either Article 3 or 8 and had failed to establish that  exceptional
         circumstances existed such as would outweigh the public interest in
         maintaining the deportation order.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

     21. The appellant was given leave to appeal on four grounds  which  can
         be summarised as follows:
             Ground 1 - the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  interpretation  of
             the application of Article 3 to a health case was  too  narrow
             and incorrect;
             Ground 2 - the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  proceeded  upon  a
             misunderstanding of an aspect of Dr Smith's report and  failed
             to take account of the guidance in the case of GJ;
             Ground 3 - the First-tier Tribunal Judge had had erred in  his
             interpretation of what had been said by the Upper Tribunal  in
             paragraph 168 of the decision in GJ;
             Ground 4 - the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  in  his
             interpretation of paragraph 398 and 399A  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.

         Each of the grounds of appeal was supported by detailed analysis in
         the  written  application  for  permission  and  each  was  further
         developed by Ms Chapman in oral submissions. It may  be  convenient
         to deal with Grounds 2, 3 and 4 first.

     22. In support of Ground 2 there was a tentative argument to the effect
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had misconstrued the evidence of
         Dr Smith regarding the conditions within the Angoda  Mental  Health
         facility. The proposition arose out of comments which the Judge had
         made in paragraph 31 of his decision concerning  photographs  which
         Dr Smith had appended to his report. On  a  fair  reading  of  this
         paragraph we are satisfied that there has been no  misunderstanding
         or other error on the part of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
         relation to Dr Smith's evidence.

     23. The second proposition advanced in support of Ground 2 was, that in
         so far as the First-tier Tribunal Judge came to the view  that  the
         facilities which would be available to the appellant in  Sri  Lanka
         had significantly improved in  recent  years,  he  failed  to  take
         account of what was said in paragraph 456 of GJ. In that passage of
         its decision the Upper Tribunal noted that mental  health  services
         in Sri Lanka were sparse and limited to the cities. It referred  to
         the Secretary of State's Operational  Guidance  Note  which  stated
         that the available facilities "do not provide appropriate care  for
         mentally ill people." Ms Chapman was therefore correct  to  observe
         that there  is  an  apparent  conflict  between  what  is  said  at
         paragraph 456 in the case of GJ and what  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge has said  in  the  last  sentence  of  paragraph  31  of  his
         decision. However, the Operational Guidance Note which  was  before
         the Upper Tribunal was dated April 2012, whereas  the  report  upon
         which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  relied  was  the  National
         Institute of Mental Health Annual Report for 2013. Precisely  which
         periods these documents relate to is not immediately clear  but  in
         light of the decisions which we have arrived at in relation to  the
         other grounds, as explained below, we  do  not  consider  that  any
         further clarification is necessary at this stage. We are content to
         record that the First-tier Tribunal Judge arrived at a  sustainable
         view on the information before him and we therefore  conclude  that
         there is no merit in either argument advanced in support of  Ground
         2.

     24. We mentioned in paragraph 12  above  the  submission  made  to  the
         effect that  the  appellant  would  be  subjected  to  severe  ill-
         treatment if he came to be detained in Sri Lanka. Before the First-
         tier Tribunal and before us that  submission  was  based  upon  the
         concession made on the Secretary of State's behalf in the  case  of
         GJ, as recorded by the Upper  Tribunal  at  paragraph  168  of  its
         decision. The opening sentence of that paragraph reads:
             "Mr Hall accepted that individuals in  custody  in  Sri  Lanka
             continue to be at risk of  physical  abuse,  including  sexual
             violence, and that such risk is persecutory."

         The argument advanced in support of Ground 3 was that the Secretary
         of State had conceded that anyone who was detained  in  custody  in
         Sri Lanka would be at risk of persecution and that accordingly  the
         appellant, as someone who might come to find himself in  detention,
         was entitled  to  international  protection.  Like  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge, our view is that this argument is misconceived.  In
         our  view,  reading  the  full  content  of  paragraph   168,   and
         understanding the context of where it  appears  in  the  judgement,
         makes it plain that the concession was to the effect that  detained
         individuals within  a  certain  category  remained  at  risk.  That
         category was those detained under the Prevention of Terrorism  Act,
         such as the members of the LTTE  who  had  been  undergoing  a  re-
         education  process  known  as  "rehabilitation"   and   had   found
         themselves  detained   for   lengthy   periods   without   judicial
         supervision.  We  consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
         understood properly the import of this paragraph and that  his  own
         analysis, as set out in paragraph 22 of  his  decision,  is  beyond
         criticism. We therefore conclude that there  is  no  merit  in  the
         argument advanced in support of Ground 3.

     25. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules  applies  where  a  foreign
         criminal seeks to resist deportation upon the premise that to do so
         would be contrary to his rights in terms of Article  8.  Paragraphs
         (a) and (b) contain the  assumption  that  deportation  of  such  a
         person will be conducive to the  public  good  and  in  the  public
         interest if the offence of which the person has been convicted  has
         resulted in a sentence of imprisonment of at  least  4  years,  and
         less than 4 years but at  least  12  months  respectively.  Neither
         paragraph applies to the appellant since, although he was convicted
         of offences in  both  November  2000  and  October  2004,  on  each
         occasion a hospital order rather than a  sentence  of  imprisonment
         was imposed. In argument in support of Ground 4  it  was  submitted
         that the Secretary of State had  erroneously  relied  on  paragraph
         398(c) in that the appellant was not "a persistent offender who had
         shown a particular disregard for the law". It  was  further  argued
         that consideration ought also to have been given to  the  terms  of
         rule 399A, since the appellant had lived  for  many  years  in  the
         United Kingdom, albeit under the auspices of orders made under  the
         Mental Health Act, and was socially and  culturally  integrated  in
         this country.

     26. In our view the argument advanced in  support  of  this  Ground  of
         appeal has no merit. Rule 398(c) is in the following terms:
             "(c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in
             assessing that claim will consider whether  paragraph  399  or
             399A applies and, if it  does  not,  the  public  interest  in
             deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors  where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A"

     27. It is clear from paragraphs 53 to 58 of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         letter of 24 July 2014  that  the  Secretary  of  State  considered
         paragraph 398(c)  applied  to  the  appellant  because  he  was  an
         offender who had caused serious harm. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
         agreed that the appellant met the criteria for deportation  as  set
         out in paragraph 398(c). Given the  circumstances  of  the  offence
         which led to the appellant's conviction for grievous bodily harm in
         October 2004, as described in paragraph 3 above, we  are  satisfied
         that both the Judge and the  Secretary  of  State  arrived  at  the
         correct conclusions. We are also satisfied that Rule 399A does  not
         apply to the appellant. The principal reference in  the  ground  of
         appeal is to the appellant being culturally and socially integrated
         and it simply skirts over the requirement  in  paragraph  399A  (a)
         that the person "has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of
         his life", which, as the First-tier Judge noted, this appellant has
         not.

     28. We turn then to consider Ground 1, which was the principal focus of
         argument before  us.  Ms  Chapman  submitted  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge had concluded that if deportation  was  resisted  on
         medical grounds, Article 3 could only be engaged if that person was
         on his or her deathbed, and that this was an incorrect view of  the
         law. She submitted that the Judge had misunderstood the  import  of
         the cases of D v United Kingdom, N v SSHD and N v  United  Kingdom.
         She observed that the Judge had given no consideration  at  all  to
         the line of authority reflected in cases such as MSS  v  Belgium  &
         Greece [2011] ECHR 108 and Sufi & Elmi v United Kingdom [2011] ECHR
         1045, which  vouched  the  proposition  that  the  admittedly  high
         Article 3 threshold would  nevertheless  be  met  if  there  was  a
         serious risk of inhuman and degrading treatment on removal. Nor had
         he taken account of the guidance in this area which could be  found
         in the Upper Tribunal Country Guidance case of GJ.

     29. For the respondent Mr Tufan submitted that the threshold was a very
         high  one  which  could  only  be  reached  in   very   exceptional
         circumstances and that the Judge had been correct in  his  approach
         to the application of the law.

    Discussion

     30. In paragraph 23 of his decision in the present case the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge noted it was accepted that:
             "... the appellant's condition  did  not  meet  the  "deathbed
             scenarios" established in case law in relation to Article 3".

         In Paragraph 31 he observed that the appellant was:
             "... in no way a deathbed or critical case scenario".

         The importance of these considerations for the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge can be seen in what he goes on to say in  the  following  two
         further observations set  out  in  paragraphs  31  and  32  of  his
         decision:
             "Before even considering the alleged disparity, (in  available
             medical care) however, the appellant must bring himself within
             the critical deathbed scenario above and he does not do so";

         and
             "Whilst I would not hesitate to consider Articles 3/8 if there
             were such an "exceptional case", such exceptionality must,  in
             my view, still be essentially related to something akin  to  a
             critical deathbed scenario - and that, patently,  is  not  the
             situation in relation to this appellant."

         In our view these various quotes from his decision demonstrate that
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge was looking to see whether  the  sort
         of exceptional circumstances as were  present  in  the  case  of  D
         featured in the present appellant's  case.  They  also  demonstrate
         that in his view an argument based upon a violation  of  Article  3
         required, as a starting point, that  the  applicant  was  close  to
         death. We therefore conclude that Ms Chapman  was  correct  in  her
         submission that the First-tier Judge's  view  was  that  Article  3
         could only be engaged if the appellant was on his deathbed.

     31. It was however never contended that the present appellant was close
         to  death.  It  might  indeed  be  difficult  to  envisage  how  an
         individual  suffering  from  mental  health  would  ever  fit   the
         description of someone in the terminal stages of a critical illness
         or, in other words, be on their deathbed. Despite this it has  been
         plain since the decision of the European Court of Human  Rights  in
         Bensaid v United Kingdom [2001] 33 EHRR  205  that,  in  principle,
         Article 3 could be engaged if deportation would result in suffering
         as a consequence of a significant deterioration  or  relapse  in  a
         deportee's pre-existing mental illness. It has been  equally  plain
         though, given the high threshold set by Article 3  where  the  case
         does not concern the direct responsibility of the Contracting State
         for the infliction of harm, that  such  a  removal  would  only  be
         contrary to  Article  3  in  a  case  which  displayed  exceptional
         circumstances.

     32. Further assistance in understanding the scope of Article 3  in  the
         circumstances of ill-health was of  course  subsequently  given  by
         both the House of Lords and the European Court of Human  Rights  in
         the subsequent case of N, to which the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         also referred. Like the appellant in D,  the  appellant  in  N  was
         suffering from a physical illness, namely  HIV/AIDS.  It  is  clear
         though from what  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  said  in
         paragraph 42 of its judgement that it had not moved back  from  the
         premise that Article 3 could be engaged in circumstances where  the
         individual concerned was suffering from mental illness:
             "The decision to remove an  alien  who  is  suffering  from  a
             serious mental or physical illness  to  a  country  where  the
             facilities for the treatment of that illness are  inferior  to
             those available in the Contracting State may  raise  an  issue
             under Article 3, but only in a very  exceptional  case,  where
             the humanitarian grounds against the removal are compelling".

     33. In the case of N in the House of Lords Baroness Hale, having  noted
         the facts in the case of D, went on to observe that  there  may  be
         other  exceptional  cases  with  other  extreme  facts  where   the
         humanitarian considerations are equally compelling (paragraph  70).
         Observations to the same effect were made by the European Court  of
         Human Rights at paragraph 43 of its decision in N. These views  are
         in  keeping  with  the  principle  otherwise  recognised   by   the
         Strasbourg Court in both Bensaid and N that the decision to  remove
         an alien who is suffering from a serious mental illness  may  raise
         an issue under Article 3.

     34. It is worth noting that in Bensaid  and  N  (at  both  levels)  the
         courts took note of the fact  that  the  exceptional  circumstances
         which engaged Article 3 in the case of D included the fact that the
         applicant was in the terminal stages of  a  physical  illness.  The
         appellant in Bensaid was not critically ill though  and  a  crucial
         finding made by the court against his claim was that  the  risk  of
         deterioration and of not receiving adequate support or care was, in
         his case, to a large extent speculative (paragraph 39).

     35. A compelling analysis of the scope of Article 3 and  the  scope  of
         the binding decision of the House of Lords in N was  undertaken  by
         Lord Justice Laws in the case of GS  (India)  &  Ors.  For  present
         purposes five of his conclusions are of assistance:
             "The  paradigm  case  of  a  violation  of  Article  3  is  an
             intentional  act  which  constitutes  torture  or  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment or punishment (paragraph 39);
             In response to humanitarian imperatives the  Strasbourg  court
             and the House of Lords have accepted a degree  of  enlargement
             to Article 3 (paragraph 46);
             There may be departures from the Article 3 paradigm other than
             of the kind vouchsafed in D v UK (paragraph 62);
             In  circumstances  not  reflecting  the  paradigm   case   the
             Strasbourg  court  has   adopted   different   approaches   in
             determining whether a breach of Article 3 has occurred, as can
             be seen by the approach taken in the case of MSS v Belgium and
             Greece on the one hand and N v UK on the other (paragraph 57);
             The D exception is confined to deathbed cases."

     36. Having considered what we understand to be the  guidance  available
         in the case law to which we have referred we return to the approach
         taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the  present  appeal.  We
         conclude that he was wrong in law in testing the appellant's  claim
         that deportation would infringe his Article 3 rights  by  reference
         to the circumstances in the case of D. As Lord  Justice  Laws  made
         plain, the case of D is only  of  application  to  deathbed  cases,
         which is not the appellant's case. We also conclude that the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge was wrong in law in holding  that  an  argument
         based upon a violation of Article 3 required, as a starting  point,
         that the applicant was close to death and wrong in law to  conclude
         that the sort  of  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  permit
         Article 3 to be engaged were restricted  to  something  akin  to  a
         critical or deathbed scenario.

     37. Having concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in
         the ways described we do not claim to be in a position to  list  or
         identify what sort of exceptional conditions might engage Article 3
         in a case such as the appellant's. We did not hear  submissions  on
         this subject and nor, of course, are we in a position to  determine
         whether or not any  such  exceptional  circumstances  are  in  fact
         present in the appellant's case. We  would  restrict  ourselves  to
         observing that, in differing circumstances, the European  Court  of
         Human Rights in the case of Aswat v United Kingdom (Application no.
         17299/12) 16 April 2013 and the Upper Tribunal in dealing with  the
         third appellant's case in the case of GJ  &  Ors,  each  held  that
         expulsion of an alien suffering from mental illness  would  not  be
         compliant with the United Kingdom's international obligations under
         Article 3.

    Conclusions

     38. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law and that decision  is  set
         aside.

     39. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         Taylor House for rehearing.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Alan D. Turnbull
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 8/12/2015
