
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01171/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR B A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An  anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the
circumstances of this case, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge L K Gibbs promulgated  on  25  March  2015  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision dated 9 June 2014 making a decision  pursuant  to  section
         3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971 that the  Appellant's  deportation  is
         conducive to the public good by reason of a conviction in Japan  on
         12 December 1997 for manslaughter.

      2. The background facts are as follows.  The Appellant is  a  national
         of Iran.  He was brought up by  his  parents  there  with  his  two
         brothers.  He was educated there.  He  undertook  military  service
         there in 1987.  At the age of fifteen years, he decided that he  no
         longer believed in religion and he became involved in politics  and
         philosophy.  He left Iran in 1992 and studied in  Japan  for  three
         years.  He met and married a Japanese woman.   In  1996,  his  wife
         died, the Appellant says as the result of an accident in  which  he
         killed her.  He was convicted of manslaughter  for  her  death  and
         sentenced  to  three  years'  imprisonment  with  labour.   He  was
         transferred to Iran less than a year after sentence.

      3. The Appellant says that when he was returned to Iran,  his  luggage
         was lost, as a result of which the police had access to it and were
         able to read his writings (of which a number had been published  in
         Newsweek).  He says  that  the  police  questioned  him  about  his
         beliefs.  He was held in detention for one night.   He  escaped  he
         says with the assistance of his brother via Turkey.  He arrived  in
         the UK on 30 March 2000 and claimed asylum on the following day.

      4. The Appellant's asylum claim was refused on 20 August 2001 and  his
         appeal  was  dismissed  in  January  2002.   He  was  though  given
         discretionary leave on 18 December 2003 by reason of mental  health
         problems.  He sought further leave thereafter but that was  refused
         and his appeal was dismissed in December 2007.  He made a number of
         subsequent attempts to regularise his stay which were unsuccessful.
          He has therefore been an overstayer since December 2007.

      5. The Appellant has been convicted of three  offences  in  the  UK  -
         battery and  possession  of  cocaine  in  2005  and  possession  of
         cannabis in 2006.  He was sentenced to a community order and  fines
         for those offences.  He was given notice that he was liable  to  be
         deported in February 2014 to which he responded.  That led  to  the
         decision of 9 June 2014 against which he appeals.

      6. The Appellant says that he cannot return to  Iran  because  of  the
         events which occurred when he was there last and the  risk  to  his
         family as a result.  He also relies on the private  life  which  he
         has formed in the  UK.   He  says  that  he  could  not  cope  with
         deportation as a result of his mental health problems and  that  he
         would commit suicide if deported. He claims  that  his  deportation
         would therefore breach Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

      7. Placing reliance on the findings of the Judges in  the  Appellant's
         previous appeals, Judge Gibbs' starting point in  relation  to  the
         risk on return was that the Appellant was not credible in  relation
         to what occurred when he was  previously  returned  to  Iran.   The
         Appellant had also obtained a passport from the Iranian embassy  in
         London which the Judge (and earlier Judges)  found  undermined  his
         claim to fear the authorities in Iran.  The  previous  Judges  also
         found it not credible  that  the  Appellant  had  various  articles
         published in magazines such as Newsweek as he produced no  evidence
         of this.  In fact, before Judge Gibbs, the Appellant accepted  that
         none had been published although he continued to assert that he had
         sent the articles to that publication for that purpose.   The  fact
         that the Appellant failed to disclose his conviction in  Japan  was
         further found to undermine his credibility, as was the inconsistent
         account which he gave of how his wife died.

      8. Judge Gibbs did not accept that the Appellant left  Iran  illegally
         because he did not accept  the  account  of  events  given  by  the
         Appellant.  In any event, he relied on SB (risk on return - illegal
         exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 to support  the  proposition  that
         the Appellant would not be at risk on that account in any event.

      9. In relation to the Appellant's mental health, the Judge had  before
         him two reports from the Appellant's GP and Dr George, a consultant
         psychiatrist who had met the Appellant on one occasion.  Dr  George
         indicated that he was not persuaded that the Appellant suffers from
         Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.  Both doctors  concluded  that  the
         Appellant suffers from mild to moderate Major  Depressive  Disorder
         caused in part by the  Appellant's  uncertain  immigration  status.
         The Judge found based on those reports that the Appellant  was  not
         at real risk of self  harm.   Although  the  Judge  noted  that  Dr
         George's report states that the Appellant  would  be  at  increased
         risk of suicide if he felt defeated, the Judge  was  not  satisfied
         based on the totality of the evidence that this was  sufficient  to
         show a real risk.  The Judge noted that the Appellant had family in
         Iran who could support him on return. The Appellant  was  receiving
         medication for his depression and it was noted that he had  insight
         into his condition.

     10. In relation to the Appellant's private life, the Judge  noted  that
         he had lived in the UK for fifteen years, having  lived  previously
         in Japan for seven years and Iran for twenty-three years.   He  had
         not been lawfully resident here for most of his  life.   The  Judge
         considered whether he could benefit from paragraph 399 or  399A  of
         the Immigration Rules but found that he could not.   He  considered
         whether there were very compelling circumstances  which  outweighed
         the  public  interest.   He  also  had  regard   to   section   117
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   Noting  that  the
         Appellant had leave only for  a  limited  period,  he  gave  little
         weight to his private life.   He accepted that  the  Appellant  did
         not intend to cause the death of his wife in Japan and that he  was
         not a risk to the public  in  the  UK  and  that  finding  was  not
         affected by the low level offences for which he  was  convicted  in
         the UK.  Relying on GS (India) and others v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40, the Judge found that, since
         he had already held that the Appellant's mental health  issues  did
         not reach the threshold to engage Article 3 ECHR, and  since  there
         were no other factors bringing  the  case  within  "the  Article  8
         paradigm", the Appellant could not succeed on  Article  8  grounds.



     11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Allen  on
         10  July  2015  on  the  basis  that  there  were  arguable  issues
         concerning the return of failed asylum seekers to Iran.   He  found
         that the remaining grounds had less force but were arguable.   This
         matter comes before me to determine whether the  Decision  contains
         an error of law and if so to either re-make the Decision  or  remit
         the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal to do so.

    Submissions

     12. Mr Turner's grounds can be summarised as follows:-

          1) That the Judge failed to properly consider what  would  happen
             to the Appellant on return as a result of  his  mental  health
             and failed to properly consider the Appellant's mental  health
             when considering his  credibility.   The  Appellant  submitted
             that the Appellant would be bound to be questioned on  return.
             What he would say in response was uncertain due to his  mental
             health so  that  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  does
             genuinely hold anti-regime views is nothing to the point.  The
             issue is whether the  authorities  would  recognise  that  the
             Appellant is mentally ill when considering his  answers.   The
             Judge also held against the Appellant the inconsistent account
             given about his wife's death without considering  whether  the
             inconsistency might be caused by his mental condition.

          2) Coupled with that, Mr Turner relied on  the  judgment  of  UTJ
             Allen in R (on the application of  Ali  Ahmad  Rashid)  v  The
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
             00430 IAC.  Although this is  a  judicial  review,  Mr  Turner
             relied on it to show that SB (Iran) no longer represents  good
             law and that there is to be further country  guidance  on  the
             risk on return to failed asylum seekers to Iran.  He says also
             that the Judge failed to consider what  would  happen  to  the
             Appellant on return to Iran if  he  was  of  interest  to  the
             authorities.

          3) Allied to ground two, Mr Turner says that the Judge also erred
             in finding that the Appellant would have family to support him
             in Iran.  The evidence is that the Appellant's mother  is  old
             and that one of his brothers also suffers from mental illness.
              The only person who might be able to support the Appellant is
             his second brother.  Mr Turner says that  the  evidence  shows
             also that he too has started to go mad.  In terms of accessing
             State support for his condition, Mr Turner  pointed  out  that
             the Appellant has a subjective  fear  of  the  authorities  so
             would be unable to access that support.

          4) In relation to Article 8 ECHR, Mr  Turner  accepted  that  the
             Appellant's case was weaker.  He  said  that  the  Appellant's
             case was however  exceptional  based  on  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant had been outside Iran for a long period and was  not
             a risk in the UK.  The Judge accepted that the  Appellant  did
             not intend to cause the death of his wife.

     13. Mr Melvin's responded to those submissions as follows:-

          1) The Judge made sound findings of fact about  how  the  Iranian
             authorities would view the Appellant's writings.   Those  were
             not published.  There  was  little  evidence  that  they  even
             existed.  The Judge found that the Appellant had an only  mild
             to moderate mental  health  condition  based  on  the  medical
             evidence and that there was a limited risk  of  suicide.   His
             condition was not such as to engage  Article  3  ECHR  on  the
             facts.

          2) In relation to risk on return on account  of  being  a  failed
             asylum seeker, the Appellant was not credible in  relation  to
             the core of his account. Mr Melvin confirmed that there  is  a
             country guidance case due to examine  issues  in  relation  to
             Iran.  Those issues relate to illegal  exit,  availability  of
             documentation and being a failed asylum seeker. The  Appellant
             has an Iranian passport obtained in London.  Even if that  had
             expired, the Appellant could obtain another one and would  not
             be considered to have exited Iran illegally.

          3) The findings in relation to support in Iran, have to  be  read
             in the context of the medical evidence.  The Appellant  is  on
             medication but is not accessing other medical support.

          4) In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the Appellant's presence in the
             UK has been precarious or unlawful.

     14. In reply, Mr Turner indicated that  the  Appellant's  passport  has
         expired and that the Appellant would be unlikely  to  approach  the
         Iranian authorities to renew it because of his subjective  fear  of
         those authorities.  In relation to support in Iran, even though  it
         is the case that the Appellant is receiving medication only for his
         condition, he would still need to  access  support  to  obtain  his
         medication.

    Decision and reasons

     15. Prior to the hearing before me but after the grant  of  permission,
         the Appellant's solicitor  sent  a  letter  dated  4  January  2016
         seeking to adduce further evidence being a supplementary  statement
         from the Appellant and an updated report  from  Dr  George.   Those
         were said to be produced as a result of "recent sensitive  evidence
         disclosed by the Appellant as well as for a general update  on  his
         mental state".  The further evidence  disclosed  by  the  Appellant
         relates to events which he appears to say may have occurred to  him
         in the UK with which Dr George deals briefly in her updated report.
          The report  is  otherwise  largely  unchanged,  certainly  in  its
         material respects.  Mr Turner did not  pursue  the  application  to
         adduce this evidence  and  he  was  right  to  do  so.   Mr  Melvin
         indicated that he had not received the letter or further  evidence.
         It would not be appropriate for me to  deal  with  it  without  the
         Respondent having any opportunity to  consider  it.   The  evidence
         such as it is was not before the Judge at the time of the  Decision
         and relates to a wholly new claim.  As such, it could not  possibly
         form the basis for a finding of an error of law  relating  to  that
         Decision.  It could of course be taken into account if a further re-
         hearing were required following my decision.  Equally, however,  it
         could form the basis of  further  submissions  if  my  decision  is
         adverse to the Appellant.   For  the  reasons  set  out  below,  my
         decision is adverse to the Appellant and if the Appellant wishes to
         rely on this further claim, it will therefore be for his solicitors
         to make further submissions.  For that reason, I  make  no  further
         comment on this evidence.

     16. The Judge's starting point in  the  Decision  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's credibility about events which  occurred  when  he  was
         returned from Japan to Iran is the findings of the previous  Judges
         in the two earlier appeals of the Appellant.  That is  clearly  the
         correct approach following Devaseelan v Secretary of State for  the
         Home Department [2002] UKAIT 000702.  This was however the  Judge's
         starting  point  and  not  his  end  point.   He   considered   the
         Appellant's evidence, noting his change of position in relation  to
         whether his writings had been published.  It was open to the  Judge
         to find that the Appellant's claim was an exaggeration and that the
         inconsistencies and failures to disclose damaged his credibility.

     17. The high point of the Appellant's case in relation to  the  failure
         to disclose his conviction  and  deal  straightforwardly  with  his
         wife's death is Dr George's report  which  notes  that  this  is  a
         sensitive issue and that this may be linked to  his  mental  health
         issues; also that he has no insight in relation to  the  conviction
         and events.  However, at the  time  of  the  earlier  appeals,  the
         Appellant had not  disclosed  the  conviction  and  was  found  not
         credible at that time for other reasons.  The Judge's finding  that
         the Appellant was not credible was not based solely on that failure
         but because of exaggerations in the Appellant's core  claim.   Even
         if there was an error by the Judge in failing to  note  that  there
         may be a reason for the failure to disclose the conviction  earlier
         and for the inconsistency, any such error is not material.

     18. The Judge fairly summarises the evidence of the Appellant's  mental
         health condition at [30] to [33] focussing  in  particular  on  the
         report of Dr George and the Appellant's GP.  The Judge accepts that
         Dr George puts the risk of suicide higher than does the Appellant's
         GP at [32] but gives reasons for finding that this still  does  not
         reach the threshold of a real risk.  The Judge relies in particular
         on the fact  that  the  Appellant  is  taking  medication  for  his
         condition and has insight into his condition.  He  relies  also  on
         the fact that the Appellant failed in his appeal  as  long  ago  as
         2007 and had not attempted self-harm in the  period  since.    That
         finding was open to the Judge on the evidence.

     19. The issue then becomes one of whether the  Appellant  would  be  at
         risk on return due to an interest in him by  the  authorities.  The
         Appellant has been roundly disbelieved by two Judges as to his core
         claim.  Although there is material in the Appellant's bundle  which
         is said to be some of his writings, none of those are dated, it  is
         not now said that those have been published and the  Appellant  was
         not believed about those writings having come to the  attention  of
         the authorities when the Appellant was returned to Iran from Japan.
          The Judge was therefore entitled to find as he did  at  [26]  that
         there Appellant would not be at risk from the  authorities  because
         there would be no writings to "come to light".

     20. Moving on then to the more generalised assertion that the Appellant
         would come to the attention of the  authorities  because  he  is  a
         failed asylum seeker  who  would  be  forcibly  returned,  for  the
         reasons which the Judge gave which in turn arose from  the  earlier
         appeal findings, the Appellant is not someone who  is  believed  to
         have exited Iran illegally.  That he is  able  to  return  to  Iran
         voluntarily is also underlined, as the Judge  found,  by  the  fact
         that he obtained a passport from the Iranian authorities in the UK.
          Although it appears that this passport may now have expired, it is
         open to the Appellant to seek to renew it.   The  reliance  on  the
         case of SB (Iran)  is  therefore  secondary  to  the  Judge's  main
         finding that the Appellant would not be of interest in any event as
         he had not exited Iran illegally.

     21. Insofar as Mr Turner relies on  the  case  of  Rashid,  that  is  a
         judicial review of a rejection of further submissions  as  a  fresh
         claim for  which  the  test  is  very  different.  In  Rashid,  the
         Applicant was an Iranian Kurd (which this  Appellant  is  not)  and
         reliance was placed on a report of Dr Joffe which  was  not  before
         the Judge in this case.  I note in passing also that  the  judgment
         in Rashid could not have been relied upon before the  Judge  as  it
         post-dates the Decision. Whilst it is  my  understanding  that  the
         forthcoming country guidance cases are not confined to  the  return
         of Iranian  Kurdish  failed  asylum  seekers,  the  fact  that  the
         correctness of SB (Iran) was successfully put at issue in the  case
         of Rashid is not support for a finding of an error of law  in  this
         case. It was not argued before the Judge  that  SB  (Iran)  was  no
         longer good law even if it was relevant.  As I have noted,  it  was
         only  of  peripheral  relevance  based  on  the  finding  that  the
         Appellant had not illegally exited Iran.

     22. The Judge's finding in relation to support on return to Iran is  at
         [33].  The finding there is only that the Appellant has a family to
         support him and that mental health treatment is available.  That is
         not central to the finding that his mental health condition is  not
         such that removal  would  breach  his  Article  3  rights.   It  is
         prefaced by the fact that the Appellant is being  treated  only  by
         way of medication which he takes because he has  insight  into  his
         own condition.  There is no suggestion in the evidence that he  has
         support  in  the  UK  from  a  partner  or  ongoing  mental  health
         treatment.  In fact, the evidence suggests that the  Appellant  has
         had only intermittent engagement with the authorities in the UK for
         his mental health.   As the Judge notes, it was not  argued  before
         him that the necessary mental health treatment is not available  in
         Iran.

     23. The Judge deals with the Article 8 claim at [34]  to  [38]  of  the
         Decision.  Although the Judge accepts that the  Appellant  did  not
         intend to kill his wife and is not on account of that conviction or
         the minor convictions in the UK a risk in the UK, the fact  remains
         that the Appellant does not have any status in the UK.  He  arrived
         as an asylum seeker and his asylum claim has failed.  He had  leave
         to remain on a discretionary basis at an  earlier  stage  but  that
         too, as the Judge notes,  was  precarious  and  further  leave  was
         refused.  The Judge was entitled to have  regard  to  the  criminal
         conviction; indeed he was bound to do so under section  117C.   The
         Judge found that the index offence was not particularly serious  in
         spite of the nature of it. However, this is not a case  where,  but
         for that offence, the Appellant would continue to have leave to  be
         in the UK and the Judge was right to consider the Article  8  claim
         against the period of precarious and unlawful presence  as  he  has
         done.  The Appellant is no longer in a relationship in the UK.  The
         Judge took account of the Appellant's mental health also as part of
         his Article 8 claim.  Mr Turner acknowledged that he was on  weaker
         ground in relation to the Article 8 claim and he was  right  to  do
         so.

     24. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does
         not contain any material error of law.

    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  does  not
    contain an error of law.  The Decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gibbs promulgated on 25 March 2015 is hereby confirmed.

Signed      [pic]      Date 9 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
