
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01605/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 November 2015                  |On 26 January 2016                   |
|Oral determination given following   |                                     |
|the hearing                          |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MOUCTAR DIALLO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Hulse, instructed by CK Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the respondent's appeal against a decision made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Stanford which  was  promulgated  on  31  December  2014
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 12 December 2014.  For  ease  of
    reference I shall throughout this determination refer to the  Secretary
    of State who was the original respondent as "the  Secretary  of  State"
    and to Mr Diallo who was the original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Guinea who was born on  26  December  1985
    and he claims that he arrived in this country in April 2005 and claimed
    asylum on the same day.   This  claim  was  refused  and  certified  as
    clearly  unfounded  but  following  judicial  review  proceedings   the
    claimant was given permission to bring the application, which was  then
    withdrawn by consent in  April  2007.   The  Secretary  of  State  then
    withdrew  the  decision  to  refuse  the   claimant's   asylum   claim,
    reconsidered it and  refused  it  again  but  this  time  allowing  the
    claimant a right of appeal. In other words the second decision did  not
    include certification of the claimant's claim.  However the  claimant's
    appeal to the Tribunal was dismissed in June 2007.

 3. Thereafter on 7 January 2008 at Canterbury Crown Court the claimant was
    convicted of possessing a false identity document with  the  intent  of
    seeking to leave the country  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of  eleven
    months' imprisonment.  The judge who sentenced him made  a  deportation
    recommendation.  Subsequently on 19 June 2008 the claimant  was  served
    with a notice of decision to deport him against which he  appealed  and
    his appeal was dismissed by a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated
    6 January 2009.  Subsequent attempts to bring judicial review  proceeds
    in the High Court were unsuccessful and a deportation order was made on
    15 January 2010.

 4. Further representations were made on the claimant's behalf  in  January
    and February  2010  which  were  treated  as  requests  to  revoke  the
    deportation order which were refused with no further right  of  appeal.
    Subsequently further representations were made on 30 November 2010  and
    further to this additional representations were made on the  claimant's
    behalf on 9 January 2013 and a decision was made on  25  July  2015  to
    refuse to revoke the deportation order and a supplementary decision was
    also issued in November 2014 which addressed the  family  issues  which
    arose following confirmation that the claimant is the father of  L  who
    he claimed was his daughter, the mother being a Ms D W with whom he had
    been in a relationship.

 5. Because the new representations  raised  matters  which  had  not  been
    considered earlier (and the respondent treated the representations as a
    giving rise to a fresh claim)  the  claimant  had  a  right  of  appeal
    against this decision and it was this appeal which  was  considered  by
    Judge Stanford who allowed the appeal.  I  note  that  in  addition  to
    founding his appeal on human rights grounds on the basis that he had  a
    family life with his daughter, the claimant also now  sought  to  claim
    that he should be entitled to asylum and  that  therefore  his  removal
    would be  in  breach  of  his  rights  under  the  Refugee  Convention,
    notwithstanding that his earlier claim to asylum had been  refused  and
    his appeal against that decision dismissed. It is not necessary for the
    purposes of this appeal to consider this aspect of the claim because it
    was dismissed by Judge Stanford and  no  challenge  has  been  made  on
    behalf of the claimant to that aspect of the decision.

 6. The judge did however allow the claimant's appeal on the basis  of  his
    Article 8 rights and he also allowed it  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    which is an aspect of his decision which will be discussed below.

 7. The basis of the claimant's appeal can be summarised briefly insofar as
    the Article 8 aspects are concerned.  The claimant had  a  relationship
    with Ms W but that relationship had come to an end in  or  about  2011.
    However there was a daughter L who was born and the claimant says  that
    he was the father and it is not now in dispute and was not  in  dispute
    before Judge Stanford that DNA tests established that he was indeed the
    father.  The appeal proceeded on the basis that he had  so  established
    to the necessary standard of proof and that is plainly right.

 8. The claimant asserted that because  he  had  a  family  life  with  his
    daughter it was in her interests to go on seeing him and also that  his
    removal would bring that family  life  to  an  end,  that  in  all  the
    circumstances of this case such a decision would not  be  proportionate
    and so his removal would be in breach of his Article 8 rights.

 9. The judge it is fair to say gave very  careful  consideration  to  this
    claim. The decision which he made is thorough, examines the evidence in
    detail and also sets out, in my judgement correctly,  the  legal  basis
    upon which the decision had to be made.  As the  judge  noted,  because
    the claimant had not received a sentence of one year's imprisonment  or
    above, he did not fall within the definition of "foreign criminal"  for
    the purposes of the new Part 5A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which was inserted as from 28 July 2014  by  virtue  of
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  For the  purposes  of  Section
    117C which  sets  out  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
    "foreign criminals"  when  considering  their  Article  8  rights,  the
    definition of "foreign criminal" as  set  out  within  Section  117D(2)
    means a person

         "(a)     who is not a British citizen,

         (b)  who has been  convicted in the United Kingdom of  an  offence,
             and

         (c)  who -

             (i)  has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment   of  at
             least twelve months,

             (ii) has been  convicted of an offence to cause serious  harm,
             or

             (iii)    is a persistent offender ..."

10. It is common ground obviously that this claimant has not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months  and  it  is  not
    suggested on behalf of the Secretary of State (and nor could it  be  on
    the facts of this case) that the offence of which he has been convicted
    has  caused  serious  harm  or  that  he  is  a  persistent   offender.
    Accordingly the judge was correct when finding  at  paragraph  67  that
    Section 117C is of no application in this appeal because  the  claimant
    is not a "foreign  criminal"  as  defined  for  the  purposes  of  that
    section.  He is also correct when stating that  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules does not apply  in  this  appeal  (at  paragraph  64)
    because none of the  conditions  set  out  within  that  paragraph  are
    satisfied.  He has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
    least twelve months and nor has the Secretary of  State  expressed  her
    view that his deportation would be conducive to the public good and  in
    the public interest because his "offending has caused serious  harm  or
    [he is] a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
    law".  (The wording of this follows the wording set out within  Section
    117D of the 2002 Act already referred to above).

11. Accordingly the appeal had to be considered on the basis  of  what  was
    contained within the Immigration Rules at paragraph 390  which  is  set
    out at paragraph 62 of the judge's decision.   As  the  judge  set  out
    paragraph 390 of the Rules states that :

         "390.The application for revocation of a deportation order must  be
             reconsidered in the light of all the  circumstances  including
             the following:

             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii)  any representations made in support of revocation;

             (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                  maintenance of effective immigration control; and

             (iv)  the   interests   of   the   applicant   including   any
                  compassionate circumstances."

12. As the judge notes at paragraph 63 "the core issue in  this  appeal  is
    whether deportation would breach the [claimant's] right to family  life
    with  his  daughter"  and  accordingly  he  decided  to  "include   the
    circumstances referred to in paragraph  390  when  considering  whether
    there would be such a breach".  This statement by the judge is relevant
    when considering the judge's decision not just to allow the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds (clearly with reference to the Article 8 rights of
    the claimant and his family) but also "under  the  Immigration  Rules",
    because it  appears  that  in  reliance  on  paragraph  390  the  judge
    considered there to be an overlap between the provisions set out within
    paragraph 390 and the human rights grounds under Article 8  which  fell
    to  be  considered  on  the  basis  of  whether  or  not  in  all   the
    circumstances of this case the removal of the claimant pursuant to  the
    deportation order which had been  made would now still be proportionate
    given the change  in  the  claimant's  circumstances  if  so  found  in
    consequence of such relationship with his daughter as he was  found  to
    have.

13. The judge was also in my judgement correct when finding at paragraph 66
    that paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules which  provides  that   "In
    the case of a person who has been deported following conviction  for  a
    criminal offence, the continuation of a deportation order against  that
    person will be the proper course: (a) in the case of a  conviction  for
    an  offence  for  which  the  person  was  sentence  to  a  period   of
    imprisonment of less than four years, unless  ten  years  have  elapsed
    since the making of the deportation order ..." did  not  apply  because
    the claimant had not yet been  deported.   He  was  also  right  in  my
    judgement that if the deportation would now be in breach of his Article
    8 rights then the order could not continue.

14. The task therefore for the judge was to weigh up all the factors, being
    those which would suggest the deportation order should still apply (and
    in particular the  public  interest  in  deporting  people  who  commit
    offences and who have no right to remain)   but  also  considering  the
    strength of such private and family life rights as this  claimant  had.
    The judge properly took into account the provisions of Section 117B  of
    the 2002  Act  which  sets  out  the  "public  interest  considerations
    applicable in all cases" where Article 8 is concerned and in particular
    that it is in the public interest and in particular in the interests of
    the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom that persons who  seek  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able  to  speak  English  (at
    subparagraph (ii)) and that  it  is  in  the  public  interest  and  in
    particular in the economic wellbeing of this country that  persons  who
    seek to enter  or  remain  are  financially  independent  because  such
    persons are not a burden on taxpayers and are better able to  integrate
    into society (at subparagraph (iii)).

15. He also had properly in mind that little  weight  should  be  given  to
    either a private life  or  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
    partner that is established by a person at a time when that  person  is
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully as this claimant was (at  subparagraph
    (iv)) and also that little weight should be given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is  precarious,  as  this  claimant's  immigration   status   was   (at
    subparagraph (vi)).

16. However with regard to Section 117B, the judge found (at paragraph  75)
    that although the claimant  was  not  financially  independent  at  the
    moment because he  was  not  permitted  to  work,  he  had  nonetheless
    demonstrated a willingness to work by working as  a  volunteer,  albeit
    without permission in charity shops over a continued  and  considerable
    period of time whilst in the United Kingdom and also  that  he  had  "a
    reasonable basic understanding of English for the many  necessities  of
    life using English".

17. Although the judge acknowledged that he was  required  to  give  little
    weight to the claimant's private life or to his relationship with Ms  W
    (which in any event was not then ongoing) and made a  specific  finding
    that the private life which the claimant had would not "alone ...  make
    disproportionate his deportation", he was nonetheless correct  when  he
    stated at paragraph 77 that "This [claimant] is not relying as part  of
    his family life on the relationship with his former partner but on  the
    relationship with their  daughter".   Accordingly,  the  judge  had  to
    consider the Article 8 rights of the claimant according to  established
    principles and this is what he did.

18.  As  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  in  her  admirably   succinct   submissions
    confirmed, the issue in this case is a narrow one. Her arguments  which
    rely on the grounds of appeal is that the judge's finding at  paragraph
    69 that  the claimant had a  family  life  with  his  daughter  is  not
    adequately reasoned in light of the judge's acceptance at paragraph  43
    that "there is no corroborative evidence" in support of  his  claim  to
    that effect. The judge, it should be noted, had in mind that he was not
    registered as the father on L's birth certificate  (see  paragraph  42)
    and set out the claimant's evidence in this regard in some detail.  The
    way Ms Brocklesby-Weller put the Secretary  of  State's  case  is  that
    there was "a lacuna in the evidence".

19. The claimant had not produced any evidence from L's mother or from  her
    school. Further there was a letter  on  her,  that  is  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller's, file from Ms W's solicitors dated 20 March 2004 which  seemed
    to have been attached to  the  claimant's  bundle  from  which  it  was
    apparent that Ms W did not want to agree to DNA testing because it  was
    said she believed that the claimant  "would  try  and  obtain  parental
    responsibility for L which our client does  not  believe  in  L's  best
    interests".  Furthermore Ms W's solicitors state in their  letter  that
    "our client feels that your client [that is the claimant] is using L to
    secure his own immigration status and once he has  this,  he  would  no
    longer show any interest in her.

20.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submits that if the letter was before  the  judge
    that was something which should have been referred to in  his  decision
    because it was relevant evidence which should properly have been  taken
    into account.

21. In my judgement this submission cannot  succeed.  In  the  first  place
    there is no basis on which this Tribunal  can  properly  conclude  that
    that letter was actually before the judge.  Ms Hulse  who  appeared  at
    the original appeal before Judge Stanford has no memory of this  letter
    at all and it is not in her file and I accept her  submission  that  if
    that letter had at the time been in the file of the Secretary of  State
    the Secretary of State's representative at that hearing would have been
    in a position to cross-examine the claimant with regard to the contents
    of this letter and had she done so Ms Hulse would then have stated that
    she did not have a copy of this letter. I consider it more likely  than
    not in these circumstances that that letter was not within  the  papers
    which had been put before the judge.

22. Even if I am wrong about this it is clear  from  the  judge's  decision
    that he understood that the relationship between the claimant and Ms  W
    at that time was strained. The judge sets out at paragraph 47 that  the
    visits which the claimant had made to visit his daughter were variable.
     The judge set out the claimant's evidence that he "has tried to  visit
    Sheffield to see  his  daughter  when  he  can  afford  it.   This  has
    sometimes been twice a month and  sometimes  as  infrequently  as  once
    every two months.  He has tried to visit at Christmas, on birthdays and
    for school events".

23. The judge then says what other efforts he has  made  but  also  records
    that contact such as the claimant would have liked  to  make  "has  not
    been possible recently because her mother has  made  it  difficult  for
    him" and that  "She has on occasions not picked up his calls".   So  it
    is quite clear that the judge had at the front of  his  mind  the  fact
    that whatever contact he had with his daughter was  not  at  that  time
    with the wholehearted consent or approval of Ms W.

24. The first task of the judge in this case as  in  any  other  where  the
    evidence was challenged, was to make findings of fact. On the one  hand
    there was the account of the claimant which  was  not  corroborated  as
    fully as it might be, in particular because there was no evidence  from
    L's mother, although it was supported by evidence of a Ms AR, a  friend
    of the claimant who was cross-examined, and on the other hand there was
    the contention made on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    Tribunal should not accept that evidence but should  rather  find  that
    there was not a family life that existed between the claimant  and  his
    daughter.

25. The judge had to consider whether or not notwithstanding  the  lack  of
    any substantial  corroborative  evidence  he  accepted  the  claimant's
    evidence in this respect.  Although it is submitted within the  grounds
    of appeal on which the Secretary of State continues to rely  that  "The
    FTT has failed to adequately reason" the finding that the  evidence  of
    the claimant was to be accepted, in my judgement this submission is not
    properly arguable and I reject it.

26. Having set out the evidence of the claimant in some detail  and  having
    at the front of his mind that "there is  little  documentary  or  other
    corroborative evidence" to support the claimant's evidence,  the  judge
    nonetheless finds at paragraph 49 that "the evidence of the  [claimant]
    is consistent and detailed and in matters relating to his  concern  for
    his daughter, is supported by the cross-examined evidence of  AR",  and
    that accordingly "I find the [claimant's] evidence to be credible".  It
    is hard to see what better reason a judge could give. The claimant  was
    cross-examined by a representative of the Secretary of  State  and  his
    story remained consistent and detailed and the judge  was  entitled  to
    accept that evidence. Having accepted it, it was  the  judge's  job  to
    apply the law properly to that evidence and he did so.

27. The grounds also complain that the finding  at  paragraph  80  that  it
    would be "In the interests of L that she continues to see and meet  her
    father from time to time" is not adequately reasoned but again I do not
    accept this submission.  All that is said on behalf of the Secretary of
    State in this regard (at paragraph 6 of the grounds) is that  "The  FTT
    has failed to provide adequate reasons for this finding in light of the
    full circumstances of the case".   In fact what the judge has  done  is
    set out the evidence which he has  accepted  for  the  reasons  he  has
    given, which amounts in substance to the claimant wishing  to  have  as
    strong a relationship  with  his  daughter  as  he  can  and  in  those
    circumstances and taking into consideration also his finding  that  the
    claimant wanted to become financially independent and so  on,  that  it
    would be in  the  interests  of  the  claimant's  daughter  to  have  a
    relationship with her father.

28. The judge was entitled to find that it would be in the interests of the
    claimant's daughter to see her father in  circumstances  where  he  had
    found that the claimant wished to do the right thing by  his  daughter.
    Of course another judge may have come to  a  different  conclusion  but
    this Tribunal did not hear the evidence which the judge heard and would
    not lightly interfere with a finding made by a judge on  the  basis  of
    the evidence he heard, when that judge has applied the law properly  to
    that evidence.  Whether or not  I  or  any  other  judge  may  on  that
    evidence have reached the same conclusion is beside the  point.  In  my
    judgement the findings the judge made cannot  by  any  stretch  of  the
    imagination  be  said  to  be  perverse  and   they   are   accordingly
    sustainable.

29. It follows that the judge's finding that the appeal stood to be allowed
    on human rights grounds was open to him.

30. I turn now briefly to the issue of whether or not the judge should also
    "have allowed the appeal" under  the  Immigration  Rules  which  was  a
    matter troubling First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Osborne, when giving her
    reasons for granting the Secretary of State permission to  appeal.   At
    paragraph 5 of her reasons, Judge Osborne states that

         "I also note that the judge has recorded that he has  'allowed  the
         appeal' on human rights grounds  and  also  allowed  it  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  I am not satisfied that the decision  discloses
         any reason for allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and
         this may therefore constitute a further arguable error of law."

31. In my judgement the judge's decision to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules does not in fact constitute an arguable or any  error
    of law.  The judge as I have noted earlier, set out at paragraph 62 the
    provisions contained within paragraph 390 of the Rules  which  included
    that he was obliged to consider the application for the  revocation  of
    the deportation order in light  of  the  interests  of  the  applicant,
    including any compassionate circumstances and had stated  at  paragraph
    62 that "the core issue" in the appeal was whether or  not  deportation
    would "breach the [claimant's] right to family life with his daughter".
    He had regard to the circumstances referred to in paragraph  390  "when
    considering  whether  there  would  be  such  a  breach".    In   these
    circumstances, as the judge was making his decision in  light  of  what
    was contained within the Rules, having found that  the  maintenance  of
    the deportation order would be unlawful because it would be  in  breach
    of the claimant's Article 8 rights, it was entirely reasonable for  him
    to allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  well  as  under
    Article 8.  In any event, clearly this is not material to the substance
    of the appeal.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
allowing the claimant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
rights grounds is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
this effect is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 20 January 2016

