
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 April and 16 June 2014                   |On 19 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SEROOK SAEED

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     (For the hearing on 04/04/14) Mr G Saunders
     (For the hearing on 16/06/14) Ms A Holmes
     Senior Home Office Presenting Officers
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, Instructed by Messrs Kesar
& Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of  State)  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal   Panel
    comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin and Mrs L Schmitt JP - Non-
    Legal Member, who in a determination promulgated  on  5  February  2014
    allowed the appeal of the Respondent (hereinafter called the  Claimant)
    a citizen of Iraq whose date of birth is 21 January  1987  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 12  July  2013  to  refuse  to
    grant to the Claimant asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended)
    and to make a deportation order by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

2.   In granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  had
    inter alia this to say:

         "The Appellant was made the subject of a deportation order  on  the
         basis of his convictions including  possession of a  Class  A  drug
         with intent to supply, affray.  His appeal was allowed by the Panel
         on the basis that he had been in the UK since he was 12 and that he
         has virtually no links to Iraq, the best interests of his  children
         played a very limited role.

         The grounds argue that the Panel failed to  give  adequate  reasons
         for their finding that he had rebutted the presumption that he is a
         danger under Section 72  given  the  assessments  of  the  risk  he
         presents.  There were inadequate reasons  given  for  the  findings
         that he would be at risk  in  Iraq  and  in  need  of  humanitarian
         protection.  The findings on medical treatment were inadequate".


3.   Thus the appeal initially came before  me  on  4  April  2014  when  Mr
    Saunders opened his submissions by  informing  me  that  he  no  longer
    relied on the ground relating to the availability of medical  treatment
    to the Claimant's (haemophiliac) in Iraq, as clearly the Panel attached
    little weight to it in allowing the Claimant's appeal and he  was  also
    mindful of what was said by Mr Mackenzie who  prepared  the  Claimant's
    detailed Rule 24 response in particular at paragraph 18 in that regard.



4.   Insofar as ground 1 was concerned,  it  had  been  pointed  out  by  Mr
    Mackenzie in his Rule 24 response that  that  ground  was  misconceived
    because the requirements of Section 72(2) did not apply to the Claimant
    because  he  had  never  been  sentenced  to  more  than   two   years'
    imprisonment.   Therefore,  the  only  particularly  relevant  part  of
    Section 72 that remained, was at sub-Section (4) that provided  that  a
    person would be presumed to have been convicted by a final judgment  of
    a particularly serious crime to constitute a danger to the community of
    the UK, if he was convicted of an offence specified  by  order  of  the
    Secretary of State. Mr Mackenzie's response continued however that that
    order was held by the Court of Appeal in EN (Serbia) [2010] 2 B 633  to
    be ultra vires.

5.   A query arose at that stage of the hearing, because most helpfully,  Mr
    Mackenzie had produced the Court of Appeal decision  of  13  July  2010
    when, in considering the Claimant's appeal against the conviction of 14
    July 2009, for possessing a Class A drug with intent to supply, it  was
    decided to quash that decision  and,  at  paragraph  13  of  the  Court
    judgment, Maurice Kay LJ had this to say:

         "What we shall do is substitute a conviction for simple  possession
         of a Class A drug (cocaine).  We shall not impose  any  penalty  in
         relation to it at this stage in view of the time he  has  spent  in
         custody.  We are not going to give him time to consider a re-trial.
          We think a re-trial is inappropriate given  the  amount  involved,
         the time spent in custody and the substituted  conviction  we  have
         added.  We make no order in relation to the money or the telephone"
         (Underlining added).


7.   Mr Saunders expressed some  confusion  in  relation  to  this  decision
    because at paragraph 12(f)  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  letter  of
    refusal the following was said:

         "On 13 July 2010 the Court of  Appeal  in  considering  the  appeal
         against the conviction of 14 July 2009 substituted the  verdict  of
         'possessing a Class A drug (cocaine) with intent to supply' with  a
         verdict of 'Possessing a Class A drug (cocaine)' and sentenced  you
         to 'no further penalty'.  HMP Wandsworth advised on  20  July  2010
         that you had been released on 13 July 2010 as your  conviction  was
         believed to  be  quashed.   However,  the  Court  of  Appeal  later
         clarified on 17 January 2013 that 'no further penalty'  meant  that
         the sentence of  42  months  remained  the  same.   Therefore  your
         custodial sentence should have been completed and your liability to
         deportation considered at that time".


8.   Mr Saunders was concerned,  not  least  in  light  of  the  submissions
    raised in the Rule 24 response, to clarify exactly what  was  meant  in
    that passage by the author of the refusal letter and in particular what
    decision the Court of Appeal of 17 January 2013 (if it existed  at  all
    and was not a mistake) referred to.  Whilst appreciating  that  such  a
    request  in  itself  might  not  be  sufficient  for  me  to  grant  an
    adjournment request (Mr Mackenzie quite properly pointing out that this
    issue in itself was not the subject matter of the Secretary of  State's
    grounds of appeal upon which permission was granted) Mr Saunders  added
    there was a more particular  reason  why  an  adjournment  was  sought,
    namely; that following such investigation and after proper  and  fuller
    consideration of the matters raised in Mr Mackenzie's Rule 24 response,
    it might be the  case  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  wish  to
    carefully review her position as to whether in  the  circumstances  she
    intended to continue to pursue to her appeal.

9.   It was on that basis in the interests of justice that  I  decided  that
    the adjournment request should be granted.

10.  I was informed by Mr Saunders that should there be any change  in  mind
    on the part of the Secretary of State in the interim as to  whether  or
    not she intended to continue to pursue her appeal,  both  the  Tribunal
    and the Claimant's legal representatives would be immediately informed.

11.  At the outset of the resumed hearing before  me  on  16  June  2014  Ms
    Holmes, who now represented the Respondent, informed me as follows:

         "Having looked at the determination and looked at the grounds I  am
         of the same view expressed by Mr Saunders that the grounds are  not
         sustainable and I simply rely on the grounds and leave it at that".


12.  In light of that most helpful clarification on the part of  Ms  Holmes,
    I did not trouble Mr Mackenzie to address me.  In common with Ms Holmes
    and having read the determination in conjunction with  a  most  helpful
    and detailed Rule 24 response prepared by Mr Mackenzie it  is  apparent
    to me that the panel's determination contained no misdirection  of  law
    and their fact-finding process cannot be criticised.  I find  there  is
    nothing to  suggest  that  the  panel's  conclusions  drawn  from  that
    evidence were not reasonably open to them.

13.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982, I find that it cannot be said that the  Panel's  finding  were
    irrational  and/or  Wednesbury  unreasonable  such  as  to  amount   to
    perversity.  It cannot be said that they were inadequate.  This is  not
    a case where the Panel's reasoning was  such  that  the  Tribunal  were
    unable to understand  the  thought  processes  that  they  employed  in
    reaching their decision.

14.  I find that the Panel properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that they considered to be critical to their decision on  the  material
    issues raised before them in this appeal.  The findings they made  were
    clearly open to them on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

Decision

15.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.




Signed                                  Date 17 June 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

