
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01387/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 January 2018                   |On 6 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     an
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This  case  has  a  long  history.  In  brief  the  respondent  made  a
    deportation order on 21 July 2009 following the appellant's  conviction
    in 2007. An appeal against the decision was refused on  4  March  2010.
    Since then the appellant has made a number of  further  representations
    regarding a claim for asylum and a claim under article 8  ECHR.  On  25
    June 2014 the respondent refused the appellant's human rights and other
    claims in the context of  an  application  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order. The appellant appealed that decision. The procedural history  is
    set out  in  paragraph  5  but  for  present  purposes  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 November  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Henderson
    refused the appeal. The appellant has appealed that decision.

 2. The appellant is an Iranian national born 2 December 1976.  He  arrived
    in the UK in December 2000 and claimed asylum.  That  was  refused.  In
    2002 he married PG who is now a British citizen. They have one  son,  P
    born 19 September 2003, who is now 14 years old. The appellant  and  PG
    were divorced in 2010. P lives with his mother but sees  the  appellant
    regularly.

 3. In 2007 the appellant was convicted on his plea of offences contrary to
    section 25 of The Identity Card  Act  2007.  In  October  2008  he  was
    sentenced to 27 months imprisonment. He has no other convictions.

Grounds of Appeal

Ground 2

 4. There are two grounds of appeal. Taking  in  reverse  order  the  first
    relates to alleged  misunderstandings  by  the  Judge  of,  first,  the
    submissions of counsel, secondly, evidence from the appellant,  thirdly
    the interpretation placed on the evidence of Ms Tyrell, a social worker
    and fourthly failing to note that there was evidence of  problems  with
    P's mental health.

 5. In support of the first two branches of that ground counsel produced  a
    witness  statement  from  Emma  Daykin,  counsel  who  represented  the
    appellant before the FtT along with contemporaneous notes from her  and
    and her pupil, Aphra Bruce-Jones. The respondent's rule 24 response did
    not challenge the accuracy of their account. Accordingly we accept  the
    factual basis upon which this ground of appeal is based.

 6. At paragraphs 7 and 30 the Judge records that Ms Daykin confirmed  that
    the appellant was not relying on matters relating to his mental health.
    This was inaccurate. She confirmed that  there  was  not  a  standalone
    article 3 case based on the appellant's mental health. But she went  to
    submit that it was relevant to the article 8 issues and whether it  was
    unduly harsh for the child to remain without his father. She  submitted
    that there was evidence from Dr Cohen that if he was separated from his
    son the appellant's mental state would deteriorate very  significantly.
    This would exacerbate his depression and PTSD and  significantly  raise
    his risk of suicide. This was a factor to be  weighed  in  the  balance
    when considering the unduly harsh question since it would impact on the
    quality of the relationship that the son would have with his father. MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617 makes it clear that all the  circumstances
    are relevant when considering the unduly harsh question.

 7. At paragraph 25 the appellant is recorded as stating that he would  not
    be able to keep in touch with his son, even if he was  able  to  remain
    alive. What he in fact said was that if he remained alive he would make
    contact with his son. "So long as I could I  would  make  contact  with
    him."

 8. At paragraph 24 the Judge comments on the appellant's attitude  to  his
    offending. He is recorded as saying that he did not regard the  use  of
    fake ID cards as a crime because he needed to work to support his  son.
    Everyone was doing the same thing in order to work  and  the  employers
    were prepared to allow it as they needed the people to do the work. The
    Judge then comments that it appeared from the  tenor  of  his  evidence
    that he did not appear to accept that he had done  anything  wrong;  it
    was better  than  selling  drugs  or  being  violent.  The  Judge  then
    commented that this  evidence  was  not  consistent  with  Ms  Daykin's
    submission that he was remorseful. The note from Ms Daykin's  pupil  is
    in the following terms, Q: "Why did  you  commit  your  crime?"  A:  "I
    didn't know I made a  crime.  It  was  fake  ID  cards.  Reason  I  got
    involved. I had no work, no support. I see everyone is using fake  work
    permissions. I was wrong. I didn't know it was a crime. I  would  never
    have done it."

 9. The Judge records the evidence of Ms  Tyrell,  the  social  worker,  in
    paragraphs  29  to  35.  At  paragraph  31  she  records  that  P   was
    experiencing some symptoms associated with reduced emotional  wellbeing
    due to concerns about separation from his father. This  Ms  Tyrell  had
    said could lead to deterioration  in  his  mental  health  if  he  were
    separated from his  father  at  this  point  in  his  life.  The  Judge
    commented that there was no supporting medical evidence on this matter.
    However Ms Tyrell had used a Department  of  health  tool  to  evaluate
    whether P was suffering from a depressive illness. That showed that  he
    was not. The Judge commented that on an objective basis given the  test
    score the likelihood of P  suffering  from  a  depressive  disorder  is
    currently low to middling and did not appear  to  support  Ms  Tyrell's
    conclusions. The submission was that the Judge had missed the point. It
    was future deterioration which the expert was concerned about. Moreover
    there had been evidence from P's mother to the effect that P  had  been
    referred to CAM, an organisation specialising in child depression, when
    the appellant was sent  to  prison.  This  together  with  Ms  Tyrell's
    evidence about anticipated mental health problems were factors that the
    Judge had failed to place any or sufficient weight.

Respondent's response to ground 2

10. As noted above the rule 24 response did not suggest  that  the  factual
    basis on which ground 2 was based was incorrect. In summary it  was  to
    the effect that the Judge  had  recorded  and  considered  all  of  the
    circumstances. Mr Melvin submitted that there was no materiality in the
    appellant's mental health issue. On the  appellant's  attitude  to  his
    crime she had made findings open to her. The Judge  had  made  detailed
    findings about the expert report.  The  fact  was  that  there  was  no
    medical evidence about P's mental health.

Conclusions on ground

11. It is clear that the Judge misunderstood  the  submission  made  by  Ms
    Daykin in relation to the  appellant's  mental  health.  There  was  no
    article 3 point being taken but Ms Daykin did make submissions that his
    mental health did impact on the article 8 considerations and whether it
    would be unduly harsh on P  for  the  appellant  to  be  deported.  The
    evidence of Dr Cohen is contained in a letter dated 24 January 2015, so
    it is now some 3 years old. She  expresses  the  opinion  that  if  the
    appellant were to be separated from his  son  again  his  mental  state
    would  deteriorate  very  significantly  and   "exacerbation   of   his
    depression and PTSD would significantly raise his risk of suicide.  His
    relationship with his son is the protective factor  in  preventing  his
    from suicide and if he were for example to be  faced  with  removal  to
    Iran this protective factor would feel to him as if it  was  no  longer
    there."

12. We are satisfied that the judge was in error in not  taking  this  into
    account in the assessment of whether it was unduly harsh on P  for  the
    appellant to be deported. Nevertheless this is not an article  3  case.
    The evidence before the FtT was nearly three years old and it  was  not
    directed to the effect on P. We are  not  persuaded  that  the  Judge's
    omission of this evidence from her consideration is a material error.

13. So far as the complaint  regarding  the  appellant's  attitude  to  the
    offence is concerned we are not persuaded that there  is  any  material
    error. The sentencing judge's remarks, as well as the sentence imposed,
    make it clear that this was a serious offence. The appellant was  found
    with 52 forged asylum registration cards in the course of  preparation,
    a laminator necessary for creating false  documents  and  an  extensive
    range of paraphernalia such as a skilful forger might require.  He  had
    computer equipment with files demonstrating a  technical  expertise  to
    create false Iraqi driving licences. This was not just  the  possession
    of a fake ID card in order to obtain work.  This  was  a  sophisticated
    criminal operation and to our  minds  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  be
    sceptical that he was not aware that it was criminal at the time.

14. We are not persuaded that there is any material error  in  the  way  in
    which the Judge dealt with the evidence of Ms Tyrell or her comments on
    lack of medical evidence. There was no  medical  evidence.  On  a  fair
    reading of her assessment of Ms Tyrell's evidence she was  entitled  to
    reach the view that the prospects that P would suffer from a depressive
    disorder were low to middling.

Ground 1

15. Ground 1 is to the effect that the Judge fell into error in relying  on
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of AJ (Zimbabwe) and VH
    (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012.  That  case  considered  the  issue  of
    exceptional  circumstances  under  the  then   version   of   IR   398.
    Consideration of exceptional circumstances only arose if the  issue  of
    unduly harsh had been considered under IR 399 and IR 399A.  Accordingly
    the Judge had misdirected herself and imposed a higher  test  than  was
    appropriate under the rules.

Respondent's response

16. Mr Melvin accepted that reference to AJ (Zimbabwe) and VH (Vietnam) was
    inappropriate but argued that the  significant  point  that  was  being
    drawn was a general one about the strength of the public  interest.  It
    was clear on a fair reading of the decision that the Judge had  applied
    he correct test.



Conclusions on ground 1

17. In AJ (Zimbabwe) and VH (Vietnam) the Court of Appeal was addressing IR
    398. That rule requires the respondent to consider whether  IR  399  or
    399A applies and, if not whether there were  exceptional  circumstances
    that outweighed the public interest in  deportation.  (The  requirement
    has now been strengthened to one of very compelling circumstances  over
    and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.) In  other  words
    the approach in AJ  (Zimbabwe)  and  VH  (Vietnam)  applies  after  the
    decision maker has applied the 'unduly harsh' test in IR 399 and  399A.
    Even on the old wording, it was necessarily  more  stringent  than  the
    unduly harsh test.

18. We do not understand why the Judge felt that she had to  refer  to  the
    case at all. If it was, as Mr Melvin suggests, to emphasise the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals  that  is  more  than
    adequately covered in the direction in section 117C of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In our opinion it has clearly infected
    the Judge's assessment of whether it would be unduly  harsh  under  the
    rules. Had matters been left there we may very well have been persuaded
    that there was a material error of law.

19. However the Judge went on to consider the  appeal  under  reference  to
    section 117C of the 2002 Act. There is of course a  difference  to  the
    status of the rules as opposed to the statute. As Lord Reed pointed out
    in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 the rules are not law though  they  are  a
    relevant and important consideration for tribunals determining  appeals
    brought on Convention grounds. They do not  have  the  same  degree  of
    democratic legitimacy as legislation made by Parliament (paras  17  and
    53). However where, as here, the wording of the rules mirrors  that  of
    the statute we are not  clear  what  purpose  there  is  in  making  an
    assessment under both the rules and the statute. It is  the  Act  which
    has primacy. In any event we do  not  consider  that  there  can  be  a
    different approach  as  to  what  constitutes  "unduly  harsh"  in  the
    assessment of the effect on a child depending on whether one is looking
    at the rules or statute.

20. At paragraphs 41 to 45 the Judge makes an assessment of proportionality
    as she says outside the rules. She correctly applies the provisions  of
    section 117C of the 2002 Act. She takes into account the guidance in MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450. She notes  that  the  expression  'unduly
    harsh' requires consideration of all the  circumstances  including  the
    criminal's immigration  and  criminal  history.  At  paragraph  44  she
    accepts that P's separation from the appellant would be distressing for
    him. However she was not presented with any  evidence  which  suggested
    that there was any likely emotional  or  physical  detriment  over  and
    above what would be expected from such separation. She bore in mind the
    nature of the appellant's offence which, she said went to the heart  of
    enforcing an effective  immigration  system.  She  concluded  that  the
    appellant's deportation would not be unduly harsh on P.

21. We do not find that there is any error in that assessment.  Deportation
    is inevitably harsh on children. The question is however whether it  is
    unduly harsh. There is  nothing  in  the  evidence  that  elevates  the
    natural consequences of separation for  a  child  to  the  standard  of
    unduly harsh.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date

Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

