
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01103/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Given orally at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19th August 2013                           |On 6th September 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                           Mr Muhammed Umar Farooq

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar of Counsel, instructed by Thopee & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese and Mr Robinson,  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 25th February 2013 in which they allowed on  Article  8
    grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State that the claimant should be  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom
    consequent to the provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant's circumstances are essentially as follows.   He  is  now
    in his early 30s.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in 1996,  aged  15,
    when his  father  was  exempt  from  immigration  control  due  to  his
    employment with the Pakistan High Commission in London.  The  appellant
    spent the remainder of his adolescence and his twenties in  the  United
    Kingdom where he lives with his parents and a number of siblings.   The
    appellant was convicted at Isleworth  Crown  Court  of  an  offence  of
    dishonesty relating to money laundering and  sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment of four years.  That offence gave rise to the  deportation
    order decision to which I have referred.

3.   The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is,  I  find,  entirely
    unsatisfactory.  Mr Jafar has done his considerable best to persuade me
    that the determination is legally sound, but I have  no  hesitation  in
    finding it is anything but that.  The Tribunal has manifestly failed to
    balance the public interest in this case against the interests  of  the
    claimant.  Apart from anything else, when one reads the  determination,
    one finds no indication of what the offence leading to the  deportation
    decision even was.  More particularly, there is in paragraph 10 - which
    is  the  only  determinative  paragraph  in  the  determination  -   no
    recognition of the public interest in deportation.

4.     Mr Jafar contends that, reasoning by analogy, the cases of N  (Kenya)
    [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 and OH (Serbia) [2007] EWCA  Civ  1440,  in  which
    reference is  made  to  the  importance  to  be  attached  to  societal
    disapprobation, should not apply in the present case since the  present
    case does  not  involve  violence,  sexual  offences  or  serious  drug
    offences.  The answer to that I  find  is  made  plain  in  the  recent
    judgments of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  550.
    In those judgments at [51] and [52] as well as [53] to  [55],  Laws  LJ
    clearly explains the nature of the public interest  to  be  taken  into
    account.  That public interest stems from what Parliament has seen  fit
    to enact in the 2007 Act.  A person who commits a criminal  offence  of
    the requisite seriousness is identified by Parliament  as  somebody  in
    whom there is a strong public interest in  deporting.   That  important
    matter finds no expression at all in the determination in  the  present
    case.

5.    There  is,  however,  quite  a  lot  more  that  is  wrong  with   the
    determination.  The facts of the appellant's life as I  have  set  them
    out make it plain that his Article 8 case rests upon his being an adult
    child living with parents and siblings.  We know  from  the  case  law,
    including Konstantinov [2007] ECHR 336 and more recently  the  domestic
    cases involving Ghurkhas, including Gurung  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8,  that
    particular care is needed in identifying in a case of this kind whether
    Article 8 is even engaged.   It  is  not  necessary  to  find  anything
    exceptional; but what are needed are clear  findings  relating  to  the
    extent of dependence between family members and whether the  person  in
    question can be said to have formed an  independent  family  life.   Mr
    Jafar contends that on the facts  this  appellant  meets  the  relevant
    requirements.  That may be so, but it is  indicative  of  the  problems
    with the determination that he had to take me this morning through  the
    various witness statements, where family life is described.   This  was
    because there are no proper findings of fact in this determination.

6.   The Tribunal refers to the case of Maslov [2008] ECHR 546 -  indeed  it
    is the only piece of case law mentioned - but does so in these terms:

         "The Tribunal considered all the  relevant  authorities,  including
         Maslov, and found that the facts of this case can be  distinguished
         in that the facts of this case do not justify the  appellant  being
         removed from this country."

7.   With great respect, it is extremely difficult  to  understand  what  is
    meant by that passage of the First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Jafar  submits
    that it may have to do  with  the  different  nature  of  the  criminal
    offence as between that committed by Maslov on the one  hand  and  that
    committed by this claimant.  That may be so, but it is unclear  and  in
    matters of this kind, involving the serious issue  of  deportation  for
    criminal conduct, such obscurity is unacceptable.

8.   What to do about this case?  As  I  explored  with  the  advocates,  it
    seems to me that, unusually, this case should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision, rather than being re-made  in  this
    Tribunal.  I say that because the failure of the First-tier Tribunal to
    record properly  the  evidence  before  it  and  to  make  findings  on
    important matters takes it, I consider, into the realm of a case  where
    there has been no fair hearing, either to the claimant, notwithstanding
    that he was successful, or to the Secretary of State, representing  the
    public interest.  Mr Jafar submitted  that  in  those  circumstances  I
    should preserve the findings of fact of the First-tier  Tribunal.   For
    the reasons I have given I find that difficult to do,  save  with  this
    exception: that the Tribunal on remittal should have regard to the fact
    that  the  first  Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant
    regarding his rehabilitation and in particular the activities  that  he
    had carried out whilst subject to detention.  That seems to  me  to  be
    plain from the evidence I have seen.  The  point  however,  as  I  have
    already indicated, is that the case law, and in particular SS (Nigeria)
    makes it abundantly evident that such a finding, whilst of  importance,
    is by no means determinative.

9.   I therefore find that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law.  I set it aside and I direct  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  panel
    not including Judge Abebrese and Mr Robinson.





                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
