
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01697/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court                 |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 January 2014                              |On 18 February 2014        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                            KENNETH NJAO MUTHONI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A N McVea, Compass Immigration Law Limited
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Kenneth Njau Muthoni, was born on 8 September  1987  and
    is a citizen of Kenya.  The appellant had appealed against  a  decision
    of the respondent not to revoke a  deportation  order  dated  9  August
    2013.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chambers and Mrs S E Singer, non-
    legal member)  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  5  November  2013
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  The  first  is  headed,  "error  of
    evidence: family life and criminality."  The appellant asserts that  at
    [11] the Tribunal cited evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  partner
    "fighting" and refers to the partner, Hayley  Sambrook,  "on  one  such
    occasion [calling] the police."  The appellant asserts that  there  was
    evidence only of one instance of physical  violence  by  the  appellant
    towards Miss  Sambrook.   The  only  evidence  of  additional  domestic
    violence appears in a letter written by the mother of  Hayley  Sambrook
    (Dianne Sambrook) to which the Tribunal gave no weight.

 3. I find that this appeal ground has no merit.  At  [11],  in  describing
    the evidence  which  it  received  of  the  relationship  between  Miss
    Sambrook and the appellant, the Tribunal recorded that, "the  appellant
    describes how [the appellant] and Hayley began to  'fight.'"   That  is
    evidence which is taken directly from  the  witness  statement  of  the
    appellant himself.  It is true that at [41] the Tribunal did  not  give
    weight to the letter of Dianne Sambrook (because it was "unsupported by
    any oral evidence") but I do not  see  how  that  interferes  with  the
    Tribunal's recording  of  evidence  which  the  appellant  himself  has
    provided.

 4. At [12] of the determination, the Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant
    claimed "he became a dealer in cannabis."  The grounds assert that  the
    appellant had been convicted of possession of cannabis with  intent  to
    supply.

 5. I find that this ground of  appeal  is  without  merit.   At  [2],  the
    Tribunal accurately recorded that "on 27 December 2010 [the  appellant]
    was convicted of possession of a class D drug with intent to supply and
    for breaching a suspended sentence for assaulting his present  partner.
    He was sentenced to imprisonment."  At [12],  the  statement  regarding
    the appellant being a "dealer in  cannabis"  comes  under  the  heading
    "evidence of the appellant."  The statement does not, therefore, appear
    to be a factual finding of the Tribunal but  rather  a  record  of  the
    appellant's  own  evidence.   Mr  McVea,  who  also  appeared  for  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal,  told  me  that  he  did  not
    recall the appellant having claimed in oral evidence that he had become
    a  dealer  in  cannabis  and  the  written  Record  of  Proceedings  is
    inconclusive.  However, I have no reason  to  believe  that  the  judge
    recorded the evidence which he heard inaccurately.  An  individual  who
    has been convicted of possession of  cannabis  with  intent  to  supply
    might well describe himself as a dealer in cannabis.  In any  event,  I
    note under the heading "findings" that, in considering  the  Article  8
    ECHR appeal, the Tribunal had proper regard to the "seriousness of  the
    appellant's offending."  [60] I am  not  persuaded  that,  whether  the
    Tribunal considered the appellant a dealer in cannabis or an individual
    convicted of possession with intent to supply, this would have  made  a
    material difference  to  its  assessment  of  the  seriousness  of  the
    offending.   Indeed, at [60], the Tribunal, was particularly  concerned
    with the failure of the appellant to  heed  previous  warnings  of  the
    consequences of continued criminal  behaviour.   That  observation  was
    valid in any event.

 6. The grounds complain that the Tribunal failed to have  adequate  regard
    to a report from an  independent  social  work  consultant,  Mr  Graham
    Nolan.  At [44], the Tribunal noted that,

         the point is made in the report by the  independent  consultant  in
         social  work  that  children   are   better   off   having   strong
         relationships with both parents and  government  policy  encourages
         strong relationships with both parents.  We agree with  that  as  a
         general statement about what is desirable.

 7. Mr McVea complained that the Tribunal had  failed  to  give  sufficient
    reasons for departing from the social worker's recommendation that  the
    children would be better off with both the appellant and Miss Sambrook.
     I do not agree.  It is not for the judge to give detailed reasons  for
    departing from a recommendation which the Tribunal itself  acknowledged
    was axiomatic.  It was for the Tribunal to make findings and  determine
    the appeal based on all the evidence, including that of the social work
    consultant.  There was no suggestion  that  the  Tribunal  ignored  the
    report's recommendations.  Indeed, at [44], the  Tribunal  did  explain
    why it intended to make a decision which appeared  to  go  against  the
    (self-evident) principle that children are better off being brought  up
    by both of their parents. The submission that the Tribunal has  ignored
    or dealt inadequately with the expert evidence is simply not made  out.



 8. The grounds also complain that the judge  inaccurately  recorded  that,
    after the appellant had been released from prison on the last occasion,
    he had returned to live with his mother rather than Miss Sambrook.   At
    [45], the  Tribunal  describes  this  as  a  "telling  aspect"  of  the
    evidence.  The appellant says that he did, in fact, return to live with
    Miss Sambrook.

 9. There is rather more force in this submission but  I  do  not  consider
    that any error is sufficiently serious to justify the setting aside  of
    the determination.  Although the Tribunal did describe that part of the
    evidence as "a telling aspect" there is certainly no suggestion that it
    was in any way determinative of the outcome of the appeal or tipped the
    balance against the appellant.  The Tribunal's observations  were  made
    in the context of the discussion of a relationship  in  which  domestic
    violence has occurred and in which Miss Sambrook is accurately recorded
    as  having  been  "furious"  with  the  appellant  following  his  last
    conviction and the fact that their family life  was  jeopardised  as  a
    consequence.  I am satisfied that, had the Tribunal been aware that the
    appellant had returned to live  with  Miss  Sambrook  rather  than  his
    mother, then the outcome of the assessment, based quite properly on  an
    accurate consideration of all the remainder of the evidence, would have
    been exactly the same.  In the absence of  other  factual  inaccuracies
    and errors of law, the Tribunal's mistake certainly does  not  justify,
    as Mr McVea submitted it should,  a  reconsideration  de  novo  of  the
    entirety of the evidence.

10. The same is true for what is said at [7] of the grounds of appeal.   It
    is disputed in the grounds that the appellant and  Miss  Sambrook  were
    estranged for six months as stated in the determination at [43].  It is
    asserted also that the Tribunal failed to take proper  account  of  the
    Integrated Domestic Abuse Programme in which the appellant was  ordered
    to participate as part of his sentence for causing actual  bodily  harm
    to Miss Sambrook.  I am absolutely clear that (a) the panel had a clear
    and accurate view  of  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and  Miss  Sambrook  and  the  difficulties  which  they  had
    encountered and; (b) that there was no suggestion that the Tribunal has
    wittingly or unwittingly distorted the evidence in a manner prejudicial
    to the appellant.

11. At [9], it is asserted  that  the  appellant's  offence  (attracting  a
    criminal sentence of 54 weeks) was of a "relatively minor nature."   In
    support of that assertion, the grounds quote the sentencing remarks  of
    His Honour Judge Teague QC who, sentencing the appellant, stated, "[the
    appellant's offence] cannot be said to be  a  case  of  utmost  gravity
    although it comes close to it."  It  would  seem  that  Judge  Teague's
    comments hardly support the appellant's contention.  An offence  coming
    close to "utmost gravity" cannot, in my judgment, properly be described
    as "relatively minor."  The  fact  that  the  sentence  only  "narrowly
    triggered" the automatic deportation provisions does not  detract  from
    the seriousness of the offence and the public interest  represented  by
    the appellant's deportation,  both  factors  of  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was well aware.

12. The third ground of  appeal  complains  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to make any finding in respect of the refusal of the appellant's
    application for a variation of his leave to  remain.   As  the  grounds
    record,

         The appellant held  lawful  discretionary  leave  to  remain  on  5
         September 2012 when he  applied  for  variation.   The  deportation
         order made by the respondent on 9 August  2013  also  served  as  a
         refusal to vary leave, carrying a distinct right of appeal.

    The relevant provision of the Immigration Rules is paragraph 276ADE(v).


13. The Tribunal made it clear at paragraph [49] that "the  appellant  does
    not succeed under the Immigration Rules."  Further, as I pointed out to
    Mr McVea, the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (form IAFT-
    1) makes no  reference  whatsoever  to  the  respondent's  decision  in
    respect of the appellant's application to vary his leave to remain; the
    notice of appeal is concerned entirely with the deportation order.  The
    First-tier Tribunal is only obliged to consider those grounds of appeal
    which are put before it.  On the face of the form IAFT-1, the appellant
    had not appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his
    application.

14. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the Tribunal  reached  a  conclusion
    which was open to it on the evidence by way of an  application  of  the
    relevant jurisprudence (see, in particular, MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192).  Any minor errors  which  the  Tribunal  may  have  made  as
    regards the particulars of the appellant's evidence had  no  effect  on
    the overall outcome of the appeal and for that reason, insofar  as  any
    errors do exist, I exercise my discretion to refrain from setting aside
    the determination.



DECISION

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 5  November
    2013 shall stand.  This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 11 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

