

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01043/2010




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 23 December 2013                           |on 31 January 2014           |




                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                      ALFRED NIL-LOMO OKAI MENSAH ABBEY

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Sood, instructed by Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, born on 17 May  1988,  maintains
        that his rights and those of his family under Article 8 of the ECHR
        would be breached if he were deported, that being the intention  of
        the respondent following the making  of  an  automatic  deportation
        order on 11 November 2010.


     2. This matter came before us as a remittal from the Court  of  Appeal
        following an order to that effect dated 23 May  2013.  The  parties
        were in agreement that the appeal was to be decided by us de  novo.
        That being so, it is unnecessary to set out here the history of the
        appeal prior to the proceedings in the Court of Appeal.

     3. The parties were also in agreement that as the decision  to  deport
        the appellant was made prior to 9 July 2012,  the  matter  did  not
        fall to be considered in the  context  of  the  provisions  of  the
        Immigration  Rules  in  force  after  that  date.  There  was  also
        agreement that the appellant's British children and wife could  not
        be expected to accompany him to Ghana so it is therefore a  'family
        splitting' case.


Background


     4. The undisputed aspects of the appellant's history can be summarised
        as follows. He came to the UK as a visitor on 25 September 2003. He
        came as a visitor again on 26 September  2004  and  he  overstayed,
        studying full-time until December 2005. He  returned  to  Ghana  at
        some point not specified in the  papers  before  us.  He  was  then
        refused leave to enter as a visitor when he attempted  to  re-enter
        on  12  January  2006  because  it  became  apparent  that  he  had
        overstayed his  previous  leave.  He  subsequently  obtained  entry
        clearance as a student and entered  again  on  24  March  2007.  He
        studied for a BSc  in  Forensic  &  Security  Technologies,  having
        obtained extensions of leave as a student.


     5. On 18 May 2010 the appellant was convicted  of  dishonestly  making
        false representations to make gain for self  or  another  or  cause
        loss to the other or expose other to risk and making  or  supplying
        articles for use in fraud. The circumstances of  the  offence  were
        that he used identity fraud to steal from an  individual  and  from
        banks, the knowledge of how to do so having  been  obtained  during
        his security technology studies.

     6.  On  14  June  2010  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  18  months
        imprisonment, that sentence subsequently being reduced to 12 months
        on appeal. He was released from criminal detention on  11  November
        2010 and from immigration detention in January 2011.

     7. As a result of the conviction, on 11 November 2010  the  respondent
        made a deportation order against the appellant under the  automatic
        deportation provisions of s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.


     8. The appellant, from a relationship with a former partner, Ms Kirsty
        Wainwright,  has a British daughter, Summer, born on 19 June  2008.



     9. The appellant married Ms Tracey Grannum, a British national, on  21
        September 2010. They have two British children, Messiah, born on 24
        May 2010 and Neveah, born on 9 July 2013.

   Article 8 ECHR

    10. We referred to the questions identified as relevant  in  Article  8
        cases which were set out by Lord Bingham in  paragraph  17  of  the
        judgement in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, as follows:


           (1) Will the proposed removal be an  interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?


           (2) If so, will such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?


           (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


           (4) If so,  is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic well- being of the country, for the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


           (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?

    11. It was not disputed that the appellant has a family life  with  his
        wife and his three children. The respondent did not accept that the
        appellant's relationship with  Summer  was  as  strong  as  claimed
        because of the inconsistent evidence given by  the  appellant,  his
        wife and Ms Wainwright about his involvement with Summer. We  noted
        that the appellant maintained in his recent witness statement  that
        he  sees  Summer  every  weekend.  However,  in  oral  evidence  he
        indicated that he sees her less frequently and that he did not know
        the exact treatment she had following an accident in the autumn  of
        2013, suggesting that he did not see her during the period  of  her
        treatment. There was also the inconsistent evidence  given  by  the
        appellant and Ms Grannum at a previous appeal  hearing  as  to  how
        often he saw Summer. It remained our view, however,  that  even  if
        the relationship was not as high as put forward for the  appellant,
        since his release from detention he has seen her fairly  regularly,
        sometimes  every other weekend, assists her with homework  when  he
        sees her and is listed at her school as a  person  to  contact.  We
        accepted that she has stayed with him during  school  holidays  and
        that the appellant, his wife and Ms Wainwright are doing their best
        to promote a good relationship between  the  children  even  though
        they live in  different  towns.  The  appellant  has  been  out  of
        detention for nearly 3 years  and  we  accepted  that  he  has  the
        parental relationship with his children commensurate with the level
        of contact he has with Summer and living full-time with and sharing
        care for his other two children.


    12. There was agreement that the appellant has  established  a  private
        life in the UK, having  lived  since  he  came  here  in  2007.  In
        addition to his wife and children,  he   has  formed  relationships
        with his wife's family, his brother is studying here and  sees  him
        and his family regularly and he has the  links  to  the  UK  to  be
        expected from someone who has studied and brought up children  here
        during his 7 year residence.

    13. No dispute arose as  to  the  next  three  Razgar  questions  being
        answered in the  appellant's  favour  and  the  advocates  properly
        focussed the remainder of their submissions on proportionality  and
        the important part played by the best interests of the children  in
        this matter.


   The Proportionality Assessment


    14. We  turn  first  to  the  appellant's  three  children  whose  best
        interests are at the heart of  this  appeal.  We  referred  to  the
        guidance provided in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2011] UKSC 4. We accept that in  considering  this
        issue it is important for us to consider the future development  of
        a relationship as well at that which currently  exists:  see  Deron
        Peart v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
        568.


    15. We also referred to MK (best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT
        00475 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal held that:


          (i)     The best interests of the child is a broad notion and  its
   assessment requires              the taking into account and weighing  up
   of diverse factors, although in  the            immigration  context  the
   most important of these have been identified by              the  Supreme
   Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the Court of  Appeal             in
   AJ (India) [2011] EWCA  Civ  1191  and  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  E-A
   (Article 8 -best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC);


          (ii)    Whilst an important part of ascertaining what are the best
   interests of the             child is to seek to discover the child's own
   wishes and views (these being             given due weight in  accordance
   with the age and maturity of the child) the            notion  is  not  a
   purely subjective one and requires an objective assessment;


          (iii)   Whilst consideration of the best interests of the child is
   an integral part of              the Article 8  balancing  exercise  (and
   not something apart from it), ZH              (Tanzania) makes clear that
   it is a matter which has to be addressed first              as a distinct
   inquiry.   Factors   relating   to   the   public   interest    in    the
   maintenance of effective immigration control must not form  part  of  the
     best interests of the child consideration;


          (iv)    What is required by consideration of the best interests of
   the child is an              "overall assessment" and it follows that its
   nature and outcome must be            reflected in the wider Article 8(2)
   proportionality assessment.                   Consideration of  the  best
   interests of the child cannot be reduced to a mere              yes or no
   answer  to  the  question  of  whether  removal  of  the   child   and/or
   relevant parent is or is not  in  the  child's  best  interests.  Factors
   pointing for            and against the best interests of the child being
   to stay or go must not be             overlooked; and


          (v)     It is important when considering a  child's  education  to
   have regard not              just to the evidence relating to any  short-
   term disruption of current                schooling that will  be  caused
   by any removal but also to that relating to            the  impact  on  a
   child's        educational        development,        progress        and
   opportunities in the broader sense.


    16. We were provided with a social work report  dated  8  October  2013
        from Mr Charles Musendo,  an  Independent  Social  Worker.  He  was
        instructed specifically to comment on the  best  interests  of  the
        appellant's three children. He interviewed the relevant parties  in
        September 2013. We accepted that he is an  appropriately  qualified
        person to produce such a report and that much of what he says about
        the  relationships  between  the  appellant  and  his  children  is
        generally consistent with the other evidence before us.


    17. We had some concern, however, about Mr Musendo's relatively limited
        knowledge of and contact with those concerned and noted  that  much
        of his information was provided to  him  by  the  parents  who,  as
        above,  have  at  times  exaggerated  aspects  of  their   evidence
        concerning the appellant's relationship with his children.  We also
        noted that certain statements made by the parents appeared to  have
        been  accepted  without  question,  for  example,  at  [44]  it  is
        suggested that the children are closer to the appellant than  their
        mothers. It appeared to us that this fell to be explored further by
        Mr Musendo when the appellant has lived very  little,  if  at  all,
        with Summer and Ms Wainwright has always been her primary carer. We
        also queried if that could be so for Summer and Messiah given  that
        the appellant had played a very limited part  in  their  lives  for
        over a year whilst he was in detention.


    18. Mr Musendo sets out at [44] to [46] his concern that the  currently
        limited behavioural issues of Messiah and Summer  that  arose  when
        they were separated from the appellant  whilst  he  was  in  prison
        could be exacerbated if  the appellant was deported. For what it is
        worth, this provides a further example of our  concerns  about  the
        weight to be placed on the report, as Mr  Musendo  relies  here  on
        information from the parents of the problems and has no  first-hand
        knowledge or information from other sources such as the  children's
        schools. Mr Musendo states in [46] that "[a]ny  further  separation
        could be very devastating for Summer and Messiah" and  at  [47]  he
        comments that for children  of  their  age  separation  could  have
        "severe" effects, could lead to mental  health  issues  and  impede
        their ability to form healthy  relationships  and  undermine  their
        self-esteem. In so far as they  were  expressed  speculatively,  as
        outcomes that "could" occur rather than "would" or "were likely" to
        arise  for  these  children,  we  did  not  find   these   comments
        controversial.

    19. We also saw little to disagree with  in  Mr  Musendo's  observation
        that the children will have less  input  regarding  their  Ghanaian
        heritage if the appellant is deported but found that this would  be
        of less seriousness where the children's mothers  were  willing  to
        promote their heritage, where Mrs Grannum is of  Ghanaian  heritage
        herself and that for the moment the appellant's  brother  lives  in
        the same city and visits regularly so would also be able to  assist
        to some extent in that regard.

    20. We accepted the confirmation in the social  work  report  that  the
        appellant shares care for his two  children  with  Ms  Grannum.  He
        carries out the usual parental tasks of getting Messiah  ready  for
        school, feeding and putting Neveah to bed and so  on.  We  accepted
        also that Ms Grannum will have struggled when she became  a  single
        parent whilst the appellant was in prison and that she is likely to
        find it difficult again if he is deported, especially  as  she  now
        has two children.  We  accepted  also  that  her  own  distress  at
        separation from will further impact  on  the  children.  We  noted,
        however, her indication to the social worker that the appellant has
        a close relationship with her father and  brother  so  there  would
        appear to be some support available there  if  the  appellant  were
        deported, even if mainly from a distance as they  are  not  nearby.
        Also, as above, the appellant's brother is nearby and is a  regular
        visitor, so could be expected to offer her some support.  We do not
        dispute that life would also be more difficult  for  Ms  Wainwright
        who is able to share some of  the  parenting  of  Summer  with  the
        appellant and who will have to  manage  entirely  alone  if  he  is
        deported.

    21. Notwithstanding the indications we have given that the social  work
        report  cannot  be  accepted  at  its  highest,  we  accepted   the
        conclusions of Mr Musanda at [75] onwards that all  three  children
        have a strong attachment to the appellant  and  that  their  future
        well-being, psychological stability  and  educational  achievements
        may  be  affected  by  his  deportation.  We  accepted   that   the
        relationships that have developed between  the  children  would  be
        unlikely to continue at the current level even though both  mothers
        could be expected  to  promote  contact  as  best  they  could.  It
        appeared to us, however,  that  whether  the  children  would  feel
        "abandoned" by the appellant would depend in part  on  the  efforts
        made by the parents and wider family to keep  indirect  contact  as
        regular as possible and to facilitate visits where possible.

    22. Mr Musendo's ultimate conclusion at [84] was that it  was  strongly
        in the best interests of the children that the appellant remain  in
        the UK.  We do not seek to differ substantially there from, even if
        we have not, as above, taken all that  is  in  the  report  at  its
        highest, particularly as the family histories indicated to us  that
        the children were more likely to have stronger attachments to their
        mothers than the appellant and that the  two  older  children  have
        lived without him already without  exhibiting  serious  behavioural
        problems. It remained our clear view that the best interests of the
        children lie in being brought up with both their parents present.


    23. We noted that Ms Sood raised in  her  skeleton  the  issue  of  the
        Children's Commissioner of England being asked to file evidence  as
        an intervener but that point was  not  taken  any  further  at  the
        hearing before us and it was not clear how it would have  added  to
        the report from Mr Musendo.


    24. We turn now to the other factors that we must weigh in the balance.
        The  case  of  Masih  (deportation  -  public  interest   -   basic
        principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC) sets out the following
        basic principles that can be derived from case law  concerning  the
        issue of the public interest in  relation  to  the  deportation  of
        foreign criminals:


          (i)     In a case of automatic deportation, full account  must  be
   taken of the strong               public  interest  in  removing  foreign
   citizens  convicted of serious offences,           which lies not only in
   the   prevention   of   further   offences   on   the   part    of    the
   individual concerned, but in deterring others from committing them in the
              first place.


          (ii)     Deportation  of  foreign  criminals  expresses  society's
   condemnation  of               serious  criminal  activity  and  promotes
   public confidence in the treatment             of  foreign  citizens  who
   have committed them.


          (iii)   The starting-point for assessing the facts of  the offence
   of which an                  individual has  been  committed,  and  their
   effect on others, and on the              public as a whole, must be  the
   view taken by the sentencing judge.


          (iv)    The appeal has to be  dealt  with  on  the  basis  of  the
   situation at the date of              the hearing.


          (v)     Full account should also  be  taken  of  any  developments
   since sentence was            passed,  for  example  the  result  of  any
   disciplinary adjudications in prison          or detention, or any  OASys
   or licence report.


    25. The importance of the public interest  being  afforded  significant
        weight also features in the more recent Court of Appeal decision of
        SS (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013] EWCA Civ 550, which states at [54],  in
        regard to automatic deportation:

           "The pressing nature of the public interest here is vividly
           informed by the fact that by Parliament's express declaration
           the public interest is injured if the criminal's deportation is
           not effected. Such a result could in my judgement only be
           justified by a very strong claim indeed."

    26. We also found it expedient when considering the  other  factors  in
        this  matter  to  follow  the  guidance  provided  in   Boultif   v
        Switzerland  [2001]  ECHR  54273,  as  confirmed  by  Uner  v   the
        Netherlands [2007] Imm AR 303, in which  the  Court  said  that  in
        order to assess whether an expulsion measure  was  necessary  in  a
        democratic society and proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued,
        the following criteria had to be considered:


         (i) The nature and the seriousness of the offence committed by the
        Appellant;
         (ii)     The length of the Appellant's stay in  the  country  from
        which he or she was        to be expelled;
         (iii)    The time that had elapsed since the offence was committed
        and the            claimant's conduct during that period.
         (iv)  The nationalities of the various parties concerned;
         (v) The Appellant's family situation, such as length  of  marriage
        and other          factors  expressing  the  effectiveness  of  the
        Appellant's family life;
         (vi)     Whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time  he
        or she entered         into the family relationship;
         (vii)    Whether there are children in  the  marriage  and  if  so
        their ages;
         (viii)   The seriousness and the difficulties which the Spouse  is
        likely to              encounter in the country of the  Appellant's
        origin;
         (ix)     The best interests and well being of any children of  the
        Appellant;  and  in       particular   the   seriousness   of   any
        difficulties that they would be likely to         encounter in  the
        country to which the Appellant would be expelled;
         (x)      The solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the
        host country and       with the country of destination.


    27. In relation to the nature and the seriousness  of  the  offence  we
        have set out the details of  the  appellant's  offence  above.  The
        sentencing remarks here take the matter little further, other  than
        highlighting that the appellant committed his offence  having  been
        allowed to come to the UK to study for a degree and using  what  he
        learned in those studies to commit the crime.  It was  a  crime  of
        dishonesty, carried out over a period of months and  we  considered
        it to be serious.  We accepted that the appellant must be given the
        benefit of eventually confessing to the police and pleading guilty.




    28. The appellant has been in the UK for 7 years but we noted, however,
        that he was only ever here in a limited capacity and could not have
        entertained an expectation of remaining on a  permanent  basis  and
        that he has known that his stay is precarious since the  sentencing
        judge indicated in 2010 that deportation was likely.

    29. We acknowledge that the appellant has  not  re-offended  in  the  3
        years since he was released from detention. We accept  that  he  is
        remorseful and  has  cooperated  well  with  prison  and  probation
        authorities. It was not suggested that his risk of  reoffending  is
        anything other than low. That does not reduce the  public  interest
        in deportation  significantly,  however,  where  there  remain  the
        important factors of deterrence and  proper  expression  of  public
        revulsion regarding criminal offences, both of which weigh  against
        the appellant.


    30. As indicated above, other than the appellant, all of those  closely
        involved in this matter are British, that being the reason why  the
        respondent does not seek to argue that the appellant's  family  can
        accompany him to Ghana.


    31. We have set out above our view of the appellant's relationship with
        his children and his wife and how their lives (and  his)  would  be
        affected were he to be deported. This  is  not  a  case  where  the
        relationships and children occurred in full knowledge  of  criminal
        offences and likelihood of deportation.


    32. We addressed the appellant's links to  the  UK  above  when  making
        findings on  his  private  life  and  the  best  interests  of  the
        children. They are of some weight given his length of residence but
        we found that he retains considerable ties to Ghana,  having  spent
        most of his life there and his immediate family members still being
        there, including his parents. In other  words,  we  find  there  is
        nothing in terms of the appellant's moral  and  physical  integrity
        that would prevent him re-integrating into Ghanaian society.

   Conclusion


    33. We have  considered  all  of  the  above  issues  carefully  before
        reaching our final conclusion. We took fully into account that  the
        deportation of the appellant will have the effect of splitting  the
        family and that this will cause distress  and  difficulty  for  all
        those concerned and damage to the development  of  the  appellant's
        relationship with his children and wife and the  future  well-being
        of the children.

    34. The public interest in deportation is also a  very  strong  factor,
        however, and only "a very strong case  indeed"  can  succeed  as  a
        result.

    35. In Ad Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348, at [27] the Court  of  Appeal
        acknowledged the tensions that arise in appeals such as this:

           "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived  as  it
           has been, will be broken up for ever because of the  appellant's
           bad behaviour. That is  what  deportation  does.  Sometimes  the
           balance between its justification and its consequences falls the
           other way,  but  whether  it  does  so  is  a  question  for  an
           immigration judge."


    36. Our answer to the question on the particular facts of  this  appeal
        was that we did not find it to be "a very strong case indeed"  such
        that the public interest in deportation was outweighed, even  after
        giving due weight to the damage this will cause to  the  appellant,
        his wife and his children.


Decision

    37. The appeal is dismissed.





Signed: [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Dated: 21 January 2014
