
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01004/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2015                   |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                   JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     LFW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola
For the Respondent:    Ms Justine Fisher of Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State  who  appeals  with  permission
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Nichols promulgated
    on 16 July 2015.  That decision  allowed  an  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds against a deportation order dated 15 May 2013.  We refused  the
    appeal at the hearing and advised that we would give  our  decision  in
    writing.

History

2.   The original appeal against the deportation  order  was  refused  by  a
    First-tier on 20 December 2013.  That decision was overturned by Upper-
    tier Tribunal Judge Goldstein by a decision dated 26  March  2014.   He
    remitted the appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.  For reasons connected to the respondent's health the  appeal
    was not heard until July 2015.

3.   The respondent is a Jamaican national who originally came to the UK  in
    2001.  On 17 December 2013 he was  granted  ILR  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person.  He was subsequently  convicted  at  Snaresbrook  Crown
    Court on 12 October 2011 of supplying controlled drugs  (class  A)  and
    sentenced to 38 months' imprisonment.  He was notified of his liability
    for deportation.  He completed his sentence on 27  July  2012.   On  22
    August 2012 he claimed asylum.  This was refused on 15 May 2013 and  he
    was served with a deportation order.

4.   Under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 the respondent  is  subject
    to automatic deportation unless one of the  exceptions  in  Section  33
    applies.  In this case the  respondent  claimed  that  his  deportation
    would breach his rights under Articles 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR  and  thus
    Exception 1 applied.  The respondent was not  present  at  the  hearing
    before the FTT he was unfit to  attend  or  give  evidence.   That  was
    vouched by  various  medical  reports.   Indeed  he  collapsed  at  his
    original hearing and was taken by ambulance to hospital.  Evidence  was
    led on behalf of the  respondent  by  Dr  Arthur  Anderson,  Consultant
    Clinical Psychologist and Miss Julie Squire, a nurse, who is  a  friend
    and the appellant's present carer.  The FTT  had  a  witness  statement
    from the respondent as well as a number of medical reports.

Background

5.   The respondent's evidence  was  to  the  effect  that  when  living  in
    Jamaica he had formed a homosexual relationship.  He had  many  friends
    who were homosexual or bisexual as well as an uncle who was homosexual.
     In 1991 or 1992 he had been shot in  the  head  in  the  course  of  a
    homophobic attack.  He spent a year in hospital.  He subsequently  left
    Jamaica in 2001 initially going to the Cayman Islands before moving  to
    the UK.  His uncle was subsequently poisoned by a homophobic  gang  and
    his son by a former partner was shot in the head and died in 2007.   He
    said that was in substitution for himself.  Judge Nichols accepted that
    that the respondent had been the victim of some form of serious  trauma
    before he arrived in the UK.  He noted that there was only his  account
    that it  was  a  homophobic  attack  but  he  noted  the  existence  of
    homophobic attacks in Jamaica as set out in the country guidance  cases
    summarised in paragraph 33 of his decision.

6.   Some time after 2007 the respondent  started  to  experience  epileptic
    fits.  Although he had retrained as a mechanic he was unable to  obtain
    work because of his epilepsy.  In addition  he  began  to  suffer  from
    asthma.  He was confirmed as medically unfit for  work.   The  evidence
    from Dr Anderson and the reports before Judge Nichols showed  that  the
    respondent was suffering a traumatic brain injury and major  depression
    with psychosis features.  The respondent experienced seizures which  in
    turn contributed to his depression and psychotic symptoms  of  auditory
    hallucinations and mild delusional  system.   He  had  an  intellectual
    ability which placed him in the mild retarded range.  There had been  a
    significant deterioration in the respondent's symptoms between the  two
    interviews that he had had with him.  He was now not aware of  the  day
    of week or the year.  He had great difficulty holding  attention.   His
    personal appearance was dishevelled.  There was a loss of brain  tissue
    of between three and five percent.  He  suffered  from  PTSD.   He  had
    recently begun to remember  incidents  of  sexual  assault  on  himself
    either brought on or been  brought  on  by  PTSD.   He  was  unable  to
    function in the community, look after his day-to-day  needs  or  manage
    his essential medication.  There was "zero" chance of  his  reoffending
    because of his general medical condition.

7.   Dr Anderson was clear in his evidence that the respondent would  suffer
    a serious psychotic breakdown if efforts were made to remove  him  from
    the UK and that the respondent would in  effect  have  to  be  comatose
    before such a removal could take effect.

8.   Miss Squire gave evidence  that  she  provided  accommodation  for  the
    respondent and acted as his carer.  When she was at  work  or  out  she
    asked her daughter to look in on him and see that he was alright.   She
    administered his medication.

9.   Counsel for the respondent had submitted that there would be  a  breach
    of Article 3 simply by the act of removing the respondent from  the  UK
    if that would either cause a severe psychotic breakdown or would result
    in the application of substantial sedation to effect the removal.

10.  Judge Nichols found that there was  a  real  risk  that  the  practical
    arrangements for the removal of the respondent from the UK would  cause
    consequences  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  amount  to  inhuman  and
    degrading  treatment  which  would  place  the  UK  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under Article 3.  He also found that this was one of  these
    very rare cases where  the  compelling  features  outweigh  the  public
    interest and that deportation of criminal criminals.  He found that the
    deportation of the respondent would amount to unlawful  breach  of  his
    Article 8 rights.

Submissions

11.  The Secretary of State submitted grounds  of  appeal  which  challenged
    the findings on both Article 3 and Article 8.  Mr Kandola adopted these
    but accepted that no issue arose from any consideration of disparity in
    medical treatment between the  UK  and  Jamaica.   Dealing  first  with
    Article 3 he accepted that the judge had applied the law correctly  and
    had regard to the decisions of the Court of Appeal in J [2005] EWCA Civ
    629 and the House of Lords in  N  (FC)  [2005]  UKHL  31.   Mr  Kandola
    emphasised that it was not part of the Secretary of State's  policy  to
    sedate mentally ill returnees in order to  effect  their  return.   The
    Secretary of State would act on medical advice.  Accordingly there  was
    no issue of a breach of Article 3 as a  result  of  sedation.   In  any
    event he questioned the finding at paragraph  40  to  the  effect  that
    administering  substantial  sedatives   to   an   otherwise   competent
    individual for the purpose of effecting a removal was probably  inhuman
    and degrading treatment.  While  he  accepted  that  proposition  as  a
    generality he suggested that it did not apply in this case.

12.  On Article 8 it was acknowledged that the respondent did not  meet  the
    criteria under paragraph 398 and that the  exceptions  under  paragraph
    399 did not apply.  Accordingly the issue was whether or not there  was
    a sufficiently compelling case.  In his submission  Judge  Nichols  had
    not taken sufficient cognisance of the fact that the respondent did not
    require full-time care and that medical facilities  were  available  in
    Jamaica.  He had further failed to give sufficient weight to the public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.

13.  The respondent submitted a very  full  and  helpful  Rule  24  response
    which analysed the factual background and the medical  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in some detail.  In essence the submission  was
    that this was a careful and  well  reasoned  decision  which  correctly
    applied the law.  In submissions Miss Fisher said  that  the  issue  of
    sedation was raised in the course  of  the  hearing  at  the  Tribunal.
    However the submissions from  Mr  Kandola  conflated  the  issue.   The
    question was whether or not the respondent was fit to travel.   It  had
    been found that he was not.  There was no evidence of rebuttal from the
    Secretary of State.  The evidence thus was therefore clear that the act
    of removal would result in a severe psychotic breakdown.  On Article  8
    she submitted that there was a careful analysis of the evidence and  in
    paragraphs 51 and 52 he set out his  reasons  for  allowing  the  claim
    under Article 8.  There was no error of law.

Decision

14.  The decision of Judge Nichols is careful and  well  reasoned.   He  had
    the benefit of listening to substantial medical evidence from Dr Arthur
    Anderson and had before him a number  of  other  medical  reports  from
    other practitioners  including  the  psychiatrist.   He  did  not  hear
    evidence from the respondent as he was medically  unfit  to  attend  or
    give evidence.  He did however have a  statement  from  him  and  heard
    evidence from his carer Miss Squire.  He has recorded this evidence  in
    detail and the findings in fact are not challenged.

15.  It is accepted that Judge Nichols applied the correct legal  test.   It
    is summarised at paragraphs 41, 42 and 43.  In N (FC) Lord  Brown  said
    that notwithstanding that a state is  entitled  to  deport  aliens  the
    exercise of such a power may itself constitute Article 3 ill-treatment.
     Exceptionally this could include  if  the  applicant's  removal  would
    sufficiently  exacerbate  the  suffering  flowing  from   a   naturally
    occurring illness.  In these cases the court will  assess  whether  the
    removal is itself to be characterised as  Article  3  ill-treatment  in
    light of the present medical  conditions.   It  is  therefore  for  the
    Tribunal to consider whether the act of removing the  respondent  would
    amount to Article 3 ill-treatment.  It is not, as Mr Kandola suggested,
    to be left to the Secretary of State to determine  whether  he  can  be
    removed safely and without infringing his Article 3 rights.

16.  The evidence that Judge Nichols accepted was that  the  respondent  was
    not fit to travel  and  could  not  do  so  without  causing  a  severe
    psychotic breakdown or applying sufficient sedative as  to  render  him
    comatose.  Even without considering the application of sedatives  there
    was in our opinion sufficient evidence that  his  removal  would  cause
    Article 3 ill-treatment.  There is therefore no error of law.

17.  That is sufficient to dispose of the appeal.  However for  completeness
    we should say that we find no error in the treatment of Article 8.   It
    is accepted that this is a decision outwith the Rules.   Judge  Nichols
    recognised that for such an  appeal  to  succeed  there  must  be  very
    compelling reasons outweighing the very substantial public interest  in
    the deportation of foreign criminals.  He sets out his  reasoning  from
    paragraphs 45 through to 52.  He concludes that this is one of the very
    rare  cases  in  which  the  compelling  factors  outweigh  the  public
    interest.

18.  The appeal is refused.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:
