
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/01341/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2015                    | On 27 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                VITALI GAVRIS
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Craigie, Hamilton Burns & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to
    them as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. By determination promulgated on  15  December  2014  FtT  Judge  Dennis
    allowed  the  appellant's  appeal   against   deportation   under   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The SSHD  appeals  to  the  UT  on
    these grounds:-

          1. The assessment of  the  appellant  as  credible  and  reliable
             (paragraph 14) without reflection on (a) his past  failure  to
             abide by the law and (b) his past failure to comply  with  the
             requirements of e.g. community orders is inadequately reasoned
             and/or irrational.

          2. Despite the appellant's  (poor)  future  prospects  of  lawful
             employment being put in issue by the respondent (paragraph  6)
             there is no finding on this in the  determination.   The  only
             observation made  is  that  the  appellant  was  previously  a
             qualified person (paragraph 19).  This amounts  to  inadequate
             reasoning.

          3. ... the decision should be set aside.

 3. Mrs Saddiq said that the Judge gave  no  reason  for  arriving  at  his
    decision in spite  of  the  appellant's  persistent  past  criminality,
    leading to 18 convictions; wrongly found in his favour on the key issue
    of rehabilitation, when there was no independent corroborative evidence
    that he was drugs-free; and wrongly  reached  his  conclusions  in  the
    absence of any social work  assessment,  sentencing  remarks  or  other
    report (although she accepted that failure to  provide  such  materials
    attached to both sides).

 4. I noted in the determination at paragraph 2 that the  appellant  sought
    an adjournment to obtain a  "social  circumstance  report",  which  the
    Judge refused, and observed that it could therefore not  be  said  that
    the appellant was unwilling to provide such information.

 5.  Mr  Craigie  said  that  the  Judge  appreciated  all  the  background
    circumstances which led to the respondent's view and acknowledged  that
    his determination might  be  thought  unusual,  given  the  "thoroughly
    unsatisfactory criminal history" (paragraph 14), but  was  entitled  to
    reach his own assessment having had the benefit of  the  oral  evidence
    from the appellant.

 6. I indicated that I preferred the submissions for the appellant.

 7. Contrary to the SSHD's grounds, the factors adverse  to  the  appellant
    are all recognised in the determination.  Without evidence  of  reform,
    and at face value of the information on paper,  the  Judge  would  have
    agreed that deportation was warranted on grounds of  public  policy  or
    public security.  Overwhelmingly, his decision is based on the view  he
    formed of the appellant with the advantage of having heard directly his
    oral evidence, including the cross-examination.

 8. While personal reform from drug abuse and crime is easily expressed but
    not easily achieved, there is  no  rule  that  judges  may  never  find
    appellants to be reformed characters, on their own evidence.  The Judge
    was entitled to conclude that  this  appellant  was  "sincere  both  in
    recognition of the consequences of his past criminality both to  others
    and himself and of the necessity to put this  unhappy  chapter  of  his
    life behind him, still in his youth, and to engage in the opportunities
    available to him."  His  reason  is  plainly  stated.   The  respondent
    disagrees, but shows no error of law.

 9. Mrs Saddiq did not elaborate on  the  matter  of  the  quality  of  the
    appellant's employment prospects, which does not bear on the outcome.

10. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                               [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                               25 August 2015
