
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01632/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham        |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5 March 2015                              |On 22 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     ATM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, instructed by RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish promulgated on 19 November 2014 which refused the  deportation
    appeal of the appellant on asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant or his wife and children. This direction applies to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order  to
    avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the
    contents of his protection claim and to his children.

 3. ATM is a citizen of Zimbabwe.

 4. He claims to have arrived in the UK in 2002. He entered unlawfully  and
    has remained unlawfully since then.

 5. He claimed asylum but absconded and his claim was refused on 13 October
    2004 for non-compliance.

 6. On 26 September 2008 the appellant was arrested for drug dealing. On 15
    April 2009 he was convicted of supplying class A drugs,  heroin,  crack
    and cocaine. On 18 May 2009 he was sentenced to 3  years'  imprisonment
    concurrent.

 7. On 2 July 2014 a deportation order  was  made  against  him  under  the
    provisions of s.32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.  It  is  that  decision
    which gives rise to this appeal.

 8. The appellant's wife was originally from Zimbabwe but is now a  British
    citizen having benefited from the  legacy  provisions.  It  was  common
    ground that although only one of  the  couple's  children  had  British
    nationality, the second child would qualify were an application  to  be
    made.

 9. The appellant appealed the deportation order on asylum and human rights
    grounds. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish found that he  was  not  in
    need of international protection and that the Article 8 claim could not
    defeat the public interest in deportation.

10. The grounds of appeal challenged the refusal of the asylum claim on the
    basis that EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  98  (IAC)
    had been applied at [18] and [19] when the correct County Guidance case
    was CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  59
    (IAC).  The grounds also maintained that whichever case was considered,
    the judge failed to consider the criteria for risk on return identified
    therein.

11. I saw no merit in this ground. Firstly, no material difference  between
    the criteria to be assessed as set out in EM or CM  was  identified  in
    the written grounds or at the hearing. Secondly, the  appellant's  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal was that he came within paragraph (3)(1)
    of the head note of CM as he had "a significant MDC profile". That case
    was not accepted by Judge Frankish and there is  no  challenge  to  her
    findings in the grounds before me.

12. The appellant's case did not include any evidence or,  as  far  as  the
    documents before me show, argument that he  would  be  returning  to  a
    rural area of Zimbabwe,  thus  bringing  him  within  a  risk  category
    identified in CM. On the contrary, in his asylum claim he  states  that
    he was born in Harare and left Zimbabwe from Harare when he came to the
    UK. I was not taken  to  any  evidence  indicating  that  he  would  be
    returning to a  high-density  area  of  Harare,  another  criteria  for
    consideration identified in CM. His  wife  works  in  the  UK  and  his
    evidence is that he has family in Zambia and nothing suggested that  he
    could not support himself financially if he  returned,  in  any  event,
    thus avoiding the need to live in a high-density area of Harare.

13. Mr Brooks sought to argue that the First-tier Tribunal  also  erred  in
    failing to indicate whether the appellant was credible as  regards  his
    MDC profile or make adequate findings in that regard. That  was  not  a
    point argued in the grounds  of  appeal.  In  any  event,  reading  the
    determination as a whole and fairly, with particular reference to [17],
    it is clear Judge Frankish did not find the appellant's claim to have a
    "significant MDC profile" as required by EM and CM was made out.

14. I noted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  address  the  s.72
    certification of the appellant's asylum claim; see paragraphs 61 to  72
    of the respondent's refusal letter  dated  2  July  2014.   That  is  a
    surprising omission from the decision of  Judge  Frankish  and  clearly
    erroneous. I do not find it to be material, however, where  the  asylum
    claim was refused by the First-tier Tribunal and no  challenge  of  any
    merit to that aspect of the decision has been made out.

15. It was my view, however, that the consideration of the Article 8  claim
    by the First-tier Tribunal disclosed a material error on a point of law
    such that it had to be set aside.

16. It was  common  ground  that  the  judge  was  required  to  apply  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules and paragraph 399(a) in  particular
    and consider  whether  the  appellant's  deportation  would  amount  to
    "unduly harsh" circumstances for his two children. The judge  was  also
    required to assess and weigh the best interests of the children.

17. Mr Smart was unable  to  persuade  me  that  in  the  sections  of  the
    determination addressing the appellant's family life  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal addressed the "unduly harsh" test regarding the children;
    see [20] to [26]. There is no reference  to  paragraph  399(a)  or  the
    "unduly harsh" test or any substantive consideration of it.

18. The judge also failed to address in any substantive way the social work
    report dated 22  October  2014  of  Mr  Charles  Musendo.  There  is  a
    reference to it  at  [20]  but  no  more.  The  report  could  only  be
    potentially  material  given  its  conclusion  that   the   appellant's
    deportation would have "severe devastating effects on  the  family  and
    therefore would be contrary to the best interests" of the children; see
    [58]. Mr Brooks identified a number of other passages in the report  to
    the same effect.

19. I therefore set aside the Article 8 decision and  proceeded  to  remake
    it.

20. The essential issue in this appeal is the situation of the  appellant's
    children and whether his deportation will be "unduly  harsh"  for  them
    or, if not, whether there are exceptional circumstances that defeat the
    public interest in deportation.

21. Mr Brooks did not seek to suggest  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    399(b) were relevant here where the appellant's relationship  with  his
    wife was established entirely whilst he was here unlawfully.

22. I considered whether the appellant's  deportation  amounted  to  unduly
    harsh circumstances for his children.

23. The document entitled "IDIs:  Chapter  13  -  Criminality  Guidance  in
    Article 8 ECHR Cases" states at paragraph 2.5.2:

        "2.5.2 When considering the public interest statements, words  must
        be given their ordinary meanings.  The  Oxford  English  Dictionary
        defines 'unduly' as 'excessively' and 'harsh' as 'severe, cruel'.

        2.5.3 The effect of  deportation  on  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
        qualifying child must be considered in the context of  the  foreign
        criminal's immigration and criminal history. The greater the public
        interest in deportation, the stronger  the  countervailing  factors
        need to be to succeed. The impact of deportation on  a  partner  or
        child can be harsh, even very harsh, without  being  unduly  harsh,
        depending on the extent of the public interest in  deportation  and
        of the family life affected."

24. The Court of Appeal has indicated at [43] of PF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015]
    EWCA Civ 251 that:

         "I fully recognise that if the Judge's factual  findings  are  well
         founded, there will be a real and damaging impact  on  his  partner
         and  the  children;  but  that  is  a  common  consequence  of  the
         deportation  of  a  person  who  has  children  in  this   country.
         Deportation will normally be  appropriate  in  cases  such  as  the
         present,  even  though  the  children  will  be  affected  and  the
         interests of the children are a primary consideration."

25.  Against  those  matters  I  must  weight  the  circumstances  of   the
    appellant's children,  Mr Musendo's report providing important evidence
    in that regard. It was not suggested for the respondent that the social
    work report was in any way unreliable. I am content to take it  at  its
    highest given that is so, the qualifications  of  Mr  Musendo  and  the
    consistent comments throughout as to the serious damage to the children
    here if the appellant is deported, evidence of this  arising  from  the
    period that he was in prison. His resumption of their care on  release,
    increased since his wife started studying as well as working,  confirms
    the conclusions of  Mr  Musendo  as  to  "severe  devastating  effects"
    ensuing if the appellant is deported.

26. Acutely concerning though it must be that the children here face such a
    future as a result of the conduct of their father, I did not find  that
    this was sufficient to show that the "unduly harsh" test was met in the
    face of the seriousness of the appellant's criminal offending  and  the
    public interest in his deportation. As set out above, the more  serious
    the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the  public
    interest in deportation of the criminal. The appellant  drugs  offences
    here attracted concurrent sentences of 3 years and must  be  considered
    as very serious indeed.

27. The appellant's immigration history must also weigh against  him  where
    he entered the country illegally  and  has  been  here  illegally  ever
    since.

28. Set against his  offending  and  immigration  history,  it  is  not  my
    judgement that the very concerning conclusions of  Mr  Musendo  in  the
    social  work  report  are  sufficient  to  show  that  the  appellant's
    deportation  would  result  in   'excessively'  and  ''severe,   cruel'
    circumstances for his children such that they could be characterised as
    unduly harsh.

29. Where that was so, I proceeded to consider  whether  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A" as required by paragraph 398.

30. When conducting that assessment,  I  referred  to  the  case  of  Chege
    (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015]  UKUT  00165  (IAC)  which
    provides in the head note that:


         "... such identification to be informed by the seriousness  of  the
         criminality and taking into account the factors set out in s117B"


    and


         "[c]ompelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a  powerful
         and irresistible effect; convincing."

     and, at [25]:

        "What are "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
        described in paragraphs 399 and 399A" referred to  in  the  closing
        words of paragraph 398? They can only be circumstances,  which  are
        sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
        deportation and render such deportation a breach of Article 8.  The
        present Rules set out particular aspects that must  be  taken  into
        account  in  the  weighing  of  proportionality;  they  allow   for
        consideration of other circumstances that may not fall within  that
        rubric but, in the language of the Rules, those circumstances "must
        be very compelling"

     and, at [28]:

        "Those individuals who do not come within  paragraph  399  or  399A
        will need to establish very compelling circumstances over and above
        those described in paragraphs 399 and  399A  because  nothing  else
        will  be  weighty  enough  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
        deportation."

31. The Court of Appeal has also indicated at [24] of  LC  (China)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 that:

         "The Secretary of State was obliged to make a deportation order  in
         respect of him pursuant to section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
         unless he could bring himself  within  one  of  the  exceptions  in
         section 33, in this case by establishing that to remove  him  would
         involve an unlawful interference with his article 8 rights, and  in
         making her determination she was obliged to weigh up the  competing
         considerations in accordance with paragraphs  398  -  399A  of  the
         Immigration Rules. The starting point for any  such  assessment  is
         the recognition that  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         criminals is so great that only in exceptional  circumstances  will
         it  be  outweighed  by  other  factors,  including  the  effect  of
         deportation on any children. However, in cases where the person  to
         be deported has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment  for  less
         than 4 years and has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a  child  under  the  age  of  18  years  who  enjoys  British
         nationality and is in the UK, less weight is to be attached to  the
         pubic interest in deportation if it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the UK and there is no one else  here  to
         look after him. By  contrast,  however,  where  the  person  to  be
         deported has been sentenced to a term of 4 years'  imprisonment  or
         more, the provisions of paragraph 399 do not apply and  accordingly
         the weight to be attached to the  public  interest  in  deportation
         remains very great despite the  factors  to  which  that  paragraph
         refers. It follows that  neither  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
         children enjoy British nationality nor the fact that  they  may  be
         separated from their father for a long time will be  sufficient  to
         constitute exceptional circumstances of a kind which  outweigh  the
         public interest in his deportation. The appellant's  children  will
         not be forced to leave the UK since, if she chooses to do so, their
         mother is free to remain with them in this country."

32. In my judgement there was nothing in the evidence before me which  fell
    outside the "rubric" of or was  "over  and  above"  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399 and 399A, certainly nothing that could  be  characterised
    as  sufficiently  compelling  so  as  defeat  the  public  interest  in
    deportation. Paragraphs  399  and  399A  provide  for  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner and their  children  and  his  length  of
    residence. The provisions of s.117B(4) allow little weight to be placed
    on the appellant's relationship with  his  wife  where  it  was  formed
    whilst he was here illegally and the  same  principle  applies  to  his
    private life. It was not  my  view  that  other  factors  such  as  his
    speaking English or the family being able to  support  themselves  were
    matters that could weigh at all heavily against  the  very  significant
    weight attracting to the public interest here given the seriousness  of
    the appellant's offending.

33. This is, in my judgement, sadly,  one  of  those  cases  such  as  that
    considered by the Court of Appeal in Ad Lee v Secretary of State [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348 where the Court accepted that one  tragic  consequence  of
    serious criminal offending by a foreign national could be that a family
    will be broken up.

34. For all of those reasons, I did not find that the  deportation  of  the
    appellant amounted to a breach of his rights or  those  of  his  family
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside.

36. I remake the appeal as dismissed.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 14 May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
