
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA011362014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2016                             |On 23 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE TURNER
                                     and
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             BONNY NGU NKEMAYANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:        Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms A Watterson, Counsel instructed by Chase Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. To avoid confusion we will refer to the Secretary of  State
    and to Mr Nkemayang as the appellant as he was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Cameroon.   He  was  born  in  1974  and
    married a British citizen in Cameroon  in  2000.   He  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in  January  2003  and  then  made  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a spouse.  Not long after that, in  2004,
    he was convicted of assisting illegal entry for which offence he served
    a prison sentence of three  months.   In  December  of  that  year  his
    application for indefinite leave to remain was  refused.   He  appealed
    and that appeal was dismissed.  Just a little over a year later, in May
    2006, he was arrested by Leicester police and served with illegal entry
    papers.  He was subsequently granted temporary release.

 3. He has three children all of whom were born in  this  country,  in  May
    2001, April 2004 and December 2006 respectively.  In December  2008  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.  It was  not  long  after  that
    that he was convicted in October 2009 of failing to provide a  specimen
    of breath for analysis. He received an eighteen month suspended  prison
    sentence and a supervision order and was disqualified from driving.

 4. In May 2013 he was convicted before a judge and jury at  Warwick  Crown
    Court of an offence of burglary and theft  against  his  employers  and
    received a sentence of eighteen months' imprisonment.   Following  that
    he was served with a liability to deportation notice on 18 July 2013.

 5. The deportation decision was challenged by  the  appellant  by  way  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and that appeal  was  successful  and
    the decision in that case was promulgated on 3 February  2015.   It  is
    against that decision that the Secretary of State appeals  before  this
    Tribunal.

 6. The appellant is the father of three children, a 7 year old boy and two
    daughters aged 10 and 13.  Unhappily he separated from their mother  in
    2010.  He now lives in Birmingham and they live in Coventry.

 7. The background is set out in the decision of the First-tier  Judge  and
    the picture painted can be derived from paragraphs 7 to 9 inclusive  of
    the decision.  It is worth reading out in full.  The evidence came from
    the appellant, from the mother of the children to whom the appellant is
    the father and Dr Nkemayang who lives in Worcester.

 8. The case for the appellant was set out in a witness statement which  he
    adopted and he said that although he split up from the  mother  of  his
    children in 2010, they kept on good terms and he had maintained regular
    contact with them.  He said that two at  that  stage  were  at  primary
    school and the oldest daughter was at secondary school.  He  said  that
    he tried to involve himself as much as he  could  in  their  upbringing
    with helping them with school work and their general development and he
    said that before his prison sentence he used to work nights and it  was
    within that context that the offending took place.  He said that he had
    always been available to help the children, particularly in  travelling
    to and from school before he was sent to prison.  He said that  he  had
    to take buses in order to transport himself because of the geography as
    between  Birmingham  and  Coventry.   He  expressed  shame  as  to  his
    conviction and said that he would be terrified to lose contact  of  the
    children, saying that he would very rarely see them again  if  he  were
    deported to Cameroon.

 9. He referred to his own medical condition  which  was  not  featured  in
    submissions made before me and which is not of  central  importance  to
    the resolution of this case.  He referred to the fact that he had  been
    classed as having a low risk of reoffending and to  the  rehabilitation
    courses and training courses which he had attended whilst in prison.

10. Mrs Ndikoum who lives in Coventry again adopted her  witness  statement
    and effectively said very much to the First-tier Tribunal Judge as  the
    appellant had done, that they had maintained good relationships, he had
    helped with the homework and taken them to school on a daily basis  and
    she said that he had continued to travel  on  a  daily  basis,  looking
    after the children since his release from prison and she said how harsh
    the effect would be upon herself and the children if he  were  deported
    back to  Cameroon,  the  difficulties  they  would  have  in  affording
    travelling out there to see him and again asserting that her assessment
    was that he had a low risk of re-offending.  She  concluded  by  saying
    that over the years he had shown a real commitment to the children.

11. Finally, Dr Nkemayang said that he is  aware  that  the  appellant  had
    played a close and involved role with his children  and  had  travelled
    tirelessly to help with the school runs and that  had  continued  after
    release from prison, that he was a committed father and that  it  would
    have a terrible impact on the children  if  they  were  to  lose  close
    contact with him and he too predicted that if he  were  permitted,  the
    appellant could lead a good and law-abiding life in future despite  his
    earlier convictions.

12. The Secretary of State challenges the decision on  two  broad  grounds.
    The first is effectively an argument that the First-tier  Judge  failed
    adequately to take  into  account  adverse  features  of  the  case  in
    relation to the appellant.  By way of salient example it  is  suggested
    that the judge did not sufficiently give weight to an earlier  decision
    in 2006 by a different judge which was adverse to  the  credibility  of
    the appellant and the mother of his children.  Without descending  into
    detail as to the particular complaints that are  made  in  relation  to
    that aspect of the grounds we have found that there is no merit in  it.
    Looking carefully at the  judgment  of  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he did identify and resolve any issues concerning  credibility
    of the appellant and the witnesses and we are loathe to interfere  with
    that decision.  The judge had  the  advantage  of  hearing  from  those
    witnesses and coming to a conclusion as to the extent, if any, to which
    such other factors including the 2006 assessment, should be considered.
     Accordingly, it is at this stage of the judgment that we  reject  that
    ground of appeal and go on to consider, in closer detail, ground 2.

13. Having identified the evidence which had been called by and  on  behalf
    of the appellant  the  judge  also  set  out  the  submissions  of  the
    advocates representing each side and eventually came to  that  part  of
    his decision which was entitled "Analysis, Findings  and  Conclusions",
    having set out Section 117C of the 2009 Act or at least referred to  it
    and the relevant paragraphs of Immigration Rules the judge went  on  to
    consider the analysis which should be based upon those primary facts.

14. Accordingly, as we have already decided, the primary facts were matters
    for the judge to determine.  The question arises now  therefore  as  to
    whether those primary facts were properly  and  appropriately  analysed
    and assessed against the legal background.

15. The analysis comprised the following.  With reference to  the  relevant
    paragraph 399A(2)(b) of  the  Immigration  Rules  the  Judge  found  as
    follows:

              "As to (b) ("unduly harsh" for the children to remain  in  the
             UK without the appellant) this is perhaps more debateable.  It
             might be argued that they managed without him before (when  he
             was in prison) and could do so again without undue  harshness.
             True it is that the children did not visit him in  prison  but
             that was because he did not want  to  distress  them.   It  is
             however telling as to the strength of the relationship that an
             exception was made prior  to  Christmas  2013  because  Denzel
             particularly asked to see him and all three children  visited.
             As to the evidence of the appellant  and  Felicite  generally,
             there were some small discrepancies of  detail  regarding  the
             taking and fetching of the children  from  school  but  as  Mr
             Clapham I think rightly submitted, the important point is that
             the appellant sees them and supports them in various ways on a
             more or less daily basis.  He is firmly  in  their  lives  and
             they in his.  After all, if the gravamen  of  this  case  were
             simply that mother would struggle with childcare  arrangements
             and the taking and  fetching  of  the  children  to  and  from
             school, there would be nothing "unduly harsh" about the matter
             because  such  difficulties   are   unfortunately   a   common
             consequence of the breakdown of a  marriage  where  there  are
             children.  Whilst noting that a previous Tribunal in 2006  had
             reservations about  the  reliability  of  their  evidence  and
             therefore  approaching   their   evidence   before   me   with
             appropriate caution, I find no reason  to  doubt  the  overall
             picture of a devoted father playing an important role  in  his
             children's lives so far as circumstances permit.

         20.  It bears noting that the children are now 13, 10 and  7.   The
             eldest child is on the threshold of her teenage years, often a
             difficult time, and the two younger children are in that  very
             significant stage of development  identified  by  Blake  J  in
             Azimi-Moayed, namely the seven years from age 4.  All of  this
             is compounded in this case by the  difficulties  mother  would
             undoubtedly fact in trying to continue her career  (the  means
             of sustenance of herself and the children) as a nurse  on  the
             one hand and coping with the  various  demands  of  the  three
             children on the other.  I found Doctor  Nkemayang  a  credible
             witness and accept that he would only be able to give the most
             occasional assistance, given his own family  commitments,  his
             work and the fact that he lives at least an hour's drive  away
             from Coventry in Worcester.

         21.  None of the children are  of  course  to  be  blamed  for  the
             appellant's wrongdoing and the professional assessment is that
             the appellant represents a low risk of reoffending.  Therefore
             one can justifiably say that any concerns about the  appellant
             being a 'bad influence' because of his  criminal  inclinations
             can on the available evidence be  discounted  so  that  it  is
             possible to say that the children's Section 55 best  interests
             are served by having their father present in their lives on  a
             regular basis.  Felicite's witness statement was also eloquent
             as to that.  The effect of the appellant's  deportation  would
             be to deprive the children of a father figure for at least ten
             years,  if  not  permanently.   That  is  a  serious   matter,
             compounded in this case, as I have said, by  the  difficulties
             and stress I would put upon their mother.

         22.  Thus, taking everything into  account,  in  my  assessment  it
             would not be harsh but "unduly  harsh"  for  the  children  to
             remain in the UK without the appellant."

    The conclusion was that the appeal would be allowed.

16. The relevant law comprises statute and Immigration Rules.  The relevant
    statutory background is to be found in Sections 32 and  33  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  Insofar as is relevant to the circumstances in  this
    case Section 32 provides  for  automatic  deportation.   It  defines  a
    "foreign criminal" as a person (a) who is not a  British  citizen;  (b)
    who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and (c)  to  whom
    condition (1) or (2) applies.  There can be no  dispute  in  this  case
    that the appellant falls into all three of those cases.  He  is  not  a
    British citizen and he has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an
    offence.

17. Turning to condition (1) or (2), sub-Section (2) is  the  relevant  one
    which identifies condition (1) is that the person  is  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least twelve months.   In  this  case  the
    appellant was sentenced to eighteen months and therefore  falls  within
    these parameters.  For the purposes of Section 35A of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 the statute says that the deportation of a foreign criminal is
    conducive to the public good  and  finally,  in  sub-Section  (5),  the
    Secretary of State must make  a  deportation  order  in  respect  of  a
    foreign criminal.  Accordingly, by the operation of Section 32, subject
    to exceptions appearing later in the Act, the  Secretary  of  State  is
    under an obligation to make a deportation order.

18. Section 33 of the 2007 Act identifies the exceptions and provides  that
    Section 32, sub-Section (4) and sub-Section (5) do not apply  where  an
    exception in this case applies and that is exception (1) where  removal
    of the foreign criminal in pursuance of  the  deportation  order  would
    breach (a) a person's Convention rights or  (b)  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention.

19. The proper approach to the application of  the  exceptions  is  further
    detailed in the Immigration Rules to which we now turn.  Paragraph  396
    provides:

         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation.  It is in the public
         interest to deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
         2007."

    Paragraphs 397 and 398 make clear  that  the  Rules  aim  to  encompass
    rights protected by the European Convention on Human Rights.

    Paragraph 397 provides:

         "A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed."

20. These Rules apply where (a) a foreign criminal  liable  to  deportation
    claims that his deportation would be contrary to the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention;  (b)  a
    foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against him to be
    revoked.  That ambition is reinforced by the heading  that  follows  of
    "deportation and Article 8" under which the framework of the  Rules  is
    set out.

    Under paragraph 398 where a person claims that their deportation  would
    be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
    Convention, and

         "(b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12
             months".

    The Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public  interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

21. We turn therefore to those circumstances which were identified as being
    applicable in the Immigration Rules.  Rule 399 provides:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be "unduly harsh" for the child to live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  the  child  to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported."

22. Stepping back from the intricate detail of the statutory background and
    the Immigration Rules it is clear that the central issue which  had  to
    be determined by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was whether  or  not  it
    would be "unduly harsh" for the children to remain in  the  UK  without
    the person who is to be deported.  No one was sensibly arguing that  if
    a deportation order were made that  the  children  would  be  following
    their father to Cameroon.

23. It therefore follows that one must have regard to the cases  which  had
    been involved in the proper construction of what is  meant  by  "unduly
    harsh" within the context of the Rules.  There  was  a  bifurcation  of
    authority in the Upper Tribunal as to the  proper  approach  which  has
    recently been resolved by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the  case  of  MM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department.  That case is as
    yet unreported.  The judgment was made ex tempore but there is  a  note
    in relatively full form of the extempore judgment to be  found  at  LTL
    21/4/2016.  The circumstances of that case were this.

24. The issue arose as to  the  proper  interpretation  of  "unduly  harsh"
    within the scope of the Immigration Rules and the account given in  the
    short report of the decision of the Court of Appeal  is  worth  setting
    out in full:

         "A Court or  Tribunal  considering  whether  deportation  would  be
         "unduly harsh"  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  Rule  399  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Section 117(5) had to
         have regard to  all  the  circumstances  including  the  deportee's
         criminal and immigration history.  The  more  pressing  the  public
         interest in removal the harder  it  was  to  show  the  effects  of
         deportation would be "unduly harsh".  Under the Immigration  Rules,
         Rule 399 of Section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act  the  public  interest
         required a foreign criminal's deportation unless where he had  been
         sentenced to prison for between  one  and  four  years  and  had  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner  or  child,  the
         effect of deportation would be "unduly harsh".  In the first appeal
         the Secretary  of  State  appealed  against  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         finding that the respondent, Ugandan  national  M,  should  not  be
         deported.  M had arrived in the UK in 1990 and had a daughter.   He
         was convicted of supplying class A drugs and received  a  22  month
         prison sentence.  He appealed against deportation to the First-tier
         Tribunal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  applied  the  old  Immigration
         Rules in error and placed great weight on M's daughter's  emotional
         development concluding that deportation  would  breach  Article  8.
         The Upper  Tribunal  dismissed  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
         finding that although the FtT applied the wrong Rules the error was
         not material given that the FtTs standout finding was a devastating
         impact that deportation would  have  on  the  daughter's  emotional
         development.

         In the second appeal the appellant Nigerian National,  K,  appealed
         against his deportation. He had been living in the UK illegally and
         had arrived with five dependants.  In  2011  he  was  convicted  of
         fraud and sentenced to twenty months'  imprisonment.   He  appealed
         against his deportation to the FtT which found it was in the public
         interest not to  take  away  the  family's  stability.   The  Upper
         Tribunal allowed the Secretary of State's appeal holding  that  the
         seriousness of a foreign criminal's offence should  be  taken  into
         account in an assessment of whether deporting him would be  "unduly
         harsh" for his wife  and  children.   The  issue  was  whether  the
         seriousness  of  the  offence  was  relevant   when   deciding   if
         deportation was "unduly harsh" or whether  MAB  (par  399:  "unduly
         harsh": US) [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) had been correct to find that the
         phrase did not import  a  balancing  exercise  between  the  public
         interest in deportation and the effect  on  the  child/partner  and
         that the focus should be exclusively on the effect of the  innocent
         child/partner."

25. The Court of Appeal held the Immigration Rules were a complete code for
    assessment of an Article 8 claim with regard to deportation.   In  both
    appeals the issue was the meaning of "unduly harsh".  The reference  to
    "unduly  harsh"  in  Section  117C(5)  and  Rule  399  had   the   same
    interpretation.  It was an ordinary English expression and its  meaning
    was coloured by its context.  That  context  invited  emphasis  on  two
    factors, the public interest in removal of foreign  criminals  and  the
    need for proportionality, Article  8  assessment.   The  importance  of
    removing a foreign criminal in the public interest  was  emphasised  in
    Section 117C(1).  Under Section 117C(2) it  was  clear  that  the  more
    serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal  the  greater  the
    public interest in deportation.   That  steered  the  court  towards  a
    proportionality assessment.  Accordingly the more pressing  the  public
    interest in removal the harder it was to  show  its  effects  would  be
    "unduly harsh".  The relevant  circumstances  included  the  deportee's
    criminal and immigration history.  The UT had wrongly decided MAB,  MAB
    overruled.  In determining whether deportation  was  "unduly  harsh"  a
    court or Tribunal had to have regard to all the circumstances including
    the deportee's criminal and immigration history.  Further, in M's case,
    the Tribunal had not considered Section 117C(4) only whether M had been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life and was  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK, the Secretary of State's  appeal  with
    regard to M was allowed and remitted to the Upper Tribunal.  K's appeal
    was dismissed.

26. It is clear from that recent decision that it  is  not  appropriate  to
    consider the question of "unduly harsh" solely from the perspective  of
    the impact which deportation would be likely to have upon the  children
    or partner involved.  It has to be said that looking at  the  analysis,
    findings and conclusions of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in this case that his approach was based exclusively or virtually
    exclusively on an assessment  of  the  potential  consequences  to  the
    children and the  appellant's  family.   Taking  paragraph  22  of  the
    decision in isolation exposes the flaw in the reasoning and I repeat:

         "Thus, taking everything into account, in my  assessment  it  would
         not just be harsh but "unduly harsh" for the children to remain  in
         the UK without the appellant" [emphasis added].

27. Accordingly we are satisfied that the approach of the First-tier  Judge
    in this case was not sufficient as he simply identified in passing  the
    relevant statutory provisions, cases  and  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    arguments advanced by the advocates on each side.  It was  inherent  in
    the analysis of all that material that consideration should  have  been
    given and been seen to have been given to  the  context  of  the  undue
    harshness taking into  account  in  the  round  factors  including  the
    criminal convictions of the appellant and the  statutory  determination
    that foreign criminals falling within the relevant  parameters  of  the
    schedule and the Rules  should  be  deported  in  the  absence  of  the
    particular circumstances therein identified.  True it is that reference
    is made to arguments that were put forward on behalf of  the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State.  None of those arguments in relation to the
    public interest were identified  or  articulated  full-fledged  in  the
    analysis.  What therefore is this court to do?  It has  been  urged  on
    behalf of the appellants that the proper course, would be to remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.  We decline to do so on the basis that
    all the material which we need is contained  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and out of fairness to the appellant we  take
    it at it high watermark and accept the  assessment  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in favour of the appellant where there were disputes  as
    between the appellant and the Secretary of State ventilated in front of
    the First-tier Judge.  Therefore  we  give  the  judge's  decision  the
    benefit of any doubt in relation to the building blocks.  We would also
    have to bear in  mind  that  the  inconvenience  and  costs  and  delay
    inevitably which would be involved in remitting back to the  FtT.    We
    are confident that we can make a proper and appropriate decision on the
    materials that we have without remitting it.

28. Looking at the way in which the courts have assessed the way  in  which
    the statute and the Rules have to be  construed  we  have  reached  the
    clear conclusion that the only correct resolution of this  case  is  to
    uphold the decision of the Secretary of State to deport.   These  cases
    are invariably sad but we have to bear in mind that  Section 55 has  to
    be looked at in the context and  through  the  lens  of  the  statutory
    scheme and the best interests of the child have to be observed  against
    that background. This is a case in which the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    made no mention in an assessment of what is "unduly harsh" to the  need
    to send out a general deterrent message to people who are  not  British
    in this country that they must not  commit  serious  offences  and  the
    threat  of  deportation  is  an  important  tool  in  addressing   that
    particular issue.  There is also the sense  of  public  revulsion,  the
    idea that those who are foreign to this  country  can  commit  offences
    whilst they are living in this country and can, by deploying  arguments
    in relation to their family, evade what would otherwise be regarded  as
    the natural consequences of their offending.

29. I have already set out the arguments and analysis relating  to  matters
    in favour of the appellant in this case.  I do not  propose  to  repeat
    them on the basis that to do so would simply extend the length of  this
    judgment without adding anything to it but I would note that this court
    accepts in its entirety all the primary  findings  of  fact  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made as to the extent  of  the  relationship.
    Bearing in mind however that this is an appellant  who  does  not  live
    under the same roof as his family, who lives  a  considerable  distance
    away, who himself has necessarily spent a considerable  time  separated
    from his children as a result of his offending and the prison  sentence
    which followed, the balancing act with  relation  to  what  is  "unduly
    harsh" is not  met  so  as  to  provide  an  exception  in  this  case.
    Accordingly, we reach the clear conclusion that on these  circumstances
    the deportation order remains.

30. We have also had our attention drawn to paragraph 23  of  the  judgment
    which identifies the following:

         "I  would  therefore  allow  the  appellant's  appeal   under   the
         Immigration Rules with regard to paragraph 399(a).  I add  for  the
         sake of  completeness  that  had  it  been  necessary  to  look  at
         exceptional or very compelling circumstances breaching respect  for
         family life under Article  8,  I  would  have  found,  for  similar
         reasons, that exception 2  at  Section  117C(5)  of  the  2002  Act
         applied so that the public interest did not require the appellant's
         deportation."

31. With all due respect we reject that conclusion having reached the  view
    as we do that it was not "unduly harsh" for the children to  remain  in
    the UK without the appellant.  It must follow as a matter of  logic  in
    the context of the facts of this case that we  would  also  reject  the
    conclusion  that  there  were  other  exceptional  or  very  compelling
    circumstances beyond those.

32. In the aftermath of delivering judgment in this  case  certain  further
    points were made on behalf of the appellant.  My intention  during  the
    course of the judgment as I hoped had been made clear was to make  sure
    it did not extend to an inordinate length by  repeating  material  that
    was set out in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    accepting that all those findings made in favour of the appellant would
    be taken at their highest.  The following points had been made that  in
    the balancing exercise of  what  is  or  is  not  "unduly  harsh"  some
    recognition should be placed upon the fact that this was a sentence  of
    eighteen months within the range of one to  four  years  which  is  the
    category we are dealing with here that some time has passed  since  the
    commission of the offence and the release of the appellant from  prison
    during which time he has kept out of trouble and a recognition that the
    evidence accepted by the First-tier Tribunal and accepted  by  us  that
    the risk of reoffending is low, should be combined with a consideration
    of the potential that, as  a  result  of  his  medical  condition,  the
    appellant will have a reduced  life  expectancy  which  will  therefore
    increase the element of "undue hardship" which concerns the test to  be
    imported in this case.  These are matters which taken into  account  in
    full do not amount to a redressing of the balance that has to be struck
    between the public interest and  the  interests  if  the  children  and
    family in this case.  Regardless of the  emphasis  and  re-emphasis  on
    these points, our decision remains the same.  e He said

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision  of  the  Secretary
of State stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Sir Mark Turner                              Date     4th May 2016

Mr Justice Turner

