
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01771/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th April 2015                            |On 5th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JUSTIN EWENGUE
                   (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT REQUESTED OR MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Hodson, Solicitor for Elder Rahimi Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Aujla)  promulgated  on
    20th January 2015.  By its decision the First-tier Tribunal allowed the
    Respondent's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 3rd
    September 2014, to deport him from the UK.

 2.  The Tribunal allowed the appeal on the  ground  that  the  deportation
    would breach the Respondent's right as a  European  citizen  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations").

 3. Whilst this is an appeal brought by the Secretary  of  State,  for  the
    sake of convenience I will refer to the parties as they were before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant is a national of France born on 3rd  January  1991.   His
    background history demonstrates that he entered the UK on 22nd December
    1992 at the age of just  under  2  years  along  with  his  mother  and
    siblings.  He has resided in the UK since that date.  Between the years
    1994-2007 he  was  educated  in  the  UK,  attended  both  primary  and
    secondary education obtaining GCSE  qualifications  and  after  school,
    enrolling in a  coaching  course  with  the  Football  Association  and
    coached local football teams.

 5. On 8th April 2013 at Luton Crown Court the Appellant pleaded guilty  at
    a PCMH to four counts of possession of control  drugs  (class  A)  with
    intent to supply and one count of possession of class A drugs.  He  was
    sentenced to four years 10 months on each count  to  run  concurrently.
    The sentencing remarks of the judge  (His  Honour  Judge  Farrell  QC),
    reflects the Appellant's criminality as having been committed  over  an
    eight month period between April-December 2012.   The  judge  sentenced
    the Appellant on the basis that he and his co-accused were involved  in
    the commercial supply of drugs  at  a  street  level  basis;  the  term
    commercial being used in the context of the motivation being financial.
     The judge found it was not  on  a  significant  commercial  scale  and
    rejected the prosecution case  that  when  considering  the  sentencing
    guidelines applicable that he fell within the  category  of  a  leading
    role.  Nonetheless he found that he fell within the "significant  role"
    under the guidelines in a street level dealing enterprise.  In reaching
    the appropriate sentence the judge took  into  account  an  aggravating
    factor committing an offence whilst on bail, he took into  account  his
    plea of guilty and the stage that it was entered giving a  discount  of
    25% and took into account his age of 22 at the age  of  sentence.   The
    Appellant had previous convictions; in 2009 for possession of a class B
    drug for which he received a conditional discharge and in  2011  simple
    possession of cannabis for which he was fined.  The judge  stated  that
    those previous convictions (one of which was a spent conviction)  could
    not be regarded as a "significant record."

 6. As a result of his conviction on 8th April 2013, on 3rd September  2014
    the Respondent issued a decision to make a  deportation  order  against
    the Appellant  under  the  2006  Regulations.   The  reasons  for  that
    decision  were  contained  in  a  detailed  decision  letter  that  was
    subsequently summarised by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs  12-15
    of the determination.

 7. The Appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal came before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Aujla) on 12th January 2015.  He had the
    advantage of hearing oral evidence from  the  Appellant  and  from  his
    mother, brother and fianc�e who gave evidence in accordance with  their
    statements and whose evidence was not challenged  in  cross-examination
    by the Secretary of State (see paragraph 18 of the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision).

 8.   The judge considered the issues before him and set out  his  findings
    of fact at paragraphs [23]-[35] of the determination.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal recorded at paragraphs [19] and [23] that it was accepted  and
    conceded by the Secretary of State both in the decision letter  and  by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing that the  Appellant  fell  within
    the highest level of protection and that as such, a decision could  not
    be taken except on imperative grounds of  public  security  [Regulation
    21(4) of the 2006  Regulations].   The  judge  also  set  out  what  he
    recorded as the common ground between the  parties  at  paragraph  [23]
    whether the Appellant's conduct together  with  the  latest  conviction
    constituted "imperative grounds of public security" and if it did, were
    they taking account the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  the
    assessment of any future risk of reoffending, his deportation would not
    be proportionate.

 9. After setting out his findings, the judge  reached  the  conclusion  at
    [28] that he was satisfied that any threat from the  Appellant  to  the
    United Kingdom's public security was not of a particularly "high degree
    of seriousness" and also did not accept that the  Appellant's  presence
    in the United Kingdom represented a "genuine, present and  sufficiently
    serious threat effecting one of the fundamental interest of society" as
    he  found  that  the  Respondent  had  not  established  that  in   the
    Appellant's case there were imperative grounds of public security which
    warranted his deportation from the United Kingdom (see [28]).  At  [29]
    the judge considered on an alternative basis that if his assessment  on
    the imperative grounds of public security was erroneous, he went on  to
    consider whether his deportation would be proportionate  at  paragraphs
    [30]-[34],  and  having  taken  into  account  the  totality   of   the
    Appellant's  personal  circumstances,  having  balanced  and  gave  his
    criminality the medium risk of reoffending, he found that the  decision
    to deport would be disproportionate.  He allowed the appeal in  respect
    of the 2006 Regulations.

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the decision and  on
    19th February 2015, Designated Judge McClure granted permission for the
    following reasons:-

         "3.  In the normal course of events where a concession is made  the
             Tribunal has to act upon the concession (see R  (Ganidagli)  v
             SSHD [2001] INLR 479 and  Carcabuk  and  Bla  (TH01426).   The
             concession may be withdrawn (see Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA  Civ
             106).   There  was  no  withdrawal  of  the   concession   and
             accordingly the judge was obliged to act upon it.

           4. As is evident from paragraph 14 there was no evidence to  show
             that the Appellant  had  undertaken  any  rehabilitative  work
             whilst in custody.   A  fundamental  basis  of  public  policy
             considerations  in  EEA  deport  cases  of  the  prospect   of
             rehabilitation.  In assessing the element and in assessing the
             issue of proportionality it is clear from  paragraph  30  that
             the judge did rely upon paragraph  AG95  of  Tsakouridis.   In
             light of the comments in the Court of Appeal by  Lord  Justice
             Kay it is arguable that the judge has erred in relying on  the
             paragraph in question in relation to the issues raised.   That
             ground at least can be argued."

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Walker on behalf of
    the Secretary of State did not seek to  advance  the  first  Ground  of
    Appeal.  That ground asserted that the judge acted  on  the  concession
    contained within the reasons for refusal  letter  but  that  concession
    should not have been made and the judge should not have acted  upon  it
    and thus the Appellant was not entitled to benefit from the requirement
    that imperative grounds of public policy were required to  justify  his
    removal.  Mr Walker referred the Tribunal to paragraphs [19]  and  [23]
    of the First-tier Tribunal determination and the  Presenting  Officer's
    acceptance of the concession and that at no  time  was  the  concession
    withdrawn and that in those circumstances, Mr Walker  stated  that  the
    first ground was unarguable.  Thus he did  not  seek  to  advance  that
    ground on behalf of the Secretary of State.

12. As to the second ground, he  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in assessing proportionality and in particular the judge at
    [30] was wrong to rely upon paragraph  95  of  the  Advocate  General's
    opinion in Tsakouridis [2011] 2CMLR 11 relying on the decision of  Essa
    R (on the application of) v UT & Anor [2012] EWCA  Civ  1718  and  also
    that  [33]  he  equated  the   criminal   licence   arrangements   with
    rehabilitation which was the wrong approach.  He further submitted that
    the findings as to rehabilitation were speculative and  the  judge  had
    diminished the circumstances and nature of  the  Appellant's  offences.
    Whilst he relied on Ground 3 he made no  further  oral  submissions  in
    this respect.

13. Mr Hodson on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the Rule 24  response.
    Whilst the response dealt with the first ground at paragraphs  [3]-[6],
    as Mr Walker did not seek to seek to advance that ground,  it  was  not
    necessary for him to deal further with that issue.

14.   He submitted that it was plain from reading  the  determination  that
    the judge properly considered that there were no imperative grounds  of
    public security capable  of  justifying  the  Respondent's  deportation
    having applied the decision in Tsakouridis [as cited] and  acknowledged
    at paragraph [25] that the conviction for drug trafficking was  capable
    of amounting to  imperative grounds of public  security.   He  referred
    the Tribunal to paragraphs H7 and H8 of that decision.  He referred the
    Tribunal to paragraphs [26]-[28] of the determination and the  findings
    of fact made by the judge concerning the offence, the plea  of  guilty,
    his remorse that he had no previous convictions for supplying  class  A
    drugs, the contents of the OASys report and the  consideration  of  the
    offence.  In this respect as the Rule 24 response set out, the decision
    made by the judge at [28] that there  were  no  imperative  grounds  of
    public security capable of justifying the deportation and  his  finding
    that  the  Appellant  did  not  represent  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, was an unchallenged finding by the Secretary  of  State  in
    the grounds.  The only ground that was relied upon by the Secretary  of
    State was that relating to  proportionality  and  that  the  judge  had
    considered proportionality in the alternative and in the event that  he
    was wrong  in  his  primary  conclusion  (see  paragraph  [29]  of  the
    determination).  Thus he submitted that any error in the assessment  of
    proportionality was not material.

15. In the Rule 24 response and in his submissions Mr Hodson accepted  that
    the judge had mistakenly referred to paragraph  [95]  of  the  Advocate
    General's opinion in Tsakouridis (as cited) but it was not  a  material
    error because there were  no  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    capable of justifying the Respondent's decision which was  unchallenged
    and it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to reach its own  conclusion
    on proportionality whereby the judge took into account the prospects of
    his rehabilitation given the length of residence and  the  findings  of
    fact that he  made.   As  Mr  Hodson  submitted,  the  judge  had  made
    significant findings as regards the integration of the Appellant in the
    United Kingdom at [30] and at [31] that the Appellant's  situation  was
    "not much different from someone born  in  this  country".   The  judge
    properly had regard to the  circumstances  of  the  index  offence  and
    properly took into account the risk of reoffending had been assessed as
    medium.  He found the Appellant would  be  "virtually  a  foreigner  in
    France", that whilst he spoke some French he had no social and cultural
    connections with France, had no material links with France  whereas  he
    was integrated into the UK.  The judge also  accepted  that  he  was  a
    changed man [33] and [27] thus he submitted that the  submissions  made
    by the Secretary of State amounted  to  no  more  than  an  attempt  to
    reargue the assessment of proportionality and that no material error of
    law was thus identified.

Decision on the Error of Law:

16. The Appellant is an EEA citizen and accordingly a  decision  to  remove
    him can be made only under Regulation 19  with  Regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).  As
    set out in the determination it was conceded at the hearing that he was
    someone who by reason of his length of  residence  could  benefit  from
    paragraph 21(4) of the Regulations  thereby  engaging  the  "imperative
    grounds" provision in paragraph 21(4).

17.  Any  decision  taken  under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  must  comply   with
    Regulation 21, which provides, so far as relevant:

         "(1) In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.


          (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


          (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


          (4) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -


             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision ...


          (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles -


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;


             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;


             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.


          (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."


18. The scheme of the 2006 Regulations in respect of those  falling  within
    their scope and who  face  removal  as  a  consequence  of  a  relevant
    decision, as defined, is to provide three  levels  of  protection  from
    removal.  The lowest  level  of  protection  afforded  is  provided  by
    Regulation 21(1) which requires that a relevant decision must include a
    decision to remove, is to be taken on the grounds of public policy  and
    public  security  and  public  health.   The  intermediate   level   of
    protection, which applies to a person  who  has  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence under Regulation 15, such a  decision  can  only  be
    taken  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or   public   security
    (Regulation 21(3)).  The third and highest level of protection  applies
    to the person who  has  accumulated  at  least  ten  years'  continuous
    residence prior to the date of the relevant  decision.   In  this  case
    such a decision cannot be taken except on imperative grounds of  public
    security (per Regulation 21(4)).

19. It was accepted and conceded by the Secretary  of  State  both  in  the
    decision letter and before the First-tier Tribunal (see paragraphs [19]
    and [23]) that the level of protection afforded the  Appellant  was  at
    the highest threshold and that it was necessary to establish  that  the
    Appellant's deportation was warranted  on  the  imperative  grounds  of
    public security.

20. Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State did not seek  to  advance
    Ground 1 before the Tribunal and having abandoned Ground 1,  that  left
    Ground  2  in  which  the  proportionality  assessment  is  challenged.
    However, there is no challenge by the Secretary of State in the grounds
    as pleaded to the conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal that were  set
    out at paragraphs [23]-[28].

21.  The judge, after having set out the common ground between the  parties
    at [23], at paragraphs [24]-[25] the judge considered the CJEU decision
    of Tsakouridis (as cited) and  observed  that  following  the  European
    jurisprudence drug trafficking could constitute imperative  grounds  of
    public security.  He went on to make an assessment of  the  Appellant's
    conduct and his conclusions were set out at [25]-[27] and  at  [28]  he
    finally concluded that having taken into account all the  circumstances
    the Appellant's conduct and criminality cumulatively, the assessment in
    the OASys report and the Appellant's claim that he was a  changed  man,
    that he was satisfied that any threat from the Appellant  to  the  UK's
    public security was not of a "particularly high degree of seriousness".



22.   In  the  circumstances  he  set  out  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    Respondent's contention that the Appellant's  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom "represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society."  Thus he  found
    that the  Respondent  had  not  established  that  there  were  in  the
    Appellant's case imperative grounds of public security which  warranted
    his deportation from the United Kingdom.  He went on to state  that  he
    did not need to consider whether the Appellant's deportation  would  be
    proportionate since he was not satisfied that it was justified  in  the
    first place.  Nonetheless at [29] in the event that his  assessment  on
    imperative grounds was erroneous he proceeded to consider  whether  the
    deportation would be proportionate giving his reasons at [30]-[34] that
    having taken into account the totality of the Appellant's circumstances
    and having balanced them against his criminality and the medium risk of
    reoffending, he did not find that the Appellant's deportation would  be
    proportionate.

23. Thus the judge properly considered the issue of imperative  grounds  of
    public  security  and  whether  his  removal  was  so  justified.    In
    addressing the question the judge took into account that this  was  the
    very highest level of the calculus introduced by the  2006  Regulations
    and Directive 2004/38/EC (see LG (Italy) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 190 and
    that imperative connoted a very  high  threshold  (VP  (Italy)  v  SSHD
    [2010].  Imperative grounds of public security  require  not  simply  a
    serious matter of public policy but an actual risk to  public  security
    so compelling that it  justified  an  exceptional  course  of  removing
    someone who had become integrated by many years' residence in the  host
    State.

24.  Having  considered  all  the  relevant  circumstances  (including  the
    personal conduct of the Appellant, the  conviction  and  the  risks  of
    reoffending),  the  judge  reached  the  conclusion  under   Regulation
    25(5)(c) that the personal conduct of the Appellant did not represent a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society"  and  that  the  Respondent  did  not
    establish that there were in the Appellant's case imperative grounds of
    public security which warranted his deportation from the United Kingdom
    and thus he found that the decision was not justified.

25. The Secretary of State has not sought to challenge  those  findings  in
    the grounds and no application has been made either before the  hearing
    or at the hearing itself for any permission to amend the  grounds.   In
    those circumstances as Mr Hodson submits the judge  having  found  that
    the threat was not made out on the evidence, it was not necessary to go
    on and address the way in which the Secretary of State had  weighed  in
    the balance the considerations set out in Regulation 21(6) to decide if
    removal was proportionate.   In  those  circumstances  he  submits  any
    errors in the assessment of proportionality are not material.

26. Whilst the Rule 24 response accepts that the  judge  was  in  error  by
    referring  to  paragraph  95  of  the  Advocate  General's  opinion  in
    Tsakouridis in the light of the decision of SSHD v  Dumliauskas  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 145 at paragraph [40] and Morris K LJ  at  paragraph  [14]  of
    Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 172, in which it was found the European Court  did
    not adopt the remarks of the Advocate General, it  is  not  a  material
    error the judge took into account the prospects  of  rehabilitation  in
    the UK and France and did so in the light of his findings of fact as to
    his  integration  and   his   length   of   residence   (family   ties,
    responsibilities, education etc.) and  did  so  in  the  light  of  the
    circumstances set out in Essa (as cited).

27. However in my judgment it was open to the judge to reach the conclusion
    that he did on  proportionality.  In  the  light  of  the  unchallenged
    findings of the judge that there were no imperative grounds  of  public
    security to justify the removal of the Appellant and because the  judge
    made sustainable findings that he was entitled to make  and  which  are
    unchallenged by the Secretary of State  that  he  was  not  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, plainly in terms of  proportionality,
    the assessment following  the  primary  findings  have  the  inevitable
    consequence of the decision being disproportionate, having  found  that
    his removal could not be justified.

28. For those reasons, I have reached the conclusion that  the  grounds  of
    the Secretary of State are not made out and that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity order was requested or made.






Signed                              Dated: 29/4/2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


