
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01778/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2015                           |On 20 January 2016            |
|Prepared 26 November 2015                     |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SAMAN GHABOOLI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Fisher
Meredith

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.
2.   The Claimant a national of  Iran,  date  of  birth  1  September  1973,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 6 March 2013,
    to refuse to revoke a deportation order  made  on  5  June  2012.   The
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sethi (the judge) who,  on
    8 October 2014,  allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision [D] on 16 October 2014  and  was  given  leave  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy on 28 October 2014.

3.   On 6 March 2015 the Honourable Mrs Justice Carr DBE and  I  found  that
    there was an error of law made by the  judge  in  failing  to  properly
    apply the Immigration Rules in considering the  application  to  revoke
    the Secretary of State's deportation order.

4.   At the hearing on  7  October  2015  the  Claimant  gave  evidence  and
    adopted statements which he had made in March and September 2014 and in
    September 2015.  In short in cross-examination  Mr  Melvin  established
    that the Claimant had not had leave to remain,  he  had  become  appeal
    rights exhausted, when he had begun his relationship with Mrs Thanh  in
    about 2010 at a time when he had no legal status to be in the UK.

5.   Mrs Thanh adopted her two  statements  of  10  September  2014  and  14
    September 2015.  She confirmed that their relationship had commenced in
    about August 2010.  She was aware that he had no right to be in the UK,
    she thought he had made a political asylum claim and she hoped he would
    remain.  She said that she had learnt of  deportation  some  two  years
    later.

6.   Mrs Thanh had come to the United Kingdom when she was 17 years  of  age
    and whilst she did not remember when she obtained nationality  she  had
    had a UK passport for some seventeen years.  Mrs Thanh  understood  or,
    more correctly, misunderstood that the Claimant had been divorced.

7.   She was free to marry and would do so were the Claimant able  to  marry
    her.  Their relationship was a firm and settled one that she wished him
    to stay with her in the United Kingdom.  She confirmed that  she  would
    not live in Iran because she was British, of the  Buddhist  faith,  she
    did not speak Iranian, her  business  activities  were  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that she had no wish, in order to marry the Claimant  in  Iran
    to convert to the Muslim faith.  She had two successful  businesses  in
    the UK one involving second hand car sales and one involving  the  sale
    of souvenirs.  She confirmed that they lived in a  property  which  she
    had purchased and which was subject to a mortgage.  The judge  did  not
    accept the general claim of the Claimant to be in need of protection.

8.   The judge found [D26] that the Claimant had family life with Miss  Dung
    Thanh and that the Secretary of State's decision constituted a material
    interference with the Claimant's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life.  It was accepted that the Claimant had been in the  United
    Kingdom since 2003 albeit all his  years  had  been  without  leave  to
    remain.  It was accepted that the Claimant had a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with his partner, Mrs Thanh, of four years who had settled
    in the UK.

9.   It was common ground between  the  parties  that  the  Claimant  was  a
    foreign national who on 23 March 2009 pleaded guilty to an  offense  of
    possession and or use of a false instrument for which he was  sentenced
    to a term of imprisonment of twelve months at the Southwark Crown Court
    (D34).  The (IAC) judge accepted the evidence of the Claimant and  Miss
    Thanh as to their genuine and subsisting relationship, their  affection
    for  and  commitment  to  each  other  and  their  intention  to   live
    permanently in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  The judge  found
    Miss Thanh to be an entirely credible witness, accepted that she was  a
    British citizen, had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  excess  of
    nineteen years, had worked, was not a burden upon the  tax  payer,  did
    not require any recourse to public funds, the Claimant and  Miss  Thanh
    both spoke English and were readily  able  to  integrate  into  British
    society.

10.   The judge accepted that Miss Thanh was not of Iranian origin, did  not
    speak any of the languages commonly spoken in Iran, was now 38 years of
    age, had devoted her adulthood in developing  her  relations  and  ties
    with the  United  Kingdom  and  accepted  that  she  was  a  practising
    Buddhist; but the Islamic cultural and religious norms and expectations
    were significantly different from her own.   The  judge  accepted  that
    Miss Thanh had no links, other than through knowledge, of  living  with
    the Claimant in Iran.  The judge found that were  she  to  go  to  Iran
    there were real obstacles to relocation in order to continue  a  family
    life with the Claimant but more so that the  move  would  significantly
    impact on Miss Thanh in respect of her  practise  of  her  faith  as  a
    Buddhist and her lifestyle as an ambitious  career  woman.   The  judge
    accepted that Miss Thanh wished to have children by  the  Claimant  and
    that  previous  attempts  at   IVF   treatment   had   failed   through
    miscarriages.  The judge also concluded that the relationship had  been
    formed at a time when the Claimant's status was precarious.  The  judge
    accepted that the Claimant had not further offended and  assessed  that
    there was no direct risk of a repetition of the  criminal  conduct  for
    which he was convicted.

11.  The witness statements  before  me  did  not  materially  advance  that
    evidential position  or raise any disputed  issues  of  fact.   It  was
    common ground that the Claimant fell within the provisions of paragraph
    398(b) of the Immigration Rules (the rules) as a person  who  had  been
    convicted of an offence for which they had been sentenced to  a  period
    of imprisonment of less than four years but at least twelve months.  It
    was  also  common  ground  that  the  Claimant  could  not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 399(b) of the rules for  although  he  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and
    is a British citizen the relationship was not formed at a time when the
    Claimant was in the UK lawfully and their immigration  status  was  not
    precarious.  Similarly  because  the  claim  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 399(b)(i) then paragraph 399A of  the  rules  did  not  apply
    because the Claimant had not  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life.

12.  Much of the argument at the hearing turned upon the  inter-relationship
    between the Immigration Rules and Sections 117A-D NIAA 2002 as amended.
     The principal cases referred to were  Bossade  [2015]  UKUT  415,  MAB
    (Para 399; "Unduly Harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 and KMO (Section  117  -
    Unduly Harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543.  For  the  purposes  of  Section
    117B(4)  and  the  rules,  because  there  plainly  is   a   linguistic
    difference, the fact of the matter was that the weight to be given to a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner  was  discounted  because
    the proposed deportee was unlawfully in the UK:  This  difference   was
    not determinative in this case.  Of greater importance  was  the  issue
    raised is whether or not there is any material difference  between  the
    expression 'unduly harsh' as used in Section 117C(5) and paragraph  399
    of the rules.  This was in the context of whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for Miss Thanh to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    Claimant.

13.  Mr Nicholson argued, by reference to the  evidence,  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect Miss Thanh, as a committed Buddhist, UK  national,
    to co-habit with the Claimant in Iran. To do so would be  unlawful  and
    when discovered, as it surely would be, lead  to  death  or  cruel  and
    degrading treatment. More particularly she could  not  be  expected  to
    convert to the Muslim faith in order to be able  to  participate  in  a
    ceremony of marriage in Iran.  Thus her life could well be in  jeopardy
    through an unacceptable relationship not recognised  in  Iran  and  the
    Claimant's  life  too  for  that  matter  through  being  in   such   a
    relationship.  That is quite apart from the reasonableness of her being
    expected to change  her  lifestyle,  her  objectives,  her  employment,
    ambitions and religion.

14.  In the context of Section 117C of the NIAA 2002 it was clear under sub-
    Section (5) that not only is the deportation of  foreign  criminals  in
    the public interest but the more  serious  the  offence  committed  the
    greater is the public interest  in  deportation.   Lesser  criminality,
    where a sentence of less than four years has been imposed, nevertheless
    is in favour of deportation.  In Section 117C  "Exception  2"  to  such
    removal requirement related to a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a qualifying partner and the effect of deportation would be unduly
    harsh.  It seemed to me that paragraph 399 of the rules has effectively
    through amendment become harmonised with  the  objectives  of  Sections
    117A-C.

15.  In this case I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a  number
    of helpful findings of fact, which have not been in dispute between the
    parties before me. The Claimant relied essentially upon the same  facts
    but with more background information relating to circumstances in Iran.
     In applying Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702 I saw no basis  to  go  behind
    the judge's findings of fact and from  the  evidence  before  me  I  am
    satisfied that:-  First, the public interest  properly  indicated  that
    the Claimant should be returned;  Second, it would be unduly harsh  for
    Miss Thanh, a  British  national,  to  be  expected  to  accompany  the
    Claimant to Iran and were she to remain co-habiting with  the  Claimant
    her  life  would  be  at  significant  risk  of  ill  treatment  as  an
    adulteress.

     16.    Third, I find on the evidence it would be unduly harsh to expect
          her to conceal her practise of the Buddhist faith in Iran or to be
       forced to abandon her faith and convert to Islam.  I further find the
           Judge's findings demonstrate, were one to consider this under the
      Immigration Rules or indeed under Section 117C that it would be unduly
     harsh for the Claimant and Miss Thanh to remove from the United Kingdom
           and try and make a life together in Iran given the issue of their
                                         unmarried relationship or her faith
                                            .                              .




17.  No submissions  were  made  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  Claimant
    relocating elsewhere with Miss Thanh: The issue was not taken on behalf
    of the Secretary of State.  I agree with the  judge  that  the  one-off
    element of criminality identified with the  Claimant  was  not  with  a
    degree of seriousness sometimes seen but that  was  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State in assessing the public interest.  I therefore reach
    the view that it would be unduly harsh in  the  circumstances  of  this
    Claimant to be removed and I find had it been necessary to do so,  that
    the circumstances of the Claimant and Miss Thanh are or would  properly
    be characterised as exceptional circumstances that would  outweigh  the
    public interest in removal

18.  I do not accept Mr Melvin's argument that there is no reason  why  Miss
    Thanh could not pursue her Buddhist faith in Iran  for  the  background
    evidence provided to me strongly suggested  that  her  pursuit  of  her
    Buddhist faith would not be acceptable and would make her  the  obvious
    object of adverse attention by the religious authorities and  religious
    zealots in Iran let alone Muslims who think Buddhism tenets are derived
    from Judaism and supported by world Jewry.  In the circumstances  I  do
    not find the Secretary of State's decision was proportionate.

19.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

20.  The original Tribunal's decision  stands  on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    grounds.

21.     No anonymity order was sought nor is one necessary.



Signed                                  Date 12 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which is due to the file being  mis-
    located


