
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01350/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2015                 |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     MZS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel; Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Savage; Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  (referred  to  as  the
        respondent in this decision) against a decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal dated 11 February  2015  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
        under Article 3 of the ECHR against a decision to make a deportation
        order pursuant to the automatic deportation provisions contained  in
        the UK Borders Act 2007.

     2. The appellant is  a  national  of  Afganistan  who  entered  the  UK
        illegally on 10 December 2007 and claimed asylum.  This was refused.
         In 2008 attempts to remove him on a number of occasions failed.  He
        applied for judicial review of removal directions  in  January  2009
        which he withdrew on the basis that the respondent would  reconsider
        the refusal of his claim  within  the  UK.   He  was  released  from
        immigration detention.  He was interviewed with an interpreter on 11
        February 2011.

     3. On 8 July 2013 the appellant was convicted of sexual assault of a 15
        year old boy.  He was sentenced to 10 months  imprisonment.   On  13
        September 2013 he was convicted of two counts of causing or inciting
        two 13 year old boys to engage in sexual activity.  He was sentenced
        to 2 years 6 months imprisonment.  The sexual assault was  committed
        after the causing or inciting offence and when  on  bail.   The  two
        sentences ran concurrently.

     4. On 8 October 2013 the appellant was notified that he was  liable  to
        automatic deportation.  He advanced reasons why  he  should  not  he
        deported but by letter of 30 June 2014 his asylum claim was refused.
         He appealed to the First tier Tribunal.

     5. The appellant's claim for asylum  was  based  on  his  fear  of  ill
        treatment on return to  Afganistan  due  to  his  imputed  political
        opinion and to his conversion to Christianity.  However,  the  judge
        found that the  appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
        serious crime and upheld the respondent's certificate  issued  under
        section 72(9)(b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002.  He therefore dismissed the appeal advanced under the  Refugee
        Convention.  He noted at paragraph 27 that the appellant  was  still
        in denial about the offences

     6. At paragraph 31 the judge  dealt  with  an  issue  relating  to  the
        appellant's credibilty.  He claimed to have seen his  brother  being
        stabbed in the chest with a  bayonet  when  in  Afgansitan  but  had
        failed to mention this at the asylum interview  or  in  his  witness
        statement of 27/7/09.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
        fabricated this aspect of his claim.

     7. The judge heard oral evidence about the  appellant's  conversion  to
        Christianity from the appellant and  one  witness,  Mr  Azizi.   The
        appellant stated that he first became interested  in  the  Christian
        faith when his family moved from Afganistan to Iran when his  father
        worked for a Christian man.  While at Harmonsworth Detention  Centre
        that interest flourished and he was baptised on 7 January 2009.   He
        spoke to the genuine nature of his converstion.  Mr  Azizi,  also  a
        Christian, had met the appellant at Harmonsworth and  supported  the
        appellant's evidence in this regard.

     8. The appellant produced a letter dated January 2015 from the Chaplain
        at Harmonsworth who baptised the appellant and two letters, dated  1
        February 2012 and 17 September 2014, from the  Pastor  of  the  Elim
        International Christian Centre in Croydon whose church the appellant
        had attended since  2010.   He  also  produced  a  letter  from  the
        Chaplain at HMP  Littlehey  dated  7  July  2014  stating  that  the
        appellant had attended regularly  while  in  prison.  These  letters
        attested to the sincerity of the appellant's belief.  The  appellant
        had given evidence as to the threats  he  received  in  prison  from
        Muslims as a result of his claimed conversion.

     9. At paragraph 47 the judge found the appellant and his witness to  be
        credible and accepted that the appellant was a practising Christian.



    10. Miss Savage for the Secretary of  State  argued  that  the  Tribunal
        failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  at  paragraph  47   of   its
        determination as to why the appellant's claim that he is  a  genuine
        convert to Christianity and is a practising Christian  is  credible.
        At 47 the judge said this:

            "I have had the benefit of hearing evidence from the  appellant
            and the witness.   I find that they both gave their evidence in
            a straightforward manner without exaggeration or embellishment.
            I find them to be credible  witnesses.  After  considering  the
            written and oral  evidence,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
            genuinely converted to Christianity and accept  that  he  is  a
            practising Christian."

    11. As a result, the judge found that his removal to  Afghanistan  would
        lead to a real risk of a breach of Article 3 of ECHR and accordingly
        the Tribunal allowed the appeal on human rights grounds on the basis
        of Article 3 of the Convention.

    12. This was against the background acknowledged at  paragraph  32  that
        the appellant fabricated the aspect of his  claim  described  above.
        Further, the judge acknowledged that the appellant was in denial  in
        relation to the offences of which he was found guilty which  related
        to the sexual assault of young boys.   At  paragraph  35  the  judge
        refused to accept the appellant's claimed age and preferred the  age
        assessment report which found his age to be about two years older.

    13. Miss Savage argued that all these matters raised real  questions  on
        the credibility of the appellant and required a reasoned  assessment
        of why the Tribunal was able to accept the appellant's evidence that
        he had converted to  Christianity.   She  referred  to  R  (Iran)  v
        Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and MK (Duty to give reasons)
        Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

    14. Mr Karnik submitted that the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  the
        appellant credible and that the reasoning given was adequate.  There
        was supporting evidence from a friend of the  appellant,  Mr  Azizi,
        who confirmed that the appellant was a genuine Christian.  The judge
        was  entitled  to  accept  that  evidence.   Furthermore  there  was
        documentary evidence in the form of letters  described  above  which
        attested  to  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's  conversion  to
        Christianity.

    15. Paragraph 47 is the judge's conclusion upon the evidence  he  heard.
        He narrates that,  having  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  from  the
        appellant himself and his witness Mr Azizi, he found that the manner
        in  which  both  gave  evidence  was  straightforward  and   without
        exaggeration and embellishment and were credible.  That  appears  to
        us to be a properly articulated conclusion of the impression  gained
        by the Tribunal of the demeanour of  the  witnesses  justifying  the
        finding of credibility.   No more was required.  As was pointed  out
        in Flannery v Halifax Estate Agencies [2001] All ER 373 (cited in MK
        duty to give reasons), the  extent  of  the  duty  to  give  reasons
        depends upon the subject matter.  Where  a  straightforward  factual
        dispute exists, dependent upon which witness is telling  the  truth,
        it is likely to be enough  for  the  judge,  having  summarised  the
        evidence, to indicate simply that he believes a witness.   In  other
        situations,  for  example  where  reasons  and  analysis  have  been
        advanced on either side,  the  judge  must  enter  into  the  issues
        canvassed and explain why he prefers one case over  the  other.   It
        seems to us that this case falls into the former category  and  that
        the Tribunal judge has given  an  adequately  reasoned  decision  on
        credibility.  She does not expressly refer in this paragraph to  the
        adverse findings on the credibility of the appellant but  we  cannot
        conclude from the absence of such reference that she  ignored  them.
        She has considered and set them out earlier  in  the  determination.
        The fact that the appellant had been found to  have  fabricated  one
        aspect of his claim did not preclude the judge  from  accepting  the
        oral amd written  evidence  on  the  matter  of  his  conversion  to
        Christianity.

    16. The judge then goes on at paragraph  47  to  narrate  that  she  has
        considered both the written and  the  oral  evidence.   Accordingly,
        having accepted as credible both the appellant and his witness,  she
        also had regard to the letters from the two chaplains and the pastor
        referred to.  Those sources of  evidence,  which  the  Tribunal  was
        entitled to accept, pointed  in  the  same  direction  as  the  oral
        evidence.  In  combination,  that  was  sufficient  to  entitle  the
        Tribunal to find as it did.   Read  as  a  whole,  it  seems  to  us
        implicit that the factors adverse to credibility were, in  the  view
        of the judge, outweighed by that combination.

    17. It is correct to say that the appellant gave different  accounts  of
        the stage at which his interest in  Christianity  or  the  Christian
        faith first arose.  At  paragraph  18  it  is  stated  that  he  had
        asserted in his case that he became interested in Christianity  when
        detained at Harmondsworth Immigration Removal Centre.   However,  at
        paragraph  43  when  rehearsing  the  appellant's  evidence,  it  is
        narrated that he stated that  he  first  became  interested  in  the
        Christian faith when his family  moved  from  Afghanistan  to  Iran.
        However,  as  Mr  Karnik  pointed  out,  there  were   problems   of
        interpretation associated with the appellant's  ability  to  give  a
        history and the Tribunal cannot be  criticised  for  preferring  the
        evidence given before them over information contained  in  the  case
        papers.  Furthermore, it is plain from the interview  to  which  the
        appellant was subjected on 4 February 2011 which starts at  page  33
        of the appellant's bundle that he was asked  at  question  160  what
        religion  he  was,  to  which  he  answered  Muslim.   However,   on
        clarification it appears that the appellant  had  misunderstood  the
        question asked.  (See question 163).

   18.   Having regard to the  aforementioned  considerations  we  are  not
        persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  materially  erred  in
        law.

Notice of Decision

   19    We dismiss the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department's
   appeal. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
   involve the making of an error on a point of law.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    13 October 2015

Signed   Date

Judge Blum
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

