


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham             |Decisions and Reason Promulgated     |
|On : 30 June 2016                     |On : 13 July 2016                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                              Massamba Lubamba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC),  born
on 2 August 1972. Following a grant of  permission  to  appeal  against  the
decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  his  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision to deport him from the United  Kingdom  on  Article  3
grounds, it was found, at an error of law hearing on 2 March 2016, that  the
Tribunal had made errors of law in its decision and  the  decision  was  set
aside, to the extent set out below. Directions were made  for  the  decision
to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

Background

The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 August  1998
and on 4 August 1998 he claimed asylum. On 13 February 2001 he  was  granted
indefinite leave to remain as a refugee. On 6 October 2003 he  submitted  an
application for naturalisation as a British  citizen,  but  his  application
was refused on 18 June 2004 because of a conviction in October 2002.

On 12 October 2007 the appellant was convicted  of  conspiracy  to  defraud,
for which he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. On 15  May  2008  he
was notified of his liability to deportation and  was  invited  to  seek  to
rebut the presumption under section 72(2) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 that he constituted a danger to the community, to  which
he responded. On 17 February 2009 a fresh liability  to  deportation  notice
was served on the appellant as a result of the changes in legislation  under
which he was liable to automatic deportation under section 32(5) of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007. He responded to that notice. On 14 January  2010  a  fresh
liability  to  deportation  notice  was  served  on  the  appellant,   again
including an invitation to rebut the presumption  under  section  72(2).  He
responded to that on 2 February 2010.  On 18 March 2010 the respondent  sent
the appellant a notification of intention to cease refugee status, to  which
he responded.

On 29 January 2011 the respondent issued a cessation of  refugee  status  to
the appellant,  and  on  13  February  2011  issued  a  fresh  liability  to
deportation notice. The cessation decision was subsequently withdrawn  after
the appellant applied  for  judicial  review  of  the  decision.  However  a
further notification of intention to cease refugee status was issued  on  16
December 2012, to which the appellant responded, and on  21  June  2013  the
respondent again made a decision to cease the  appellant's  refugee  status.
On 3 July 2013 a fresh liability to  deportation  notice  was  sent  to  the
appellant, again inviting  him  to  seek  to  rebut  the  presumption  under
section 72(2). The appellant made further  representations  challenging  the
decision to  cease  refugee  status,  to  which  the  respondent  responded,
maintaining the decision, on 11 October 2013. The appellant  then  lodged  a
further judicial review application on 10 January 2014 which, it seems,  was
withdrawn on 12 June 2014 when  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the
cessation decision.  In a letter dated 27 September 2014, and in  a  further
letter  dated  3  November  2014,  the  respondent,  having   undertaken   a
reconsideration, maintained the cessation decision of 21 June 2013.

In the meantime, on 25 June 2014 a deportation order was signed against  the
appellant and a decision made the same day that  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007 applied.

The respondent, in making that decision, advised the appellant that  he  was
excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention by virtue of  Article
33(2), on the basis that he  had  failed  to  rebut  the  presumption  under
section 72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  that  he
constituted  a  danger  to  the  community.  He  was  also   excluded   from
Humanitarian Protection. The respondent considered that  the  appellant  was
not at risk of persecution in the DRC, either  on  the  basis  of  his  past
political activities, as a returned asylum-seeker or as a  foreign  national
offender and rejected his Article 3  human  rights  claim.  With  regard  to
Article 8, paragraphs 399(a) and 399A  of  the  immigration  rules  did  not
apply to the appellant as a result  of  the  length  of  his  sentence.  The
respondent did not accept that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  such
that the appellant's right to family  and/or  private  life  outweighed  the
public interest  in  his  deportation.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the
appellant had five British children living in the United Kingdom it was  not
accepted that he had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  them  or
with his claimed British partner, the mother of four  of  his  children.  It
was accordingly concluded that his deportation would not breach Article 8.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 10 February  2015,  before  a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hopkins and Mr F T Jamieson, a non-legal  member.  The  panel
heard from the appellant  and  his  eldest  son  and  considered  a  witness
statement from his partner who was not in attendance. The panel  found  that
the appellant had rebutted the presumption that  he  was  a  danger  to  the
community and they then went on to consider whether his removal to  the  DRC
would breach the Refugee Convention, concluding that he would be at no  risk
on return as a result of his past political activities.  However,  in  light
of a decision of the High Court in P and R [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin), and  on
the basis of his claim that members of the security forces had come  to  his
house in the DRC after hearing of his offending in the United  Kingdom,  the
panel concluded that the appellant would be at risk on return as a  criminal
deportee and accordingly allowed the appeal on  Article  3  grounds.  Having
considered Article 8 independently of the  Article  3  decision,  the  panel
found that there were no  exceptional  circumstances  for  the  purposes  of
paragraph 398 of the immigration rules and that the appellant's  deportation
would not breach his Article 8 rights.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against
the panel's decision on  Article  3,  asserting  that  they  were  wrong  to
dismiss the Home Office Country Policy  Bulletin  which  included  a  direct
response to P  &  R  and  that  they  had  erred  in  simply  accepting  the
appellant's claim in regard to the visit to  his  family  home  by  the  DRC
authorities.

In a  cross-appeal  challenging  the  panel's  decision  under  the  Refugee
Convention, it was asserted in the grounds  that  the  panel  had  erred  by
failing to take into account the appellant's position  within  the  MPR  and
his escape from detention in the DRC, in concluding that he would be  at  no
risk on return. The grounds asserted further that the panel  had  failed  to
give a proper interpretation to Article 4(5) of the Qualification  Directive
2004/83 and that an assessment of  credibility  was  not  warranted  in  the
appellant's case, since his asylum claim had  previously  been  accepted  by
the respondent.

Permission to appeal was granted to the respondent and the appellant  on  16
March 2015 on all grounds, but primarily with respect to  the  latter  point
regarding Article 4(5).


Following an error of law hearing on 2 March 2016, I upheld  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision dismissing  the  appellant's  claim  under  the  Refugee
Convention but set aside the decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  3
grounds, as follows:


         "13. Mr Bedford's initial submission was  not  one  that  had  been
         raised previously in the  grounds  and  he  therefore  applied  for
         permission to amend the grounds. It was  his  submission  that  the
         automatic  deportation  decision  preceded  the  cessation  of  the
         appellant's refugee status and, as such, the burden  of  proof  lay
         upon the respondent to show that cessation  was  justified  in  the
         terms set out in Article 11(1)(e) and (2) of the  Directive.  Given
         that the UNHCR opposed the cessation  of  the  appellant's  refugee
         status, the respondent had failed to discharge the burden of  proof
         and the panel had  erred  by  failing  to  recognise  that  and  by
         considering that the burden of proof  lay  upon  the  appellant  to
         establish his claim. Mr Bedford also pursued the point set  in  the
         grounds relating to Article 4(5),  that  where  the  appellant  had
         refugee status, his credibility should be accepted and  should  not
         be assessed. Mr Bedford submitted further that the panel had  erred
         by considering risk on return on the basis that the appellant was a
         failed asylum seeker when he was not, and when it  was  clear  that
         the appellant, when questioned on return to the DRC,  would  reveal
         that he had been a refugee in the United Kingdom.  The  panel  were
         wrong to have concluded that the appellant's  political  party  had
         disappeared. Mr  Bedford  submitted  that  the  panel's  Article  8
         decision could not stand - and he applied to amend the  grounds  in
         that respect - as the appellant's circumstances, being a  low  risk
         of re-offending and having  lived  in  his  family  home  with  his
         children for six years, had to be described as exceptional.


         14. Mr McVeety submitted that the challenge to the panel's decision
         with respect to the burden of proof in ceasing refugee status could
         not be accepted, since it had not been raised before the First-tier
         Tribunal. The panel had referred to the appellant's refugee  status
         having been ceased and had therefore had  that  in  mind,  but  the
         decision to cease refugee status had  not  been  challenged  before
         them. The Secretary of State was not bound by the UNHCR's views  in
         any event. The panel had given proper reasons for  concluding  that
         the faction of the MPR which the appellant had supported had ceased
         to exist. The panel did not err  by  considering  the  case  of  BK
         (Failed asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT  00098,  as  they  were
         considering all risk factors.  With  regard  to  the  Secretary  of
         State's appeal, Mr McVeety submitted  that  the  issue  of  foreign
         national offenders had now been settled in the country guidance  in
         BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  (CG)  [2015]
         UKUT 293 and the panel had therefore erred by relying on  P  and  R
         even though BM post-dated their decision.  The  panel's  acceptance
         of the appellant's claim in regard to the visit to his home by  the
         DRC authorities was erroneous, as it was based upon  an  acceptance
         of the risk identified in P and R.


         15. In response, Mr Bedford submitted that the fact that there  was
         subsequent country guidance did not mean that the panel  had  erred
         in applying the guidance before them at the time.  As  regards  the
         appellant not having challenged the Secretary of State's failure to
         meet the burden of proof before the First-tier Tribunal, he  relied
         upon the case of FP (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13 in asserting  that  appellants  could
         not be held responsible for failings of their representatives.  The
         respondent had erred by failing to discharge the burden of  proving
         cessation and the panel had failed to deal with that.


         Consideration and findings


         16. I turn  first  of  all  to  the  appellant's  cross-appeal.  Mr
         Bedford's  submissions  bore  little  resemblance  to  the  grounds
         initially raised  and  to  the  basis  upon  which  permission  was
         granted. I have nevertheless considered those grounds,  but  reject
         them as being without merit.


         17. Mr Bedford's submission in regard to  the  panel's  failure  to
         consider the burden of proving cessation of refugee status  is,  in
         fact, misconceived. His submission was made on the basis  that  the
         relevant date of cessation post-dated the deportation decision  and
         was 27 September 2014, which  was  the  date  when  the  respondent
         reconsidered and maintained the decision to cease  refugee  status,
         further to the commencement, and subsequent withdrawal by  consent,
         of  judicial  review  proceedings.  However  that  is  clearly  not
         correct, as the letter of 27 September 2014, as with the subsequent
         letter of 3 November 2014 and the previous  letter  of  11  October
         2013, was simply a response to a request for reconsideration and  a
         decision to maintain the actual cessation decision of 21 June 2013.
         Accordingly the relevant date of  the  decision  to  cease  refugee
         status was 21 June 2013. From that date the appellant ceased to  be
         a refugee. The appellant did not have a  right  of  appeal  against
         that decision and the fact that he sought to judicially review  the
         decision is a clear indication that he was aware that that was  his
         only recourse to challenging the  decision.  Paragraph  16  of  the
         panel's  decision  refers  to  an   outstanding   judicial   review
         challenge, and that reflects what the  Tribunal  was  told  in  the
         appellant's skeleton argument at paragraph 18. However there was no
         evidence  before  the  panel  of  any   ongoing   judicial   review
         proceedings and indeed this Tribunal can  find  no  record  of  any
         outstanding judicial proceedings, the last application having  been
         withdrawn on 12 June 2014.


         18. Accordingly, at the date on which  the  deportation  order  was
         made,  and  the  relevant  deportation  decision  taken  under  the
         automatic deportation provisions in section 32(5) of the 2007  Act,
         namely 25 June 2014, the appellant was no longer a refugee. It  was
         therefore not for the First-tier Tribunal to re-open or to consider
         the cessation decision and the fact that the respondent  bears  the
         burden of proving matters relevant to cessation was  not  a  matter
         before them. Indeed it was, quite properly, not pursued before them
         as a matter in issue and the appellant's skeleton argument makes it
         quite clear that the appellant's claim under the Refugee Convention
         was pursued on the basis that the burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the
         appellant (paragraph 5 of the skeleton argument). It  was  on  that
         basis that the First-tier Tribunal  therefore  properly  considered
         the appellant's claim, having concluded that he  had  rebutted  the
         presumption under section 72(2) and found that he was not  excluded
         from protection under the Refugee Convention and having noted  that
         his previously granted refugee status had been revoked.


         19. Mr Bedford then pursued  the  ground  raised  with  respect  to
         Article 4(5), although that does appear to be a basis upon which to
         challenge the panel's decision, at least from the appellant's point
         of view, given that no credibility assessment  was  in  fact  made.
         Indeed the absence of  any  credibility  assessment  was  a  ground
         relied upon by the respondent and I shall therefore  come  to  that
         later.


         20. The appellant's written grounds seek to challenge  the  panel's
         assessment of risk, asserting that  they  failed  to  consider  his
         previous position held with the  MPR  and  the  fact  that  he  had
         escaped from detention. However those were clearly matters to which
         the panel referred and had in mind when considering  whether  there
         would be any continuing interest in him by the DRC authorities. The
         panel gave careful consideration, at [39], to the  profile  of  the
         MPR and to the appellant's claim that the faction of the party with
         which he was involved was banned. Contrary to the assertion made by
         Mr Bedford, they gave full and proper reasons for  concluding  that
         that faction did not have a significant profile such as to lead  to
         any ongoing adverse interest in the appellant, noting that  two  of
         the three published sources referred to in the Home Office  Country
         of  Origin  Information  Service  report  did  not  even  note  its
         existence.


         21. Mr Bedford also challenged the panel's decision  on  the  basis
         that they had assessed risk on return on the erroneous  basis  that
         the appellant was a failed asylum seeker rather  than  someone  who
         had previously been recognised as a refugee in the UK.  However  it
         is clear that what the panel were doing at [41] was considering the
         various risk categories and, on the basis of the  relevant  country
         guidance cases dealing with returnees to the DRC, concluded that he
         did not fit within any of the categories of those  at  risk.  There
         was  no  evidence  before  the  panel  to  suggest  that   returned
         previously recognised refugees  were  at  any  particular  risk  on
         return and it is clear  that  the  panel  gave  full  and  adequate
         consideration to the appellant's circumstances in  concluding  that
         he did not have a profile that would attract adverse  attention  on
         return to the DRC such as to lead to a risk of persecution.


         22. I turn  finally  to  Mr  Bedford's  challenge  to  the  panel's
         findings on Article 8, again a matter never  previously  raised  in
         the grounds. It is clear from [52] that the panel were  considering
         Article 8 independently of their decision  under  Article  3.  They
         considered the relevant immigration rules and statutory  provisions
         and provided full and detailed reasons for  concluding  that  there
         were  no  exceptional  circumstances  preventing  the   appellant's
         deportation for the purposes of paragraph  398  of  the  rules.  Mr
         Bedford challenged that decision, but on what was no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the panel's  decision.  The  panel  were  clearly
         entitled to reach the decision that they did.


         23. Accordingly, for all of these reasons, I find no errors of  law
         in the First-tier Tribunal's decision on  the  appellant's  grounds
         relating to asylum, humanitarian protection and  Article  8  and  I
         uphold the decision in those respects and dismiss  the  appellant's
         cross-appeal.


         24. I do, however,  find  merit  in  the  respondent's  grounds  of
         appeal. It is clear that the panel allowed the  appellant's  appeal
         on Article 3 grounds purely on the strength of the  decision  in  P
         and R, where Phillips J concluded that criminal  deportees  to  the
         DRC would be detained on arrival for an indefinite period and  that
         such detention would be in conditions which contravened Article  3.
         The country guidance in BM, which was decided after the appellant's
         appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  came  to  a   different
         conclusion. Mr Bedford submitted that an error of law did not arise
         simply because a subsequent country guidance case differed  from  a
         previous case on the facts. However P  and  R  was  not  a  country
         guidance case and did not purport to be such.  It  was  a  judicial
         review decision quashing the certification, as  clearly  unfounded,
         of an application to revoke a deportation order.  Accordingly,  the
         panel were wrong to consider that they were  bound  to  follow  the
         decision,  which  is  what  they  appeared  to  do,  and  that   is
         particularly so when  faced  with  a  Home  Office  Country  Policy
         Bulletin which was compiled as a direct response to  that  decision
         and which they nevertheless, as a result  of  the  assumed  binding
         nature of the decision, failed properly to consider and address and
         failed to accord any weight. Furthermore, the country  guidance  in
         BM makes it clear that Phillips J, in coming to the  decision  that
         he did, had relied upon information from the DRC  Ambassador  which
         had subsequently been  clarified  and  undermined.  Accordingly  it
         seems to me that the panel's decision on the risk of return to  the
         appellant simply as a result of his criminal offending in the UK is
         unsustainable and cannot stand.


         25. Whilst it is the case that the panel  found  the  risk  to  the
         appellant to arise also as  a  result  of  interest  shown  in  him
         through visits to his family  home  in  the  DRC  by  the  security
         services, there is merit  in  the  respondent's  assertion  in  the
         grounds that the panel erred by failing to explain why that account
         was simply accepted at face value, particularly  in  light  of  the
         appellant's history of dishonesty. Contrary to the  assertion  made
         on behalf of the appellant, I do not accept that  Article  4(5)  of
         the Directive has to be read as requiring the appellant's  evidence
         to be accepted without more, on  the  basis  of  his  asylum  claim
         having previously been accepted. It is, furthermore, plain that the
         panel, in accepting the appellant's account of the  visits  by  the
         security services, were influenced by the decision in P and R which
         concluded that the DRC authorities took an adverse interest in  DRC
         nationals who had committed serious criminal offences  abroad.  For
         the reasons given above, the panel erred  in  law  in  placing  the
         weight that they did upon that decision.


         26. For all of these reasons I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds  has  to  be  set
         aside and re-made. The Secretary of  State's  appeal  is  therefore
         allowed. I set aside the decision allowing the appeal on Article 3.


         27. The appellant's appeal will therefore be listed for  a  resumed
         hearing in the Upper Tribunal in order for the decision to  be  re-
         made on this limited basis, namely the question of risk  on  return
         to the appellant as a person who has been  convicted  for  criminal
         offences in the UK. It will be for the Upper Tribunal, in re-making
         the decision, to consider, and make findings  on,  the  appellant's
         claim in respect to the visits to his family home in the DRC and it
         may be that the appellant would wish to give further oral  evidence
         in that regard. Submissions will, of course, need  to  address  the
         country guidance in BM."

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me for a resumed hearing on 30 June 2016, to re-
make the decision on Article 3.

Mr Bedford raised a preliminary point, namely that with regard  to  [17]  of
my error of law decision and the judicial  review  proceedings  referred  to
therein, there had in fact  been  such  outstanding  proceedings  which  had
resulted in a grant of permission and the withdrawal by  the  respondent  of
her decision of 3 November 2014 maintaining the decision  to  cease  refugee
status. He submitted that the cessation decision had  thus  been  withdrawn.
He referred further to the immigration  history  at  the  beginning  of  the
respondent's appeal bundle which confirmed that the  revocation  of  refugee
status had been withdrawn on 19 May 2014 pending reconsideration.  Ms  Aboni
had no instructions that the  cessation  decision  had  been  withdrawn.  Mr
Bedford invited me to reconsider the argument he had made previously at  the
error  of  law  hearing  about  the  deportation  decision  pre-dating   any
cessation decision and to  set  aside  my  own  decision  in  that  respect.
However I did not agree to that and I set out my reasons later.


Mr Bedford then called the appellant to give oral evidence in regard to  the
claimed incident when security services  visited  his  home  after  becoming
aware of his criminal  offending  in  the  UK.  The  appellant  adopted  his
previous statements. When asked why his  previous  solicitors  had  said  in
their letter of 31 March 2010, at R1  and  R2  of  the  respondent's  appeal
bundle, that the incident was a recent one, when  he  had  claimed  that  it
occurred in 2007, the appellant said that it was because he  only  told  his
solicitors about it when he  came  out  of  prison  in  December  2009.  His
criminal offending was widely  publicised  and  was  mentioned  on  the  BBC
Birmingham News as well as being reported in the  Daily  Mail  and  the  Sun
newspapers. The crime  was  widely  reported  and  easily  accessed  on  the
internet. When cross-examined by Ms Aboni, the appellant said  that  he  was
not aware of any incidents after 2007, but he felt that since that  incident
occurred almost ten years after he left the DRC and  came  to  the  UK,  the
same could happen now, ten years later.


Both parties then made submissions. Ms Aboni submitted  that  the  appellant
would not be at risk on return to the DRC and she relied  upon  the  country
guidance in BM and  Others  in  regard  to  the  risk  to  foreign  national
offenders. The incident in 2007 involved  rogue  elements  of  the  security
forces trying to extort money  and  was  not  evidence  of  the  authorities
having any adverse interest in the appellant. Mr Bedford submitted  that  it
was reasonable to believe that there would be a resurgence  of  interest  in
the appellant. His case differed to that of BM as there had been a  previous
interest in him. The appellant had fled from  detention  and  there  was  an
unexecuted warrant against him. Furthermore, BM did not deal with those  who
had previously been recognised as refugees,  but  only  with  failed  asylum
seekers.  The  DRC  authorities  would  be  aware  that  the  appellant  was
previously recognised as a refugee  and  that  would  put  him  at  risk  on
return.

Consideration and findings

I turn first of all to the preliminary point raised by Mr Bedford in  regard
to the decision to cease the appellant's refugee status  and  his  assertion
that that decision had been  revoked.  As  I  stated  in  my  error  of  law
decision at [17] and [18] it was clear to me that the decisions made by  the
respondent subsequent to the cessation decision of 21 June 2013 were  simply
decisions following an agreement to reconsider the cessation  decision,  but
refusing to  do  so.  The  reference  in  the  immigration  history  to  the
withdrawal of the revocation decision on 19 May 2014 was  clearly  an  error
and, it seems to me,  was  in  fact  referring  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
judicial review claim. It remains the case that there is  no  evidence  that
the cessation decision of 21 June 2013 has been withdrawn by the  respondent
and the papers produced by Mr Bedford in the  most  recent  judicial  review
proceedings again show no more  than  that  the  respondent  has  agreed  to
reconsider the cessation decision, as  she  has  done  on  several  previous
occasions, following each of which the original decision  of  21  June  2013
was maintained. Accordingly I maintain my  view  previously  expressed  that
the relevant date of the decision to cease refugee status was 21  June  2013
and from that date the appellant ceased to be a  refugee.  That  was  indeed
the case before the First-tier Tribunal and accordingly I see no  reason  to
go behind my  decision  upholding  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
relation to the appellant's claim under the Refugee Convention.

I therefore turn to the substantive matters upon which the decision  in  the
appeal was to be re-made, namely the risk on return to the  appellant  as  a
foreign national offender in the UK. Despite Mr  Bedford's  valiant  attempt
to suggest reasons why the appellant would be at risk, I find absolutely  no
merit in such a claim. The country guidance in BM makes it  clear  that  the
evidence produced before the Tribunal showed  there  to  be  no  risk  to  a
returnee simply on the basis of having offended in the UK.  I  consider  the
appellant's claim as regards an incident in December 2007, when  members  of
the security  services  came  to  his  home  after  becoming  aware  of  his
conviction in the UK, to be pure fiction. The  appellant's  account  of  the
incident, in his statement of 30 January 2015, bears little  resemblance  to
the account relayed by his solicitors in their letter of 31 March  2010,  in
which they referred to the incident as being 'recent' and made no  reference
to any attempt to extort money from his family.  The  appellant's  attempted
explanation for the reference  to  the  incident  being  recent  was  not  a
credible one. For these reasons, and considering the appellant's history  of
dishonesty, I simply do not accept that such an incident occurred.  However,
even if it was the case that there had indeed  been  an  attempt  to  extort
money after the appellant's crime became known in the  DRC,  I  would  agree
with Ms Aboni's submission that that did not amount to anything  other  than
rogue elements of the security forces seizing an opportunity to make  money,
rather than an example of adverse interest being taken in the  appellant  by
the security services, and there is no reason whatsoever to  consider,  even
to the lowest standard of proof, that there would be  any  interest  in  the
appellant some ten years later.

Mr Bedford submitted that the  appellant's  case  differed  to  the  general
guidance in BM in relation to foreign national offenders, in that there  had
been a previous adverse interest in him and  that  his  return  to  the  DRC
would therefore cause a resurgence of that interest. However the  First-tier
Tribunal found, for reasons properly given,  at  [47],  that  there  was  no
reason  to  believe  that  there  would  be  any  ongoing  interest  in  the
appellant, and there is no reason to go behind that finding. Contrary to  Mr
Bedford's submission, the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  in  that  respect
had not been set aside by the error  of  law  decision,  as  was  abundantly
clear by the fact that their  decision  under  the  Refugee  Convention  was
upheld. Likewise, the argument which  Mr  Bedford  attempted  to  resurrect,
that the appellant would be at risk as a previously recognised refugee,  had
already been addressed in my error of law decision at [21].


Accordingly I find absolutely nothing in  the  country  guidance  in  BM  to
support the appellant's claim to be at risk  on  return  on  any  basis  and
neither do I find any reason to consider that  the  appellant  would  be  at
risk for reasons not covered by the country guidance. I do  not  find  there
to be any basis upon which the appellant could be considered to be  at  risk
on return to the DRC. His removal to the DRC would clearly not be in  breach
of Article 3 of the ECHR. Since Article 3 was the only part of the  decision
in the appellant's appeal to be re-made,  it  follows  that  his  appeal  is
dismissed on all grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law in relation to its findings on Article 3,  and  the  decision
has accordingly been set aside in that respect. I re-make  the  decision  by
dismissing the appellant's appeal on Article 3  grounds  and  on  all  other
grounds.













                               Signed                     Date13 July 2016


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
