
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01058/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester (Piccadilly)              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 November 2013                           |On 06 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               PAWEL WYKOWSKI
                                                                  Respondent
    [No Anonymity Direction requested or made]


Representation

Appellant:    Ms Rutherford (of counsel), instructed by Dixons Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

[1]  This judgment contains the fuller grounds and  reasons  articulated  in
      our ex tempore judgment at the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  of  14th
      November 2013, when we summarised why we had  decided  to  allow  this
      appeal.

[2]  The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (hereinafter  "the
    Secretary  of   State")   appeals,   with   permission,   against   the
    Determination of the First-Tier Tribunal (hereinafter  "the  Tribunal")
    promulgated on 18th April 2013.  By its decision, the Tribunal  allowed
    the Respondent's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,
    dated 12th December 2012, to deport him from the United  Kingdom.   The
    Tribunal allowed the appeal on the ground that deportation would breach
    the Respondent's rights as a European  citizen  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").
    While  the  appeal  had  been  pursued  on  a  second  ground,   namely
    infringement of the Respondent's  rights  under  Article  8  ECHR,  the
    Tribunal did not determine this  ground,  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    considered unnecessary to do so.

FIRST GROUND OF APPEAL: THE PERMANENT RESIDENCE ISSUE

[3]  By regulation 15(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations,  the  right  to  reside
    permanently in the United Kingdom is conferred on, inter alios, an  EEA
    National who has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years.  One of the elements
    of the definition of "EEA decision", enshrined in regulation 2(1), is a
    decision that concerns "a person's removal from  the  United  Kingdom".
    Regulation 21 employs the  terminology  "relevant  decision",  defining
    this as "an EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public
    security or public health".

[4]  We  elaborate  on  the  above  as  follows.  The  scheme  of  the  2006
    Regulations in respect of those falling within their scope and who face
    removal as a consequence of a relevant  decision,  as  defined,  is  to
    provide three levels of protection from removal. The  lowest  level  of
    protection afforded is provided by regulation 21(1) which requires that
    a relevant decision, which includes a decision  to  remove,  is  to  be
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health. Turning to the intermediate level of protection, which  applies
    to a person who has acquired  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    regulation 15, such a decision can be taken only on serious grounds  of
    public policy or public security: per regulation  21(3).  Finally,  the
    third, and highest, level of protection applies to  a  person  who  has
    accumulated at least ten years continuous residence prior to  the  date
    of the relevant decision. In this case, such a decision cannot be taken
    except on imperative grounds of public security: per regulation 21(4).

[5]  For the purposes of this appeal we are concerned only  with  the  first
    two levels of protection. In paragraph [3] of  its  determination,  the
    Tribunal stated:

         "The [Secretary of State] accepted the [Respondent] has acquired  a
         right of permanent residence by being in  the  United  Kingdom  for
         over a continuous period of five years."

      This  finding  was  repeated  in  paragraph  [18].   It  is,  however,
    confounded  by  the  text  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  deportation
    decision, which recites:

         "There  is  no  evidence  of  residence  in  accordance  with   the
         regulations for a continuous period of  5  years  or  of  10  years
         continuous residence ...


         It is considered that you have not acquired the right of  permanent
         residence in the United Kingdom."

     The letter then rehearsed, correctly, the Regulation 21(1)  test.  Thus
    the Tribunal made a notable error on this issue.

[6]  The Tribunal, in its first reference to the applicable test  under  the
    2006 Regulations - in paragraph [15] - was clearly directing its  mind,
    incorrectly, to the lower threshold prescribed by regulation 21(1).  In
    the next relevant passage, in paragraph [18], the Tribunal recited,  in
    terms, the higher (intermediate)  threshold  prescribed  by  regulation
    21(3), but did so  in  the  context  of  the  aforementioned  erroneous
    finding which, if correct, would have triggered  the  lower  regulation
    21(1) threshold.  Ms Rutherford, on behalf of the Respondent, drew  our
    attention to later passages in the Determination,  in  paragraphs  [26]
    and [28].  We are unable, however, to accede  to  her  submission  that
    these passages had the effect of correcting (a) the articulation of the
    wrong  test  in  paragraph  [15],  (b)  the  repeated  statement  -  in
    paragraphs [3] and [18] - that there was no dispute between the parties
    that the Respondent had the status of a  person  enjoying  a  right  of
    permanent residence or (c) the confused juxtaposition in paragraph [18]
    of this incorrect statement and the recitation of the  test  applicable
    to persons who have not acquired this right.

[7]  In summary, there is a fundamental error of fact in  the  Determination
    bearing on an issue of  central  importance,  namely  the  Respondent's
    status under the 2006 Regulations, a significant  misdirection  in  law
    concerning the applicable test and a demonstrable degree  of  confusion
    relating to  these  important  issues.  These  combine  to  produce  an
    unmistakable error of law. We consider that the first of the  permitted
    grounds of appeal has been established accordingly.

SECOND GROUND OF APPEAL: THE RISK OF REOFFENDING ISSUE

[8]  While there are two permitted grounds of  appeal  under  this  umbrella
    heading, we consider that, properly analysed, they resolve to a  single
    complaint, albeit with more than  one  manifestation,  which  we  would
    summarise as a failure  on  the  part  of  the  Tribunal  to  correctly
    understand and properly engage with the evidence bearing on this issue.

[9]  While there was an OASYS report which made some  contribution  to  this
    issue and to which our attention was correctly drawn by Ms  Rutherford,
    it was agreed, in substance, that this ground of  appeal  falls  to  be
    determined mainly by reference to the Probation Service "NOMS"  report.
    Its salient contents may be summarised thus:

     a) There was  an  assessment  that  the  Respondent  presented  a  low
        likelihood of reoffending.


     b) The risk of inflicting serious harm, in the event  of  reoffending,
        was considered to be medium.

     c) This latter risk was based on a lengthy menu of "risk factors".

     d) The Respondent was assessed as presenting a risk to the  victim  of
        his index and previous offences and to the general public.

     e) The Respondent was under the influence of alcohol when he committed
        the index offence.

     f) The author considered the Respondent  capable  of  behaving  in  an
        aggressive and impulsive manner due to his temperament.  There  was
        a related assessment that he -
             ".... needs to gain skills to deal with conflict situations in
             an assertive way as well as improve his  problem  solving  and
             consequential thinking skills."

     g) Employment, stable accommodation, engagement  and  compliance  with
        community based orders were identified as  "protective  factors  in
        him leading an offence free lifestyle".

[10]  It  is  clear  from  its  determination  that  the   Tribunal   became
    particularly  preoccupied  with  the  issue  of  where  the   Appellant
    continued to reside and whether an alternative place of residence might
    be available to him, as a possible antidote to reoffending.    This  is
    clear from paragraphs [23] - [28].  It is reinforced by the  procedural
    course of the hearing, to which we have adverted above.   Both  parties
    were agreed that the hearing was initially conducted  on  29th  January
    2013 and was  concluded  on  the  basis  that  judgment  was  reserved.
    However, subsequently, the Tribunal issued  formal  directions  to  the
    effect that the aforementioned issue should be specifically  addressed.
    The Tribunal then convened a second day of hearing, on 15th April 2013.
     The reception of the further evidence thereby generated is recorded in
    paragraphs [26] - [28] of the Determination.  The central  issue  being
    explored by the Tribunal was the risk of  the  Respondent  reoffending.
    This  was  unquestionably  an  important  issue   to   be   considered.
    Furthermore, it was incumbent on the Tribunal  to  form  its  own  view
    about this matter.  We consider that what this required of the Tribunal
    was the demonstration in its determination of  having  fully  addressed
    and understood the NOMS report and having  properly  engaged  with  its
    contents, to be followed by appropriate findings and conclusions,  duly
    reasoned. We conclude  that  these  requirements  were  not  satisfied.
    There was inadequate engagement with the NOMS  report  and  an  evident
    failure to appreciate that the reoffending and serious harm assessments
    in the report were neither based on the Respondent's place of residence
    nor restricted to a single  putative  victim.   We  consider  these  to
    constitute clear errors of law which, as they  concerned  an  issue  of
    fundamental importance, were of undeniable materiality.

[11] The second ground of appeal succeeds accordingly.


THIRD GROUND OF APPEAL: PROCEDURAL UNFAIRNESS

[12] We have mentioned briefly the  procedural  course  of  the  hearing  at
    first  instance.   In  light  of  our  exchanges  with   the   parties'
    representatives, it is clear that the relevant sequence  of  events  is
    the following:

     a) The Tribunal, constituted  by  a  Judge  and  a  non-legal  member,
        conducted a  hearing  on  29th  January  2013.   This  hearing  was
        concluded on the clearly shared understanding and expectation  that
        a reserved judgment would be forthcoming in due course.


     b) The hearing was followed by procedural  directions  issued  by  the
        Tribunal.  These focused exclusively on the issue  of  reoffending,
        invited further evidence and explicitly stated  that  both  parties
        would have the facility of making further representations.

     c) The Tribunal then arranged a second  day  of  hearing,  which  took
        place on 15th April 2013.

     d) At the second hearing,  the  Respondent  was  permitted  to  adduce
        further evidence relating to the "relocation" issue.  The Secretary
        of State's representative  is  recorded  as  having  addressed  two
        questions to the witness concerned.

     e) The Tribunal did not permit the Secretary of State's representative
        to make submissions in relation to the new evidence.

[13] We are  satisfied  that,  procedurally,  it  was  appropriate  for  the
    Tribunal to issue the further directions and to reconvene  subsequently
    for a second day of hearing.  It lay within its margin of  appreciation
    to conduct the appeal process in this manner.   However,  the  Tribunal
    had an overarching duty to ensure that both parties' right  to  a  fair
    hearing was fully respected.  A party's entitlement to respond  to  the
    other party's case is an elementary, entrenched aspect of this hallowed
    common law right.  We consider that in refusing to permit the Secretary
    of State's  representative  to  make  submissions  concerning  the  new
    evidence the Tribunal failed to accord to the  Secretary  of  State  an
    indisputable aspect of this fundamental  right.    While  we  recognise
    that this kind of procedural impropriety must not  be  assessed  in  an
    abstract vacuum, the conclusion that the impropriety which occurred  in
    the context under scrutiny was a matter of some moment is  inescapable.
    The simple analysis that the Secretary of State's representative  could
    have  formulated   representations  which  might  have  influenced  the
    Tribunal's determination of the appeal is unassailable.  That  fairness
    demanded  such  an  opportunity  to  advance  closing  submissions   is
    reinforced by the fact that more than ten weeks had elapsed  since  the
    date of the initial hearing. See, generally, R v   Chief  Constable  of
    Thames Valley Police,  ex  parte  Cotton  [1990]  WL  753309.   We  are
    impelled, inexorably, to the conclusion that this ground of  appeal  is
    also established.


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

[14] We note with some concern that,  on  the  first  day  of  hearing,  the
    Tribunal was composed of a judge and a  non  -  legal  member.  On  the
    second day of hearing, the non - legal member did not feature  and  the
    Determination is in the name of the judge only.  In  the  text  of  the
    Determination, one finds a mixture of the judge's  personal  views  and
    assessments and the combined views and assessments of the judge and the
    non - legal member: see paragraphs [24] - [28].  No order of  any  kind
    was made to  regularise  the  alteration  in  the  composition  of  the
    Tribunal.  We are  bound  to  comment  that  all  of  this  was  highly
    irregular.  While this irregularity does not form one of the  permitted
    grounds of appeal, we consider that, per se, it vitiated the outcome at
    first instance.

DECISION

[15] We allow the Secretary of State's appeal and we  set  aside  the  first
    instance decision.

[16] The effect of this is that the decision is to be remade, either by  the
    Upper Tribunal or on remittal to the First-tier Tribunal by a different
    constitution of that Tribunal. In deciding this question  we  have  had
    regard to the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  paragraph  7.2
    whereof provides that the expectation is for the decision to be re-made
    by the Upper Tribunal except where  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
    that:

          (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Here, the effect of one of the errors made below was to deprive one  of
    the parties of the opportunity to have its case considered because  the
    judge misunderstood it. We bear in mind also that the appeal is  to  be
    decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved. For these reasons we
    are satisfied that the proper course is to remit  this  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that  the  parties  can  now  have  the  initial
    hearing to which they were entitled.






OMNIBUS CONCLUSION

[17] For the reasons elaborated above, the appeal succeeds on  all  grounds.
    We order remittal to the First-tier Tribunal, differently  constituted,
    with no preserved findings.

[18] The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent  that  it  is
remitted to the   First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.







                           Signed:   [pic]

                                             The President
                                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey


                           Dated:     6 January 2014


