
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01352/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 October 2013                            |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                            MARIO MENDES MACHADO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel, instructed by Dicksons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wardle, Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth and Mr G  H
    Getlevog) promulgated on 25 June 2013 dismissing his appeal against the
    respondent's decision made on 7 December 2012 to refuse him asylum  and
    to make a deportation order pursuant  to  section  32  (5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Angola  born  on  11  December  1975.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 June 1996 and claimed asylum.  That
    application was refused  and  his  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed. He remained in the United Kingdom and was on 22  March  2002
    convicted at Sheffield Crown Court of obtaining property  by  deception
    for which he was on 14 May 2002 sentenced to  a  total  of  two  years'
    imprisonment and was recommended for deportation.  A deportation  order
    was signed.

 3. On 22 November 2002  the  appellant  married  Dawn  Morris,  a  British
    citizen who, on 20  February  2003,  became  a  citizen  of  the  Irish
    Republic. The appellant then made an application  for  confirmation  of
    his right of residence as the spouse of an EEA National, an application
    refused on 24 March 2003, it being concluded that his deportation would
    still be conducive to the public good.

 4. Although an appeal against that decision was initially  dismissed,  his
    appeal was allowed by the Court of Appeal on 19 May 2005 (see Machado v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 597) to the extent that it  was  remitted  to  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of
    the AIT (as he then was) and Designated Immigration Judge Wynne)  which
    allowed his appeal in a determination promulgated on 9 May 2006.   They
    noted [6] that it was accepted that the appellant and his  then  spouse
    were qualified persons under the EEA Regulations.   Subsequent to  this
    decision the respondent  revoked  the  deportation  order  against  the
    appellant and issued him a residence card as confirmation of his  right
    of residence with Dawn Morris. On   30 March 2011 he was divorced  from
    his wife.

 5. On 20 April 2010 the appellant was convicted at Sheffield  Crown  Court
    of harassment of Dawn Morris; paying for sexual services with  a  child
    aged 13-15; and failure to surrender to custody, offences for which  he
    was sentenced to 18 months, two years and  36  days  imprisonment,  the
    first two sentences  to  be  served  consecutively.   The  sentence  in
    respect of the first crime was on appeal later varied to 12 months.

 6. On 16 September 2011, the respondent wrote to the appellant, explaining
    that he was liable to deportation and asking if he considered that  any
    of the exceptions set out in section 33 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    applied to him. He replied on  11  November,  claiming  that  he  faced
    persecution on return to Angola. The respondent  considered  that  this
    constituted a claim for asylum.

 7. On 17 November 2011 the appellant's then representatives. Irving &  Co,
    wrote to the respondent,  submitting that he fell within  exception  1,
    that is that his removal was contrary to articles 2, 3 6 and 8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention. There  is  no  indication  that  exception  3,
    relating  to  EU  law,  was  invoked.  Further  submissions  from   the
    appellant's representatives followed, but it does not appear that  they
    argued that the appellant's deportation from  the  United  Kingdom  was
    contrary to his rights under EU law.

 8. On 7 December 2012 the respondent made a deportation order against  the
    appellant pursuant to section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   The
    appellant lodged  an  appeal  against  that,  accompanied  by  detailed
    grounds,  averring  that  the  decision  was  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights
    Convention.  It was not averred that the decision was contrary  to  the
    appellant's rights under EU law or not in accordance with the law.

 9. The appeal against the respondent's decision was heard on  26  February
    2013 and 13 June 2013 at Nottingham Magistrates' Court.  The  appellant
    was represented by Mr Barnfield of Counsel.  There is no indication  in
    the determination, or in Mr  Barnfield's  skeleton  argument  that  any
    application was made  to  vary  the  grounds  of  appeal,  or,  that  a
    submission was made that the appellant's deportation  was  contrary  to
    his rights under EU law. While the panel noted [106] the submission  by
    Mr Barnfield that the appellant had been issued with a  residence  card
    as the family member of an EEA national, there is  no  indication  that
    this submission was  developed  or  that  it  was  submitted  that  the
    appellant had acquired the right of permanent residence.

10.  In  their  determination,  the  First-tier  Tribunal   dismissed   the
    appellant's claims that he was at risk on  return  to  Angola  of  ill-
    treatment sufficiently severe to engage articles 2 or 3  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention or the Refugee Convention. They  noted  that  it  was
    accepted  by  his  counsel  that  the  appellant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules [97] and concluded [118] that the
    appellant's deportation to Angola would be proportionate.

11. The appellant did not challenge the findings made  in  respect  of  the
    Refugee Convention or the Human  Rights  Convention,  but  only  sought
    permission to appeal on the grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred:

          i) in  failing to consider that the  appellant  had  continued  to
             enjoy a permanent right to reside  in  the  UK  under  EU  law,
             notwithstanding his divorce  [3]; and,


         ii) in consequence, failing to consider whether his deportation was
             justified pursuant  to  regulation  21  of  the  Immigration  (
             European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the    EEA
             Regulations").

12. On 18 July 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Blandy granted permission  to
    appeal on all grounds. The respondent replied to that, pursuant to Rule
    24, on 1 August 2013, submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    erred, given that the issue of whether the appellant was entitled to  a
    permanent  right  of  residence  had  not  been  raised;  and,  in  the
    alternative, that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the
    assertion that the  appellant  had  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
    residence.


 Submissions

13. Mr Draycott relied on his extensive skeleton argument, submitting  that
    the First-tier Tribunal, having acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had
    been issued a residence card of five years' duration, had been  put  on
    notice that EU  law  was  engaged,  and,  following  the  principle  of
    effectiveness, should have enquired into the matter.  He submitted also
    that the First-tier Tribunal should have concluded that  the  appellant
    had acquired permanent residence, his imprisonment notwithstanding.  He
    also drew our attention to the difficulties the appellant faced in  the
    circumstances of a marital breakdown in establishing that  his  ex-wife
    had been exercising Treaty rights.


14. Mr Wardle submitted that the FTT did not err in law, given that it  had
    not been put to them that the  appellant  had  acquired  the  permanent
    right of residence and that although it appears from the notes  of  the
    presenting officer who had appeared  below  that  the  issue  had  been
    raised with him by the appellant's counsel, it had not been  raised  in
    the hearing.

15. Mr Wardle submitted also  that  even  had  the  FTT  erred  in  law  in
    considering this issue, this was not material as there was insufficient
    material before the court on which they could have made a finding  that
    the appellant had acquired permanent residence, asking us to note  also
    that in July 2007, the appellant  had  been  sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment. As the law presently stands (see  Ogunyemi  (imprisonment
    breaks continuity of residence) [2011] UKUT (IAC)  164),  that  is  the
    effect of this, notwithstanding the reference to the Court  of  Justice
    of the EU made in Onuekwere  (imprisonment  -  residence)  [2012]  UKUT
    (IAC) 269, which has as yet not proceeded beyond the publishing of  the
    opinion of the Advocate-General.

 Discussion

16. It is established law that a tribunal or judge does not err in  law  in
    failing to make a finding in respect of a matter not put  to  him.   In
    this  case,  despite  Mr  Draycott's  submissions,  he  was  unable  to
    demonstrate that the assertion that  the  appellant  had  acquired  the
    permanent right of residence under EU law was raised before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. We find that it was not, and in doing so  we  note  that
    this  issue  was  not  raised  with  the  respondent  in  the  numerous
    submissions made following the notification on 16 September 2011 to the
    appellant that he faced deportation, nor was it raised in  the  grounds
    of appeal despite the appellant's earlier success in appealing  against
    a deportation order on the basis of EU law.  The issue is not raised in
    the skeleton argument served on the First-tier Tribunal,  nor  was  any
    relevant case law adduced in the appellant's bundle.

17. As regards the principle of effectiveness, it is clear from the Court's
    case-law that it is concerned with  the  question  whether  a  national
    procedural provision renders the exercise of rights conferred by the EU
    law on individuals impossible or excessively difficult. Its application
    is fact-sensitive, and we do not accept  that  it  is  applicable  here
    where the appellant had not yet asserted that he is entitled to benefit
    from a right, in this case, the  acquisition  of  permanent  residence.
    Further, we do not accept that the case law of the ECJ establishes that
    in a context such as this, where a legally represented  party  has  not
    raised an issue, that a Tribunal is required to raise  it  of  its  own
    motion.

18. We accept that the appellant is not currently  precluded  from  raising
    this issue in  a  fresh  application,  but  as  he  did  not  raise  it
    previously in a notice pursuant to section  120  of  the  2002  Act  or
    otherwise, Mr Draycott's submission that we should entertain the  issue
    given the one-stop appeal process, is not a matter with  which  we  are
    concerned. Still less does that submission indicate that the First-tier
    Tribunal's determination involved the making of an error of law.

19. We do not consider that it was incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal  to
    raise or consider the issue  of  acquisition  of  permanent  residence.
    Even assuming that they should have done so, it is  not  arguable  that
    any failure to do so constituted a material error of  law  for  several
    reasons.

20. First, in the light of McCarthy v UK [2010] EUECJ C-434-09, it  is  now
    unclear that this appellant's ex-wife had been exercising Treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom, given the absence of any finding of  her  having
    exercised her right of free movement,

21. Second, were that hurdle overcome, it would have been necessary for the
    appellant to show that his ex-wife  had,  in  any  relevant  five  year
    period, been exercising Treaty rights.  Had that period begun as  early
    as October 2002 when they married,  we  consider  that,  as  Mr  Wardle
    submitted,  there  was  insufficient  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on which they  could  have  concluded  that  she  had  been  a
    qualified person during the whole five year period.

22. While the AIT found in 2006 that the  ex-wife  was  still  a  qualified
    person it does not follow that she continued to be such a person  after
    that date, and the later the qualifying period starts, the  longer  the
    period for which there is insufficient evidence  of  qualification.  It
    was for the appellant to adduce evidence to that effect and he did  not
    do so, nor did he assert before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  was
    unable to do so.

23. Finally, the effect of Ogunyemi, unless and until Onuekwere changes it,
    is that the appellant could not have acquired the  right  of  permanent
    residence on which the application for and the grant of permission were
    based.


24. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  by  not  considering
    whether the appellant had acquired the right of permanent residence, as
    that issue was  not  raised  with  them,  nor  was  it  submitted  that
    regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations applied  to  the  appellant.  They
    were not under a duty to consider or raise these issues.

25. The First-tier Tribunal directed themselves properly as to the law  and
    reached conclusions open to them  and  for  which  they  gave  adequate
    reasons. Accordingly, we find that the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law  and  we  uphold
    it.


   Conclusions

1. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
   of an error of law, and we uphold it.

Signed                                  Date:  22 October 2013
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
