
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01777/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tariq, West London Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, who I  shall  continue  to
    refer to as the  Respondent,  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Dineen and Dr  De  Barros,  by  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed against the Secretary of State's decision to  deport
    him to Afghanistan.

 2. The Appellant was born on 2nd April 1990 and is  aged  25  today.   The
    decision was taken on 13th August 2013.  It was a decision on conducive
    grounds pursuant to Sections 3(5) and 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.
     The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in June 2001 aged 11 years  2
    months and 12 days.  His first criminal conviction was on 1st  November
    2005 and the last on 15th October 2011.  He has a  total  of  seventeen
    convictions for 23 offences  including  offences  against  the  person,
    against property, public order offences and drugs offences.  The First-
    tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    succeeded under paragraph 399A(b) of the Immigration Rules as they were
    at the date of hearing which was 2nd and 3rd July 2014.

 3. The problem is that the decision was only promulgated on  23rd  January
    2015.  The Immigration Rules changed on 28 July 2014.  Mr Tariq  argued
    that YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 was not authority for saying that
    the First-tier Tribunal should have considered the 2014 Rules.  However
    YM (Uganda), it seems to me, makes clear that you have  to  assess  the
    case against the Rules in force at the date of the Tribunal's  decision
    which was 23rd January 2015 which were the 2014 Rules.

 4. Paragraph 36 of YM (Uganda) says that

         "... when the Court of Appeal has to consider an  appeal  from  the
         Upper Tribunal, its first task is to decide whether 'the making  of
         the decision concerned involved the making of an error on  a  point
         of law'.  This Court's task, therefore, must be to consider the law
         as it had to be applied at the time of the UT's decision. It cannot
         be to consider the law as it has subsequently developed.  Thus,  in
         my view, both the new Part 5A to the 2002 Act and  the  2014  Rules
         are irrelevant to the first task that we are faced with."

    They go on at paragraph 37 to say

         "If, however,  this  Court  considers  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         decision did involve 'the making of an error on a  point  of  law',
         there are further decisions to make. This Court  can,  but  is  not
         obliged to, set aside the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal.  If  it
         does so, then the matter  can  either  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal or this Court can re-make the decision itself."

    and they indicate then that if that was to be the case  then  both  the
    new statutory provisions and the 2014 Rules would become relevant.

 5. In YM it was accepted in that case  by  both  parties  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had erred when it considered the case in applying the Rules at
    the date of the Secretary of State's decision rather than at  the  date
    they decided the case.  That was the error.  And  the  same  thing  has
    happened in the present case.

 6. Therefore the First-tier Tribunal clearly made an error in  considering
    the Rules as they were at the date of hearing rather than at  the  date
    they made their  decision,  and  the  Rules  have  a  very  significant
    difference. The difference is in the exceptions contained at  paragraph
    399A which was the basis upon which this appeal was allowed.

 7. Pre- the 2014 changes 399A read:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

         (a)  The person has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least
             twenty years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  he  has
             no ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK; or

         (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least  half
             of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK   immediately
             preceding the date of the  immigration  decision  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including
             social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

 8. That was the provision under which the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the
    appeal.

 9. The new provision in paragraph 399A of the Rules following 28 July 2014
    reads:

         "(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life and,

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to  which it is proposed he is deported."

10. It can be seen from this that the requirements in the  2014  Rules  are
    considerably more strict than those under the 2012 Rules.

11. In considering this under the incorrect Rule therefore  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law and as that was the basis  and  the  sole
    basis for allowing the appeal it is clearly material and to that extent
    I set it aside.

12. However there has  been  no  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings, the error of law was the application by the Tribunal  of  the
    facts that it found to the law.

13. Having set it aside I then have to redecide the appeal on those  facts.
    Firstly, in relation to 399A has the Appellant been in the UK for  most
    of his life?  It is my view that if he has been in the UK for more than
    half of his life that must be the equivalent to "most".  He came at the
    age of 11 years 2 months and 12 days and excluding time spent in prison
    he has been here for eleven years, ten months and thirteen  days.  That
    is for more than half his life and therefore I find and  indeed  it  is
    accepted by the Presenting Officer, represents "most" of his life.

14. That however is not the end of  it.   He  must  also  be  socially  and
    culturally integrated into  the  UK  and  on  the  basis  of  the  very
    considerable offending behaviour only  four  years  after  he  came  it
    cannot be said that he has integrated into UK society.   He  has  taken
    himself outside mainstream society by his persistent offending.

15. The next head is an additional factor, namely that there will  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which  it
    is proposed he  is  deported.   Mr  Tariq  says  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles and points to the fact that he  has  no  ties  to
    Afghanistan, which was accepted by the Secretary of State as  evidenced
    in paragraph 23 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  However,  the
    absence of ties is only a part of it.  Very significant  obstacles  are
    obstacles that  are  more  than  significant,  they  have  to  be  very
    significant and the First-tier Tribunal noted at paragraph 46 that  the
    Appellant is in good health and well educated, he is articulate, he has
    sources of income other than that provided by  his  parents  and  is  a
    confident person. At paragraph 47 of its determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was satisfied "he would establish a private  life  quickly  in
    Afghanistan, even given the absence of contacts in that country".  That
    finding has been unchallenged and on the basis of it, it cannot be said
    that there are very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Afghanistan.

16. Having found that he does not meet the requirements of  paragraph  399A
    which is an exception to deportation, paragraph 398 as it is under  the
    2014 Rules indicates that if that paragraph does not apply "the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

17. The First-tier Tribunal, again applying the older version of the Rules,
    found there to be  no  exceptional  circumstances.  if  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances, and again that part of the decision has  not
    been challenged, then it follows that there cannot be  very  compelling
    circumstances.  MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  tells  us  that  the
    Rules so far as deportation are concerned  are  a  complete  code,  any
    Article 8 matters are either included in the exceptions in 399A or fall
    to be considered under paragraph 398: very compelling circumstances.

18. On the basis that this Appellant is not integrated into the UK; on  the
    basis that he has no Article 8 family life in the UK and that he can re-
    establish a private life in Afghanistan there are  no  very  compelling
    circumstances. Therefore having set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal I remake it and dismiss it  under  the  Rules  and  under
    Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  such  that
the Appellant's appeal against the decision to deport him  is  dismissed  on
all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 9th December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

