
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01678/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On  22nd April 2015                  |On 15th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ALUSINE KAMARA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Rendle, Counsel instructed on behalf of Wai Leung
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal following an appeal
    by the Secretary of  State  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lobo)  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  7th
    October 2014, allowed the appeal of the Respondent against the decision
    of the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against  him  by
    virtue of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. Whilst the Secretary of State is the Appellant in this appeal, for  the
    sake of convenience we will refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The Background :

 3. The Appellant is a national of  Sierra  Leone  who  was  born  on  29th
    September 1987.  His immigration history can be briefly summarised.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd October 1993 at  the  age  of  6,
    having been brought to the United Kingdom with his 8 year old sister by
    his half sister Mrs Kamara, who had indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was stated that the Appellant's father had died  in
    Sierra Leone.  On 30th August 1995 the Appellant and  his  sister  were
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  dependants
    of their half sister, Mrs Kamara.

 4. The Appellant is the subject of a deportation order as a result of  his
    conviction on 10th October 2011 at Maidstone Crown Court for possession
    of a controlled drug with  intent  to  supply,  namely  Class  A  crack
    cocaine and failing to surrender to custody at an appointed  time.   He
    was sentenced to a period of three years and six months'  imprisonment.



 5. The Appellant relies upon the exception to be found in  Section  33  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 that his removal pursuant  to  the  deportation
    order will breach his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. In terms of chronology, the Appellant appealed the decision and it came
    before the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Tipping and Mrs M  Padfield
    JP) on 5th December 2013 who allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State sought permission to appeal that decision and in a  determination
    promulgated on 17th April 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  found  that
    there were errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel and set aside the decision.  The judge remitted the appeal to  be
    re-heard before the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  took  place  on  26th
    September 2014 before Judge Lobo, whose decision  forms  the  basis  of
    this second appeal by the Secretary of State.

 7. In a determination promulgated on 7th October 2014  the  judge  allowed
    the appeal.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  on  22nd
    October 2014 stating:-

         "The Grounds of Appeal identified an arguable error of law in  that
         when the judge considered the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
         no consideration was given to the  deportation  provisions  of  the
         Immigration Rules that had been  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
         2014.  At paragraphs 26-29 the judge set out "the  legal  framework
         of this appeal" but nowhere in that section is any  reference  made
         to the 2014 Act which applies to all appeals heard on or after 28th
         July 2014 irrespective of when the application for the  immigration
         decision was made.  As the Respondent has raised an arguable  error
         of law permission to appeal is granted."

 9. In a determination promulgated on the  5th  February  2015,  the  Upper
    Tribunal reached the conclusion that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Lobo) did err in law and gave its reasons for reaching  that  decision.
    The decision of the Upper Tribunal is  annexed  to  this  determination
    marked "Appendix A". We therefore set aside the decision to be  re-made
    by the Upper Tribunal.

The Resumed Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal:

10. At the hearing the Appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Rendle,  Counsel
    instructed on his behalf and Mr Kandola, Senior Presenting  Officer  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  Mr Rendle relied upon the  documents
    that had been provided before the First-tier Tribunal which we numbered
    Bundles "A" and  "B."   They  contained  witness  statements  from  the
    Appellant and his sister, documentation in respect of  the  Appellant's
    education and letters from the Probation Service and also  from  prison
    officials.  The bundles also included within them a copy of  the  OASys
    assessment and pre-sentence report and also country materials  relating
    to Sierra Leone.  In addition Mr Rendle relied upon a  recent  document
    dated 30th March 2015 which was an updated report  from  the  Probation
    Officer. We provided to the parties the most recent report  for  Sierra
    Leone  form  Amnesty  International  and  an  IRIN  news  report.   The
    Respondent relied upon the Respondent's  bundle  that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

11. At the hearing,  the  Appellant  gave  oral  evidence  before  us.   He
    confirmed and adopted the two witness statements that he had made.   In
    addition he confirmed that he had completed his entire education in the
    United Kingdom  including  primary  level,  secondary  level  and  also
    culminating in his attendance at the University of the Arts in  London.
    He confirmed that he had attended a church in the  United  Kingdom  and
    that the congregation was not of  any  particular  background  but  was
    diverse.  As to  his  time  in  foster  care,  he  confirmed  that  the
    background and ethnicity of his foster carers were not that  of  Sierra
    Leone.  As to his present circumstances, he made reference to his  wish
    to make a new life for himself in the north of the  country.   He  made
    reference to his friends from university  who  were  living  there  and
    including  his  girlfriend.   In  respect  of  future  plans,  he  made
    reference to his partial completion of his BA Degree in Fashion  Design
    and that he was continuing to design and make clothes and  referred  to
    the clothes that he was wearing in court.   He  referred  to  potential
    employment in the north of England including screen-printing  and  that
    upon completion of his degree would wish to establish himself there.

12. As to his integration in the United Kingdom, he confirmed that  he  had
    740 to 760 friends on Facebook of a diverse background and that he  had
    a Twitter and e-mail account.  He confirmed that he  had  held  a  bank
    account for eight years.  As to his degree, he confirmed  that  he  had
    undertaken two years of his three year degree and in  essence  had  six
    months left of the course.  He would wish to complete that course which
    would then provide him with his degree and in order to do so would stay
    at his sister's home and then move  to  Liverpool.   Presently  he  was
    living  in  Kent  and  was  taking  part  in  song  writing  with   his
    collaborative partner,  using  the  experience  gained  from  a  course
    undertaken whilst in custody. He confirmed that he was  not  living  in
    the area  amongst  those  with  whom  he  had  committed  his  previous
    offences.  He confirmed that he was not able to work as a result of his
    bail conditions and he was not claiming any form of state benefits.  He
    said he was planning to vote and was available to register.  As to  his
    girlfriend, he confirmed their relationship and gave details of  it  to
    us.

13. He was asked about the recorded conversation at page 45 of  the  bundle
    (the OASys Report).  The Appellant explained that from the time he  was
    born the person he knew was his  mother  was  his  stepmother  who  had
    previously lived in Sierra Leone.  He had lost  contact  with  her  but
    then she  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  at  a  later  date.   His
    stepmother was Mehmun Yassin.  The Appellant stated that  he  had  been
    asked if he had spoken to his  mother  and  he  said  that  he  had  by
    telephone but he was not referring to his natural mother but the person
    whom he regarded as his mother  which  is  his  stepmother.   He  later
    clarified in his evidence that he had been asked about this on only one
    occasion when he  was  giving  evidence  via  a  video  link  and  made
    reference to this at page 45 of the bundle.  He was adamant that he had
    not been asked any such questions  on  more  than  one  occasion.   The
    Appellant gave a detailed account as to how he  had  been  asked  these
    questions and in the context of showing scars  whilst  subject  to  the
    video link.  He confirmed in his evidence that he had  had  no  contact
    with his natural mother and had no knowledge of her whereabouts nor did
    any other member of the family.

14. In cross-examination he was  asked  about  his  relationship  with  his
    natural mother and he confirmed  that  he  had  never  lived  with  his
    natural mother and had been raised in Sierra Leone by  his  stepmother.
    He said that his father had died when he was 4 or 5 and that he was  in
    Sierra Leone when he died and continued to  live  with  his  stepmother
    until he was brought to the United Kingdom.  He confirmed that  he  has
    never been back to Sierra Leone since residing in the  United  Kingdom.
    As to relatives in Sierra Leone, he  said  that  all  of  his  father's
    relatives including his  brothers  and  sisters  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He said his father had no extended  family  in  Sierra  Leone
    because he was of Lebanese nationality.  He confirmed that he had still
    been in touch with Hawa (his stepsister) and last spoke  to  her  seven
    months ago. She resides in the United Kingdom.  He was asked  if  there
    were any reasons why extended family members had  not  attended  court.
    The Appellant stated the problems that he had and the  proceedings  for
    deportation was as a result of his own actions and he did not  want  to
    put them in the situation of having to attend court. As to his  sister,
    he said his niece was 1  year  old  and  there  were  problems  in  her
    obtaining childcare to attend. He referred to her written statements.

15. He was asked about his criminal offences and he stated that he borrowed
    �700 when he was a student and had to repay that money.  He  said  that
    he was not saying he was forced to deal in drugs and he  knew  what  he
    was getting into but that he had been loaned money and had to pay  that
    money back.  He was asked about a failure to turn up at trial  but  the
    Appellant explained that the letter had been sent to the wrong  address
    and when he had found out about the trial date he  had  handed  himself
    in.  As to the offence in 2008 he confirmed that he  had  been  charged
    with other offences for which he was found not guilty  and  he  pleaded
    guilty to fourteen wraps for which he was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    community service.  He confirmed that his  sister  did  not  live  near
    those associates who lived in a different part of London.

16. In answer to questions that we asked the Appellant, he  confirmed  that
    he  had  undertaken  courses  in  prison  and  made  reference  to  the
    certificates within the bundle and also that he had  completed  a  drug
    awareness (victim awareness) course.  The vocational courses  including
    music and technology NCFE Level 2 and that in  prison  he  had  had  an
    enhanced category as the letters from the prison officials had attested
    to.  He confirmed that he had  completed  the  custodial  part  of  his
    sentence and was released but had spent more than a year out of  prison
    on bail and on licence and had had contact with the Probation  Officer.
    He had not committed any offences and regretted  having  committed  the
    offences for which he had been sentenced to.

The submissions:

17. At the conclusion of the evidence we heard submissions from each of the
    parties.  Mr Kandola on behalf of the Secretary of State made reference
    to the reasons for  refusal  letter  but  observed  that  it  had  been
    superseded by the new Rules.  Dealing with paragraph 399A, he  accepted
    that 399A(a) was satisfied in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's  lawful
    residence and the length of the residence in the United Kingdom.

18.   As to paragraph 399A(b) he submitted  that  he  had  lived  with  his
    stepmother between the ages of 12 and  16  who  is  of  Sierra  Leonean
    origin and therefore was likely to have some links with  Sierra  Leone.
    His criminal offending weighed against him when considering whether  he
    was socially integrated in the United  Kingdom.   He  made  no  further
    submissions in relation to any other social or cultural  links  to  the
    United Kingdom.

19. In respect of paragraph 399A(c) and  the  issue  of  "very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into the country to which it  is  proposed
    he was deported" Mr Kandola invited us to reach the conclusion that  he
    had not demonstrated that he had no family relatives  in  Sierra  Leone
    which would assist him  in  his  reintegration  to  that  country.   He
    submitted it was a matter of credibility and that whilst the  Appellant
    claimed he was talking about his  stepmother  she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it did not explain why the  author  had  written  what  was
    recorded in the OASys Report.  He reminded  us  that  no  other  family
    members had given evidence on this issue.  He  further  submitted  that
    the Appellant would be able to reintegrate into Sierra Leonean  society
    if the Tribunal concluded on the facts that his  mother  still  resided
    there.  The letter from 1994 gave some support for the  view  that  the
    family relatives did know where  Ami  was.   Consequently  he  had  not
    demonstrated that he had met all limbs of paragraph 399A and  therefore
    could not satisfy the Rules.

20.  In those  circumstances  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  demonstrate
    compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  matters.   In  this
    respect, he could not succeed and whilst he sought to establish  family
    life between him and his sister, she had not given evidence before  the
    Tribunal  and  little  weight  should  be  given  to  her  two  witness
    statements.  Applying Section 117, the  Appellant  was  able  to  speak
    English but had not demonstrated financial independence.  He  submitted
    that each case was fact sensitive and depended on  its  own  individual
    facts.   However  in  this   case   deportation   was   justified   and
    proportionate.

21. Mr Rendle on behalf of the Appellant submitted that he was socially and
    culturally integrated in the UK and that that was well demonstrated  by
    the evidence and that this Appellant, by reason of his  lengthy  lawful
    residence of over 22 years,  was  inevitably  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom.  In this regard he made reference  to
    the evidence concerning his education in the United Kingdom, noting his
    attendance at university, his attendance at church  which  demonstrated
    his integration into society which was not limited to a congregation of
    those  from  Sierra  Leone  but  was   a   cosmopolitan   and   diverse
    congregation.  His integration was demonstrated by his  voluntary  work
    with ACAPS and his family links.  As  to  his  offending,  whilst  this
    might militate against his integration, it had  to  be  viewed  in  the
    light of his subsequent engagement with the Probation Service and  lack
    of offending since his release and therefore outweighed any anti-social
    behaviour demonstrated by his previous offending.  This was case  where
    the Appellant has shown great remorse and that this was a young man who
    had demonstrated maturity and a capacity to change.  He has no cultural
    links with Sierra Leone and when in foster  care  had  been  placed  in
    family placements without that type of background.   The  OASys  Report
    made reference to a low risk of reoffending and the matters highlighted
    to demonstrate a lessening of any risk to the public related to  moving
    away from past associates and the provision  of  employment.   In  this
    case the Appellant had significantly expressed a desire  to  move  away
    and had done so  and  had  put  forward  a  credible  future  plan  for
    finishing his degree and obtaining employment in the north of  England.
    He had a wide network of friends including 700 plus on Facebook, he had
    a bank account and an e-mail account.  Thus the  evidence  demonstrated
    that he was socially and culturally integrated.

22. As to paragraph 399A(c) he submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  deeply
    entrenched in the UK and that there was no evidence  that  he  had  any
    relatives or familial links that he had retained in Sierra Leone.   The
    main issue in dispute related to the recorded  comments  in  the  OASys
    Report and the letter at A1  of  the  Respondent's  bundle  from  1994.
    Dealing with the 1994 letter, this was a letter of some age and  it  is
    plain from reading the letter that shortly after  that,  the  Appellant
    and  his  sister  were  granted  indefinite  leave  to   remain   which
    demonstrated that despite the best efforts of the  Secretary  of  State
    and the British High Commission, his mother could not be  located  from
    1994 and thus indefinite leave to remain was granted.  When looking  at
    the evidence recorded in the OASys Report, the Appellant  had  given  a
    credible account and had gone into detail about when he was asked about
    this matter referring to the video link.  He gave  evidence  about  the
    scars which are recorded at page 45 and made it plain that  he  thought
    the discussion related to his stepmother.  There had been confusion  as
    to the family relatives and in the light of the lack of any evidence as
    to his mother's whereabouts, his explanation should be accepted.

23.  As to family life, the only family that he has had of conscious memory
    is that in the United Kingdom.  He has had a strong  family  life  with
    his sister who had been through a series of life events and  had  lived
    with her previously and would intend to live with her  when  restarting
    his degree.  That was a strong relationship based in part on their past
    life experiences and therefore exceeded  the  ties  usually  that  were
    found between siblings.  Consequently each case was fact sensitive  and
    the evidence demonstrated that he  had  no  familial  links  to  Sierra
    Leone.  The evidence set out  in  the  country  materials  relating  to
    Sierra  Leone  and  the  difficulties  the  country  was  facing  would
    constitute very significant obstacles for his reintegration. This was a
    country to which he has  no  familial  support,  no  knowledge  of  the
    language of Krio, the main language in Sierra Leone  and  having  never
    visited that country since he left as a child.  Thus he invited  us  to
    allow the appeal.

24. We reserved our determination.

Findings of Fact:

25. We are required to set out our findings of fact on the areas  that  are
    in dispute.  There is no dispute that the Appellant was  born  on  29th
    September  1987  in  Freetown,  Sierra  Leone.   There  has  been  some
    misunderstanding as to the nature of the Appellant's family members and
    whether the Appellant has had any contact with his natural mother.   We
    have had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  Appellant  and
    also a family tree helpfully provided by Mr Rendle, Counsel  on  behalf
    of the Appellant.  From that evidence we  have  reached  the  following
    findings of fact concerning the  Appellant's  family  members  and  the
    level of contact that he has had with them since  his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom.

26. There is no dispute between the parties that the Appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 23rd October 1993 when  aged  6  along  with  his
    older full sister who was then aged 8.  The Appellant's  father  was  a
    Lebanese national who was living in Sierra Leone.  He was never married
    to the Appellant's natural mother (Ami) but during the course  of  that
    relationship there were three children born, the Appellant, his  sister
    Memunat and Zanaib whom the Appellant has no real  knowledge  of.   His
    father had been married to Mrs Yassin (the Appellant's stepmother)  who
    was the mother of Hawa and therefore the half sister of  the  Appellant
    and his sister.

27. We accept the Appellant's evidence, which is unchallenged,  as  to  the
    circumstances of family life in Sierra Leone.  He stated that the  only
    person he knew was his stepmother whom his father was  married  to  and
    who had raised him in Sierra Leone.  He had never lived with  Ami.   In
    or about 1992 the Appellant's father died in Sierra Leone and  on  23rd
    October 1993 the Appellant was brought to the UK along  with  his  full
    sister by his much older married half sister who had  indefinite  leave
    to remain.  On 30th August 1995 he  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a dependant of his half sister Hawa.   It  appears  that  his
    sister gave them her own married name rather than their birth name.

28. When in the United Kingdom, the Appellant and  his  sister  lived  with
    Hawa but also there were periods of living with other  extended  family
    members including his father's sister also called Zanaib and  his  wife
    (the Appellant's stepmother).  It is further not in  dispute  that  the
    Appellant and his sister were received into foster care and at times in
    different foster placements.  It is not been challenged that this  time
    in foster care was an unhappy one for both the Appellant and his sister
    for the reasons set out plainly at paragraphs 10-11 of the  Appellant's
    witness statement and also referred to not  only  in  the  pre-sentence
    report but the sentencing remarks of the judge.  We accept the evidence
    from the Appellant that he had not been placed in  a  family  placement
    with any links to Sierra Leone.  The Appellant returned  to  live  with
    his stepmother after a period in foster care until he left school at 16
    where he lived independently.

29. The issue remains as to his links with Sierra Leone and in this context
    whether he has had  any  contact  with  his  natural  mother  or  other
    relatives in Sierra Leone.  The Appellant's evidence before us is  that
    since he left Sierra Leone aged 6, he has never returned there and  has
    had no contact with any family members including his mother who resided
    there at the time he left.  Mr Kandola  has  directed  us  to  evidence
    contained in the OASys Report (see page 45) and the pre-sentence report
    (page 30) which is said to contradict this evidence.  At page 45 of the
    OASys Report the following is stated:-

         "Mr Kamara has had little contact with his mother since he  arrived
         in the UK, and only speaks on the phone occasionally as  she  still
         resides in Sierra Leone."

30. When asked about this evidence the Appellant stated that from the  time
    he was born there had only been one person he knew and regarded as  his
    mother and this was his stepmother who used to live  in  Sierra  Leone.
    She later moved to the United Kingdom.   He explained that when he  was
    asked if he spoke to his mother he said he did so by telephone  but  he
    was not referring to his natural mother Ami but to his  stepmother  who
    was in the UK, who had previously been  living  in  Sierra  Leone.   He
    confirmed that he had not had any contact with Ami nor had any  members
    of his family nor did he have any knowledge of her whereabouts.

31. In reaching our assessment on this issue we have  carefully  considered
    the oral  evidence  or  the  Appellant  and  the  documentary  evidence
    provided.  As we have  set  out,  the  account  given  in  the  written
    evidence in the OASys Report and also in the pre-sentence report, seems
    to be in identical terms and therefore if it was the position that  the
    Appellant had said this to two different people at different  times  it
    would have an impact on the credibility of that evidence.  However  the
    Appellant was adamant in his evidence that  he  had  been  asked  about
    family members on only one occasion and this was whilst taking part  in
    a video link.  This in fact is referred to in the OASys Report at  page
    45.  He stated that he had not been asked questions at the time of  the
    pre-sentence report and he gave a description as to how  the  questions
    had been asked, the answers he gave and the circumstances in which  the
    conversation  had  taken  place.   When  we  considered  the  documents
    further, it became clear to us that the Appellant was in fact right  as
    the source of information at page 38 and made reference to  the  report
    being informed by the OASys Report.  In those circumstances Mr  Kandola
    did not seek to rely on any submission to the effect that the recording
    had been set on  two  occasions  but  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    explanation was not credible when considering the author's reference to
    Sierra Leone.

32. Having had the opportunity to hear and see the Appellant give  evidence
    before us, we have reached the conclusion that the Appellant has  given
    evidence in a straightforward and credible manner.  Indeed at times  he
    has given evidence  which  could  be  seen  as  contrary  to  his  case
    (concerning past offending) and we are satisfied that he has not sought
    to exaggerate or withhold evidence from  us  but  has  been  frank  and
    forthright in all that  he  has  told  us.   In  this  context  we  are
    satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  that  his  explanation  is
    indeed a truthful one.  As we have set out earlier there appear to be a
    complex set of family relationships with some  members  of  the  family
    retaining the same name and we are satisfied that  it  is  more  likely
    than not  that  this  has  caused  confusion.   We  further  note  that
    throughout the proceedings, the evidence before us has always been that
    he had referred to his stepmother as "mum" which is  supported  by  his
    evidence from his early years in Sierra Leone and being brought  up  by
    his father who was married to her.  It  is  further  supported  by  the
    written evidence in the witness statement provided by his full  sister.



33. In reaching our finding we have taken into account evidence provided by
    the Secretary of State taken from a  document  from  the  British  High
    Commission in Freetown dated 11th August 1994 (set out  at  A1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle).  This was a document which made reference to  the
    Appellant's natural mother Ami and efforts to trace her  in  1994.   At
    paragraph 3 it makes reference to a conversation with someone who  knew
    her who had last seen her in Freetown two months prior to  August  1994
    but could provide no further information.  The  author  of  the  letter
    concludes that they had exhausted every line of enquiry concerning  her
    whereabouts  and  whilst  it  is  plain  the  author  did  not  believe
    Hanawatu's account, there was no  further  information  concerning  the
    whereabouts of the Appellant's natural mother in 1994.  In  considering
    that letter, we observe that it was written a very  long  time  ago  in
    1994 and the author was not  able  to  trace  the  whereabouts  of  the
    Appellant's mother at that time.  Furthermore it makes it plain that if
    they could have located Ami, the children could have  been  removed  to
    Sierra Leone.  What is significant is that  within  one  year  of  that
    letter, indefinite leave to remain was granted to  both  the  Appellant
    and his sister which in our  judgment  demonstrates  that  despite  the
    efforts of the Secretary of State and the British High Commission,  the
    Appellant's natural mother could not  be  traced  and  her  whereabouts
    therefore remained unknown post  1994.   There  has  been  no  credible
    evidence before us  that  that  position  has  changed.   Consequently,
    taking the evidence in the round, we are satisfied on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant has  not  had  any  contact  with  his
    natural mother in Sierra Leone and has no subsisting familial  ties  to
    that country.

34. We further find from the evidence before us that he was raised  by  his
    stepmother and father in Sierra Leone and  has  not  returned  to  that
    country since he left aged 6.  His father's  close  relations  (brother
    and sister) live in the United Kingdom and his father has no  relatives
    in Sierra Leone bearing in mind his Lebanese nationality.  Consequently
    the close relations that  he  has  are  those  in  the  United  Kingdom
    including his sister, her husband and children, all of whom are British
    citizens.

35. There is no dispute concerning his education which is evidenced in  the
    documents in  the  bundle  and  attested  to  in  the  various  witness
    statements before us.  He has undertaken all of his  education  in  the
    United Kingdom including that at degree level between  2009  and  2011.
    We understand his evidence to be that he has completed two of his three
    years in the subject, a BA in Fashion, and  has  yet  to  complete  his
    final year.

The Legal Framework:

36. Section 19 of the 2014 Act introduced into the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 a new Part 5A containing new Sections 117A-D.   The
    new  part  is  headed  "Article  8  of  the  ECHR:    Public   Interest
    Considerations".   Sections 117A-D set out  statutory  guidelines  that
    must be applied when a court or  tribunal  has  to  decide  whether  an
    immigration decision to remove someone from the UK would be  in  breach
    of his Article 8 rights.  Section 117A is headed "Application  of  this
    Part";   Section  117B   is   headed   "Article   8   public   interest
    considerations in all cases" and  117C is headed "Article 8  additional
    considerations in cases involving foreign criminals".

37. They provide as follows:-

         "117A   Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

         117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

         117C   Article  8  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals.

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.




         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

         (a)  is a British citizen, or

         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

         (a)  is a British citizen, or

         (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning  of
             the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)  who is not a British citizen,

         (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an  offence,
             and

         (c)  who -

             (i)  has been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                  least 12 months,

             (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused  serious
                  harm, or

             (iii)    is a persistent offender.

         (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to  an
             order under-

             (a)  section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity)  Act  1964
                  (insanity etc),

             (b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act  1995
                  (insanity etc), or (c) Article 50A of  the  Mental  Health
                  (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been
                  convicted of an offence.

         (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
             a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

             (a)  do not include a person  who  has  received  a  suspended
                  sentence (unless a  court  subsequently  orders  that  the
                  sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take
                  effect);

             (b)  do not include a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
                  period of imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by
                  virtue  of  being  sentenced  to   consecutive   sentences
                  amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

             (c)  include a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  detention,  or
                  ordered or directed to  be  detained,  in  an  institution
                  other than a prison (including, in particular, a  hospital
                  or an institution for young offenders) for that length  of
                  time; and

             (d)  include a person who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
                  detention, or ordered or directed to be detained,  for  an
                  indeterminate period, provided that it  may  last  for  at
                  least that length of time.

         (5)  If any question arises for the purposes of  this  Part  as  to
             whether a person is a British citizen, it is  for  the  person
             asserting that fact to prove it."

  38. The Immigration Rules were amended at the same time as s117A to  s117D
      came into effect and read, in so far as relevant to  this  appeal,  as
      follows:

         "A362.   Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
                under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will
                only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at  28
                July  2014  are  met,  regardless  of  when  the  notice  of
                intention  to  deport   or   the   deportation   order,   as
                appropriate, was served.

         ...

         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
                be that the public interest requires deportation. It  is  in
                the public interest to deport where the Secretary  of  State
                must make a deportation order in accordance with section  32
                of the UK Borders Act 2007.

         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
                pursuant  to  the  order  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
                obligations under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights
                Convention. Where deportation would not be contrary to these
                obligations, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances
                that the public interest in deportation is outweighed.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months;

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law,

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,
                the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed
                by  other  factors   where   there   are   very   compelling
                circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
                399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
               if -

               (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

               (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                    or settled in the UK, and

                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                        person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their
                        immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                        in  the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported, because of compelling  circumstances  over
                        and above those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                        Appendix FM; and

                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                        remain in the UK without the person  who  is  to  be
                        deported.

        399A.     This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
               applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and

                (b)     he is socially and culturally integrated in the  UK;
                    and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported.

         399B.    Where an Article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
                successful:

                (a)    in the case of a person who is in the  UK  unlawfully
                    or whose leave to enter or remain has been cancelled  by
                    a deportation order, limited leave may  be  granted  for
                    periods not exceeding 30  months  and  subject  to  such
                    conditions  as  the   Secretary   of   State   considers
                    appropriate;

                (b)    in the case of a person who has not been served  with
                    a deportation order,  any  limited  leave  to  enter  or
                    remain may be curtailed to a  period  not  exceeding  30
                    months and conditions may be varied to  such  conditions
                    as the Secretary of State considers appropriate;

                (c)    indefinite leave to enter or remain  may  be  revoked
                    under section 76 of the 2002 Act and  limited  leave  to
                    enter or remain granted for a period  not  exceeding  30
                    months subject to such conditions as  the  Secretary  of
                    State considers appropriate;

                (d)    revocation of a deportation  order  does  not  confer
                    entry clearance or leave  to  enter  or  remain  or  re-
                    instate any previous leave."

  39. It is common ground between the parties that HC 532 provides that "the
      changes take effect on 28 July 2014 and apply to all  ECHR  Article  8
      claims from foreign criminals which are decided on or after that date"
      and that paragraph A362 refers to the Rules having  effect  regardless
      of when the notice  of  intention  or  the  deportation  order  ...was
      served;   the  explanatory  memorandum  at  3.4  and  3.5   talks   of
      harmonisation of the Rules with Immigration Act 2014 and [38] and [39]
      of YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 make clear  that  irrespective  of
      when the deportation order was signed or a decision to deport made, if
      the appeal is determined after 28th July 2014, then the Rules in force
      on that date are the relevant Rules.

40. Paragraph 398 guides the decision-maker's approach to the weight to  be
    given to the public interest  in  the  Article  8  assessment.  If  the
    offender has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment  of  4  years  or
    more "the public interest in deportation will  only  be  outweighed  by
    other factors where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A". Where  the  offender
    has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of more than twelve months
    but less than four years or, in the view of the Secretary of State, the
    offending has caused serious harm  or  the  offender  is  a  persistent
    offender with a disregard for the law, paragraphs  399  and  399A  will
    apply to him as appropriate.

  41. Paragraph 399  deals  with  circumstances  relevant  to  family  life.
      Paragraph 399(a) relates to  the  offender's  subsisting  relationship
      with his child. If the child is British and has lived in the UK for at
      least 7 years preceding the immigration decision and (a) it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which his  parent
      will be deported and (b) it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to
      remain in the UK without the offender, the Secretary of State will not
      make the deportation order.

42. Paragraph 399A applies to the offender's private life. If the  offender
    has been resident in the UK for most of his life and  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK and there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into the country  to  which  he  would  be
    deported,  the  Secretary  of  State  will  not  make  the  order   for
    deportation.

  43. In this appeal, it is agreed that Mr  Kamara  falls  within  paragraph
      398(b) and thus, the first issue is whether he falls within  paragraph
      399 or 399A. If not, then the public interest in his deportation would
      only be outweighed in Article 8 terms "by other  factors  where  there
      are very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
      paragraphs 399 and 399A".

44. Although there has been a rule change since MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192, it remains plain that the Rules, in so far as deportation  is
    concerned, remain a complete code  for  the  consideration  of  whether
    removal would result in a breach of the UK's obligations under  Article
    8.

  45. As was said in [39] of MF  "...  the  rules  expressly  contemplate  a
      weighing  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  against   'other
      factors'...this must be a reference to all  other  factors  which  are
      relevant to proportionality and entails an implicit  requirement  that
      they are to be taken into account". The Court of  Appeal  went  on  to
      say:

         "42  The scales are heavily weighted in favour of  deportation  and
             something very compelling (which  will  be  "exceptional")  is
             required to outweigh the public interest in  removal.  In  our
             view, it  is  no  coincidence  that  the  phrase  "exceptional
             circumstances" is used in the new  rules  in  the  context  of
             weighing the competing factors for and against deportation  of
             foreign criminals.

         43.  The word "exceptional" is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule. The general rule in the  present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs
             399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to outweigh the public interest in deportation. These
             compelling reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".

  46. This approach was approved in AJ (Angola) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1636  per
      Sales LJ at [40]:

             "The requirement that claims by  appellants  who  are  foreign
             criminals for leave to remain, based on the Convention  rights
             of themselves or their partners, relations or children, should
             be assessed under the new rules  and  through  their  lens  is
             important,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  has
             emphasised. It seeks to ensure uniformity of approach  between
             different officials, tribunals and courts who have  to  assess
             such claims, in the interests of fair and equal  treatment  of
             different appellants with similar cases on the facts. In  this
             regard, the new rules also serve as a safeguard in relation to
             rights of appellants  under  Article  14  to  equal  treatment
             within the scope of Article 8. The requirement  of  assessment
             through the lens of the new rules also seeks  to  ensure  that
             decisions are made in a way that is properly informed  by  the
             considerable weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by Parliament in
             the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State (as  the
             relevant Minister with responsibility  for  operation  of  the
             immigration system), so as to  promote  public  confidence  in
             that system in this sensitive area."

47. We have set out in the  preceding  paragraphs  the  legislative  regime
    applicable to this appeal and observe that the new  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules were  introduced  in  tandem  with  the  new  foreign
    national offender deportation regime in the 2002 Act. We have heard  no
    argument or submissions from  the  parties  as  to  whether  we  should
    proceed to consider the matters set out in Section 117  first  of  all,
    based on the primacy of primary legislation or  the  Immigration  Rules
    designed to deal with the deportation of foreign criminals. As  can  be
    seen the the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applicable  to
    deportation under paragraph 399A are effectively the same as those  set
    out in s.117C(4).

48. The first provision in the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act is Section 117A.
     It is relevant for this appeal as we are  required to  decide  whether
    the  deportation order would breach the right to  respect  for  private
    and/or family life under Article 8 ECHR  of this particular  Appellant,
    thereby contravening section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Under the
    new statutory provisions, the "public interest question" is defined  as
    "the question of whether an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under  Article  8(2)".
    In determining this question, we are required to  have  regard  to  the
    considerations specified in section 117B and section 117C.

49. With reference to section 117B, we place weight on the statement of the
    legislature that the maintenance of effective immigration control is in
    the public interest, as the section makes plain, it is  in  the  public
    interest that those who wish to enter or remain in the UK (or  seek  to
    demonstrate their integration in UK society)  must  be  able  to  speak
    English. There is no dispute that this Appellant has demonstrated  that
    ability. It is further not in dispute that the requirement  in  section
    117B(4) to attribute little weight to a private life established  at  a
    time when the person is in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  does  not
    arise, since the Appellant was at all material times  lawfully  present
    in the United Kingdom, having been granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the 30th August 1995. The same assessment applies to the requirement
    to give little weight to a private life  established  when  a  person's
    immigration status was precarious. The relevant deportation  order  was
    not made until 18 years after the Appellant had been granted indefinite
    leave to remain.

  50. As to financial independence, the Appellant has not been in employment
      as during his later years he has been  a  full-time  student.   As  we
      understand the evidence the offences were committed during his  second
      year at university.  He has not been reliant on public funds  and  has
      not had access to benefits since his release.  We observe  that  since
      he has served his sentence and been released on bail, those conditions
      have not permitted him to be in employment.  His future plans we  find
      are of some relevance.  We accept the Appellant's evidence as  to  the
      future plans that he has which we  consider  to  be  both  reasonable,
      realistic and credible.  In his evidence he expressed a wish  to  move
      to the north where he has friends and links to the fashion world which
      would provide future employment in this field.  He has  further  links
      of stability within that area including  a  girl  friend  who  resides
      there.  He stated that he had six months left of his degree course  to
      complete and would like to undertake this and  would  wish  to  do  so
      before moving to the north to establish himself there.   We  therefore
      consider that he has not had an opportunity to  demonstrate  financial
      independence given his educational history and more  recently  in  the
      light of his bail conditions but nonetheless we find  that  he  has  a
      future plan which is realistic, credible and  reasonable  which  would
      provide for his own financial independence.

51. As regards Section 117C we acknowledge Parliament's statement that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest, the more so
    according to  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed.   In  this
    respect, we consider this was a serious offence involving the supply of
    class A drugs and as recognised in the sentencing remarks of the  judge
    and ultimately by the length of the sentence  of  imprisonment  imposed
    upon him.  He has a previous similar offence recorded against him which
    is an aggravating factor. In the case of a foreign criminal who has not
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,  the
    public  interest  requires  his  deportation  unless  Exception  1   or
    Exception 2 applies. Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

52. These provisions  mirror  those  set  out  in  Paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules. We have therefore considered whether he can meet the
    requirements of Exception 1 or those of Paragraph 399A.

Our consideration  of  Exception  1   /Paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration
Rules :

53. As set out in the preceding paragraphs, the exception to deportation on
    the basis of private life as advanced by the Appellant is  set  out  in
    the Rules at paragraph 399A and Exception set out in Section 117.   The
    requirements are cumulative and must all be met.  We therefore turn  to
    each of those sub-paragraphs in turn.





Paragraph 399A(a)/ Exception1 (a)

54. "The person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life;
    and "

    There is no dispute between  the  parties  that  paragraph  399A(a)  or
    Exception 1 (a) is met on the  particular  facts  of  this  case.   The
    Appellant came to the UK aged 6 and his resided lawfully in the  United
    Kingdom since he was granted indefinite leave to remain in 1995.  It is
    conceded by Mr Kandola on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that  he
    satisfies paragraph 399A(a).

Paragraph 399A(b)/ Exception 1 (b)

55. "He is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and "

    We have not been provided with any  guidance  by  the  parties  (either
    produced by the Secretary of State or otherwise) as to what factors  we
    should take into account in making our assessment under  this  limb  of
    paragraph 399A.  We consider as a starting point the factors set out in
    Section 117B which are specifically directed to matters of  integration
    which are relevant factors.  The provisions stress  the  importance  of
    language and the ability to speak English and that a failure to  do  so
    will be indicative of a lack of integrating in UK society.  There is no
    dispute on the facts of this case that the Appellant  has  demonstrated
    his ability to speak and understand English and that he is socially and
    culturally integrated in this respect.  His educational history is well
    documented in the papers demonstrating that he  has  been  educated  in
    English since the age of 6 from  primary  school  level  and  up  until
    degree level between 2009 and 2011 when he was undertaking a BA Degree.
     During his educational career he has been able to pass qualifications,
    and has  undertaken  internships  during  his  degree  course.   It  is
    significant that his education took place at the  time  of  his  lawful
    residence which is further indicative we find of his social integration
    in the United Kingdom.

56. As to financial independence, we have set  out  our  findings  in  this
    regard in the preceding paragraphs  (at  paragraph  50)  and  they  are
    equally applicable here. Thus we are satisfied that the  Appellant  has
    not been in employment as during his later years he has  been  a  full-
    time student.  We therefore consider that he has not had an opportunity
    to demonstrate financial independence given his educational history and
    more recently in the light of his bail conditions  but  nonetheless  we
    have found that he has a future plan which is realistic,  credible  and
    reasonable which would provide for his own financial independence.

57. We further consider that a  matter  weighing  in  the  balance  against
    integration in the UK is the Appellant's offending.  The Appellant  was
    convicted of offences of possession with intent to supply Class A drugs
    which resulted in a sentence of imprisonment of three and a half years.
     The circumstances of the offence and the sentencing  remarks  indicate
    that he had 38 packages weighing 11.4 grams with a street value of �570
    which was described by the judge as "relatively small".   The  relevant
    parts of the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Carey in  which  he
    described the drug related offence as "very serious" stated:

         "... I sentence you on the basis you are  in  possession  of  these
         drugs voluntarily: that you had them in order to  make  money  from
         them: and that the telephone  was  in  your  possession,  which  is
         plainly one which was being used by somebody dealing in drugs,  was
         the telephone which you were in possession of not as a carrier, but
         as a user of the phone.  The calls recorded or rather taken by  the
         police .... are entirely consistent  with  you  supplying  Class  A
         drugs to others ... I trust you that were simply concerned to  make
         money ...  This is Class A drug supply.  The  court  regard  it  as
         very serious ....  Moreover your position is made the more  serious
         because you already have  a  conviction  for  possession  of  crack
         cocaine with intention to supply."

58. The Appellant had a previous conviction relating to drugs in  2008  for
    which he received a community order of 30 hours.

59. This was a serious offence recognised in the sentencing remarks of  the
    judge and ultimately by the length  of  the  sentence  of  imprisonment
    imposed upon  him.   The  Appellant  has  a  previous  similar  offence
    recorded against him which is an  aggravating  factor.   The  trade  in
    illicit drug has a negative impact upon society and those  involved  in
    the supply of  drugs  are  involved  in  a  process  that  has  harmful
    consequences for society as a whole.  This  is  therefore  evidence  of
    anti social and damaging behaviour for society as a whole. There  is  a
    strong public interest in the deportation  of  those  who  commit  such
    serious crimes; this is because the public interest in the  deportation
    of those who commit serious crimes goes well beyond the need to deprive
    the individual of the opportunity to re-offend but extends to the  need
    to deter others and to uphold the public  abhorrence  of  such  crimes.
    That is recognized in section 117(C) (1) and (2) which  we  pay  weight
    and have had regard to and by doing  so  we  acknowledge   Parliament's
    declaration that the deportation of foreign criminals is in the  public
    interest, the more so according  to  the  seriousness  of  the  offence
    committed.  In this respect, as we have set  out  this  was  a  serious
    offence involving the supply of class A drugs.  It cannot be  the  case
    that because a person subject to the deportation regime  has  committed
    an offence, that automatically requires  the  court  to  treat  him  as
    having a lack of integration when considering whether the  requirements
    of paragraph 399A(b) are met ( or Exception 1). If  that  were  so,  no
    person subject to deportation could succeed  under  paragraph  399A(b).
    Thus we have considered whether there is any  evidence  of  a  positive
    nature of such strength and weight to outweigh that evidence.  In  this
    regard we have taken into account part of the sentencing remarks of the
    judge who made reference to the Appellant's earlier life in the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge said this:

         "Your barrister is absolutely right to begin his mitigation on your
         behalf by pointing to the fact that you are a  talented  young  man
         who has,  in  many  respects,  used  your  time  and  your  talents
         constructively.  It is most important that you are now not able  to
         take a course which would be a constructive one  for  you  and  for
         society.  But that is your choice ... Your letter is  a  thoughtful
         and well constructed one.  I have read it with care.  I acknowledge
         that there  have  been  aspects  of  your  early  life  which  were
         difficult ... and difficult through no fault of your own.  But  you
         have had other opportunities.  You have, to a  degree  taken  them,
         which makes your scroundrelling of your talents your  opportunities
         the more regrettable.  You are still young.  ..."

    The judge went on to say later on in his judgment:

         "During that time there will  be  opportunities  for  you  to  take
         courses and occupy yourself in a  constructive  way.   Whether  you
         choose to do that is for you to decide.  There is,  therefore  some
         light at the end of the tunnel, albeit that this is  a  substantial
         sentence for a person of your age."

    The judge in his sentencing remarks was making reference to the earlier
    part of the Appellant's life in the  United  Kingdom  when  he  was  in
    foster care.  Mr Rendle has  pointed  out  to  us  that  prior  to  the
    offence, the Appellant did make a positive contribution to  society  by
    undertaking voluntary youth work with ACAPS (we refer  to  his  witness
    statement in this respect).

  60. The OASys Report and the pre-sentence report assessed the Appellant as
      someone after release who would not be prohibited from leading a  full
      and positive life in the community.  The reports made reference to his
      qualifications and being in the fortunate position of having a  degree
      and that he had  spoken  of  his  plans  to  utilize  his  skills  and
      qualifications to good use.  The report at page 31 makes reference  to
      his conduct in prison as being actively engaged by completing  courses
      in music, technology and IT and someone who was prepared to accept the
      consequences of his  actions  and  remaining  positive  regarding  his
      future prospects.  The  OASys  Report  concludes  that  the  Appellant
      represents a medium risk to the public on the basis of his offence  as
      drug related and as such the provision of  drugs  to  members  of  the
      public representing such a risk.  The report also reaches a conclusion
      that he has a low risk of reoffending (see page 30 of the  Appellant's
      bundle).  The risk to the public would likely to  be  reduced  if  the
      Appellant distanced himself from his former associates  and  who  were
      involved in drugs and engaging in gainful employment.  It is stated in
      the  report  that  those  factors  would  lessen  the  risks  of   any
      reoffending as would  a  concerted  effort  to  learn  from  his  past
      mistakes and be mindful of the public consequences of such  behaviour.



61. In our judgment that has been  demonstrated  in  the  evidence  by  his
    conduct in prison and that upon  release.   As  we  had  set  out,  the
    Appellant has  made  good  use  of  the  time  in  custody  undertaking
    vocational courses which reflect  an  interest  he  has  in  music  and
    information technology  (see  page  24  NCFE  Level  2)  and  has  also
    undertaken a drugs awareness (victim) awareness course.   There  is  no
    evidence that he has a drug habit nor is there any evidence  before  us
    from the  prison  officials  that  that  manifested  itself  whilst  in
    custody.  Furthermore there is positive evidence before  us  concerning
    his behaviour.  The evidence demonstrated his conduct whilst in custody
    has been exemplary.  This is attested to by evidence  from  the  prison
    officers set  out  in  letters  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
    contained at pages 22 onwards.  The evidence  makes  reference  to  the
    Appellant's role as a "violence reduction" person who diffuses conflict
    within the prison and as such has  received  positive  entries  in  the
    ledger.  He has been upgraded to an enhanced status as a result of that
    conduct.

62. Furthermore there is evidence from the Probation  Service  (see  letter
    dated 23rd/9/2014)  which  makes  reference  to  the  Appellant  having
    complied with all his licence conditions and supervision since 7th June
    2013, his lack of reoffending and  the  work  that  he  is  undertaking
    during the period of supervision has demonstrated "a good insight  into
    his offending behaviour, is  remorseful  and  intends  to  lead  a  law
    abiding lifestyle in the future".  An  updated  letter  from  the  same
    Probation  Officer  dated  30th  March  2015  confirms  his   continued
    compliance with his licence conditions.

63. The evidence we have made reference to above serves to confirm our  own
    assessment of the Appellant.  He has continued to express  his  remorse
    over the offences committed and  we  observe  that  those  offences  in
    effect halted what could have been described as a promising  career  in
    fashion in which his expertise and interests has been  recognised.   We
    do not simply accept what he says himself about  being  remorseful  but
    have viewed it in the light of his conduct both in custody  and  whilst
    on release from the community which significantly supports that remorse
    and does indicate a level of maturity.

64. We have therefore conducted a careful balance of the  relevant  factors
    that we have identified  and  having  done  so,  we  have  reached  the
    conclusion that whilst  the  criminal  offending  of  this  nature  and
    seriousness can be evidence of a lack of integration, it is  outweighed
    by the other factors that  we  had  indicated  which  demonstrates  his
    social and cultural integration in the UK demonstrated by his language,
    that he has spent all but six years in the UK (including his  childhood
    and informative years) which we find to  be  a  significant  length  of
    time.  He has been educated from primary level to degree  level  within
    the educational system in the United  Kingdom  and  his  upbringing  is
    equivalent to that of some who is British and  we  are  satisfied  that
    this is not a case where it can be said that he  has  been  brought  up
    within the Sierra Leonean community or diaspora in the United  Kingdom.
    The evidence before us is that he has spent some of his formative years
    in foster care in placements which were not with carers from the Sierra
    Leone community and has lived  with  family  members  who  are  British
    citizens.  There has been some dispute as to the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his family members in the UK.  Whilst his sister  has
    not given evidence before us  we  have  attached  some  weight  to  her
    written evidence and the chronology of  the  Appellant's  life  events.
    Whilst they are both adults we are satisfied  that  their  relationship
    should be viewed on the  basis  of  their  past  history.   Their  life
    experience includes coming to the  United  Kingdom  together  as  young
    children, they have experienced life in foster care and in  that  sense
    we find have extended their ties beyond that of  normal  siblings.   On
    the evidence of the Appellant, which we accept, they have  remained  in
    close contact and we are satisfied that the  relationship  between  him
    and his sister, husband and children remain a social and familial  link
    relevant to integration in the United Kingdom.

65. There is no evidence that he has ever returned to Sierra Leone or  that
    he has retained any cultural or social links with  that  country.   His
    friendships  and  relatives  are  all  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Such
    questions are fact sensitive and as such necessarily form part  of  the
    balancing exercise.  We are therefore satisfied  on  balance  that  the
    Appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom.





Paragraph 399A(c)/ Exception 1(c):

    "And that there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
    into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

66. In dealing with this issue we observe that we have  not  been  provided
    with any  guidance  by  either  party  as  to  what  constitutes  "very
    significant obstacles to his integration".  However we consider that by
    its nature the burden must be on  the  Appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    there would be "very significant obstacles to his integration" and  the
    use of the word "very" must require a high threshold.

  67. We begin our assessment by  considering  the  findings  of  fact  made
      earlier in this decision.  For the reasons given we have  reached  the
      conclusion on the evidence before us that the Appellant has no family,
      no familial links or friends in  Sierra  Leone.   Mr  Kandola  in  his
      submission accepted that were we to find that he had no such family in
      Sierra Leone, then that would be evidence to show that there were very
      significant obstacles to his integration.   He  did  not  advance  any
      further submissions as to the evidence or any other  factors  relevant
      to this requirement.

68. It seems to us that notwithstanding a lack of family  or  relatives  in
    the proposed country  of  integration,  there  may  be  other  relevant
    factors which would or  may  outweigh  this,  for  example,  where  the
    Appellant has social or cultural ties of a nature which  would  provide
    him with the basis of establishing a private life and thus  integration
    in that country.  We remind ourselves that there are many migrants  who
    seek a new life in countries other than their own.  In this context  we
    weigh in the balance that the Appellant does not speak the language  of
    Sierra Leone which is Krio.  At  page  37  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    (Bundle B) it is stated that whilst the nationally recognised  official
    language of Sierra Leone is English, it  is  primarily  used  only  for
    business, government and media purposes.  Krio is the language  of  the
    majority of people in Sierra Leone speak which  is  a  form  of  pidgin
    English spoken with African words as well as  Mende,  Tamne  and  other
    local languages.  All together there exist 23 active languages that are
    spoken in Sierra Leone.  Sierra Leone has  many  different  tribes  who
    have their  native  languages  or  versions  of  languages  which  they
    primarily speak.  Within the urban areas English is  most  widely  used
    and recognised but because Sierra  Leone  is  a  highly  contextualised
    society, many  things  in  the  language  are  not  expressed,  instead
    interpreted through  non-verbal  cues  or  cultural  norms.   Thus  the
    Appellant, whilst having the advantage of  speaking  and  understanding
    English, would not be able to understand the language of Krio.   Whilst
    there may not be a linguistic obstacle "that is very  significant"  the
    evidence before us is that the Appellant  has  no  cultural  or  social
    links with Sierra Leone in the light of his  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and given the age he left Sierra Leone.   In  this  context  we
    have considered the decision of Bossadi (Paragraph 276ADE; suitability:
    Ties) [2015] UKUT 0042 (IAC)  which  in  turn  made  reference  to  the
    decision of YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.  In  doing  so  we
    recognise that the authority the Upper Tribunal was dealing with was  a
    different  Immigration  Rule  namely  276ADE  but  the  Tribunal   gave
    consideration to what encompasses the  issue  of  ties.   The  Tribunal
    cited Ogundimu (Article 8 - New Rules) (Nigeria) v SSHD.  The  Tribunal
    concluded that the exercise should be a "rounded assessment of all  the
    relevant circumstances" which are not confined to "social, cultural and
    family" issues.

  69. There is no evidence before us that any family members in the UK  have
      retained any links to Sierra Leone that would be  able  to  assist  or
      support  the  Appellant  in   any   integration   to   that   country.
      Importantly, as the country materials make reference to, there are  23
      active languages spoken in Sierra Leone and that there are a number of
      different tribes within that country all of whom have their own native
      language or version of languages and that as Sierra Leone is a "highly
      contextualised society" and as such many things in  language  are  not
      expressed but are interpreted  through  non-verbal  cues  or  cultural
      norms.  Thus it is not simply a matter of linguistic ability  but  the
      understanding of cultural  norms  that  is  important.   There  is  no
      evidence before us that he would be able to integrate in Sierra  Leone
      within that kind of cultural context.

70. We have also taken  into  account  the  country  materials  as  to  the
    circumstances in Sierra Leone.  The country was  severely  affected  by
    the Ebola epidemic which spread across West Africa.  In July  2014  the
    President declared a state of emergency and passed the Public Emergency
    Regulations 2014 and other byelaws which were passed including a ban on
    public gatherings and restrictions on freedom of movement (see page  16
    of Appellant's bundle and the Amnesty International report 2014/15  for
    Sierra Leone).  The information in the Appellant's bundle does  not  go
    beyond that of 2014 and the Respondent has produced no country evidence
    concerning  the  circumstances  in  Sierra  Leone  currently   and   we
    understand from Mr Kandola that there is no Operational  Guidance  Note
    available for that country.  The  most  recent  information  from  IRIN
    demonstrates that the government in Sierra Leone  continue  to  operate
    lock downs in a  bid  to  combat  Ebola  and  its  spread  whereby  the
    population in Sierra Leone are required to remain in  their  homes  for
    periods of up to three days; one  took  place  in  September  2014  and
    recently in March 2015.  It is recorded  that  those  lock  downs  have
    affected people's livelihood and also the supply of food and  water  to
    those without homes.   The  evidence  therefore  points  to  continuing
    hardships in Sierra Leone and whilst we do not place significant weight
    on this, we  find  it  has  some  relevance  to  the  ability  of  this
    particular Appellant being able to integrate into Sierra Leone where he
    would be someone with no social, cultural or familial  links  with  the
    country.  Those are the kind of links that would  enable  a  person  to
    reintegrate and without them, based on the particular circumstances  of
    this Appellant which we have set out  at  length,  demonstrate  in  our
    judgment that when taken together are very significant  obstacles.   As
    we have observed such cases are highly fact sensitive and  in  carrying
    out a balancing exercise we have reached the conclusion on the  balance
    that this particular Appellant has demonstrated  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into Sierra  Leone  for  the
    reasons that we have given.

  71.  Parliament  has  set  out  in  the  legislation  the  exceptions   to
      deportation on the basis of private life  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
      Immigration Rules (and S117C (4) )which can only apply  to  those  who
      have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less  than  four
      years, as has this Appellant.  Consequently all three requirements  of
      paragraph 399A(a) - (c) or Exception 1 (a)-(c) must be met and if  so,
      Parliament has stated that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  is
      outweighed  as  Paragraph  A362  makes  it  clear  that  in   criminal
      deportation cases a claim under Article 8  ECHR  "will  only  succeed"
      where the provisions of the new Rules are satisfied. We have therefore
      carried out a careful balance of those considerations  taking  account
      of the public interest in deportation. Under the new statutory regime,
      Parliament has recognised that the public interest  does  not  require
      the deportation of certain foreign criminals.   Consequently  for  the
      reasons that we have  given,  we  have  reached  the  conclusion  that
      Exception 1 (a)-(c) and paragraph 399A(a)-(c) have been satisfied  and
      that his deportation is disproportionate. In terms of the  Immigration
      Rules, and giving effect to paragraph A362 of the Rules,  we  conclude
      that the case made under Article 8 ECHR succeeds under this regime for
      the reasons we have given.

Decision:

72. The decision is re-made as follows; the appeal is allowed.

73. Anonymity direction not made.



Signed        Date 22nd April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                "APPENDIX A"
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01678/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st January 2015                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ALUSINE KAMARA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Mustapha


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

74. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lobo) who, in a determination promulgated on
    7th October 2014, allowed the appeal  of  the  Respondent  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against
    him by virtue of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

75. Whilst the Secretary of State is the Appellant in this appeal, for  the
    sake of convenience we will refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

76. The Appellant is a national of  Sierra  Leone  and  was  born  on  29th
    September 1987.  His immigration history can be briefly summarised.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd October 1993  at  the  age  of  6
    having been brought to the United Kingdom with his 8 year old sister by
    his half sister Mrs Kamara, who had indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was claimed that the Appellant's father had died in
    Sierra Leone.  On 30th August 1995 the Appellant and  his  sister  were
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  dependants
    of their half sister, Mrs Kamara.

77. The Appellant is the subject of a deportation order as a result of  his
    conviction on 10th October 2011 at Maidstone Crown Court for possession
    of a controlled drug with  intent  to  supply,  namely  Class  A  crack
    cocaine and failing to surrender to custody at an appointed  time.   He
    was sentenced to a period of three years and six months'  imprisonment.



78. The relevant parts of the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Carey,
    in which he described  the  drug  related  offence  as  "very  serious"
    stated:-

         "... I sentence you on the basis that you  were  in  possession  of
         these drugs voluntarily; that you had them in order to  make  money
         from them; and that the telephone was in your possession, which was
         plainly one which was being used by somebody dealing in drugs,  was
         the telephone which you were in possession of not as a carrier, but
         as a user of the phone.  The calls recorded or rather taken by  the
         police ... are entirely consistent with you supplying Class A drugs
         to others ....  I judge that you  were  simply  concerned  to  make
         money ...  This is Class A drugs supply.  The courts regard  it  as
         very serious ...  Moreover, your position is made the more  serious
         because you already have  a  conviction  for  possession  of  crack
         cocaine with intent to supply."

79. This is not the first time that the Appellant  had  been  convicted  of
    criminal offences relating to supply of Class A drugs as in 2008 he had
    been convicted at Southwark Crown Court of possession  with  intent  to
    supply Class A crack cocaine and Class A  heroin  and  had  received  a
    community order on both counts requiring 30 hours of unpaid  work.   On
    23rd July 2010 he was convicted at the same court for failing to comply
    with the requirement of a community order and was given  an  additional
    seven hours unpaid work requirement.

80. The Appellant relies upon the exception to be found in  Section  33  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 that his removal pursuant  to  the  deportation
    order will breach his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

81. In terms of chronology, the Appellant appealed the decision and it came
    before the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Tipping and Mrs M  Padfield
    JP) on 5th December 2013 who allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State sought permission to appeal that decision and in a  determination
    promulgated on 17th April 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  found  that
    there were errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel and set aside the decision.  The judge remitted the appeal to  be
    re-heard before the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  took  place  on  26th
    September 2014 before Judge Lobo, whose decision  forms  the  basis  of
    this second appeal by the Secretary of State.

82. In a determination promulgated on 7th October 2014  the  judge  allowed
    the appeal.  For reasons that we shall explain, it was not  clear  from
    the determination of the judge upon what basis he  allowed  the  appeal
    having found that paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply but  then  went
    on to find that Exception 1 as set out in Section 117 did  apply.   The
    judge found that Exception 1 applied because  the  Appellant  had  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life,  that  he
    was socially and culturally integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom  and
    because there were "very significant obstacles to his integration  into
    the life of Sierra Leone".  He reached that conclusion at  [63]  having
    found that he arrived in the UK at the age of 6 and was now 27, he  had
    been educated in the United Kingdom and  that  the  way  he  spoke  and
    carried himself was as a "south Londoner" and that he had no friends or
    family in Sierra Leone, he did not speak the Patwa and his culture  was
    that of a British person and that he has not been in Sierra Leone since
    he was 6.  The judge went on  to  consider  the  crime  that  had  been
    committed but reached the conclusion that the danger to society by  the
    Appellant committing his crime  could  be  gauged  by  looking  at  the
    sentence he received in relation to the sentences  that  were  possible
    and contrasted the range of sentences being between a  community  order
    and sixteen years in custody to the sentence he received of three and a
    half years.  He considered that he had lived in the United Kingdom  for
    21 years and only began his offending when he had lived in the UK for a
    considerable period of time.  He took  into  account  his  co-operation
    with the Probation Service and his behaviour in prison and that he  had
    not re-offended.

83. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  on  22nd
    October 2014 stating:-

         "The Grounds of Appeal identified an arguable error of law in  that
         when the judge considered the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
         no consideration was given to the  deportation  provisions  of  the
         Immigration Rules that had been  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
         2014.  At paragraphs 26-29 the judge set out "the  legal  framework
         of this appeal" but nowhere in that section is any  reference  made
         to the 2014 Act which applies to all appeals heard on or after 28th
         July 2014 irrespective of when the application for the  immigration
         decision was made.  As the Respondent has raised an arguable  error
         of law permission to appeal is granted."

84. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for us to decide  whether  or
    not the determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  or
    errors on a point of law such  as  may  have  materially  affected  the
    outcome of the appeal.

85. Mr Tarlow, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon
    the grounds as drafted and in his oral submissions directed us  to  the
    determination to demonstrate that the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    correct legislative framework and the statutory regime that  he  should
    apply.   He  submitted  that  there  was   a   contradiction   in   the
    determination at paragraph 52 and at 54 where he found that  paragraphs
    399 and 399A did not apply but then went on to find  that  Exception  1
    applied.  He submitted that looking at the determination the First-tier
    Tribunal judge had misdirected himself in law as to the  provisions  he
    should apply and thus reached the conclusion that he may not have  come
    to had he not made that error.  In relation to Exception 1 at paragraph
    63 of the determination, he submitted that as he did not give  adequate
    reasons for finding that Exception  1  applied,  and  even  if  he  had
    properly considered the  Appellant's  lawful  residence  there  was  no
    proper  consideration  of  the  issue  of  whether  there  were   "very
    significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  the  life  of  Sierra
    Leone".

86. Mrs Mustapha relied upon a Rule 24 response that she had  provided,  on
    the basis that the First-tier Tribunal did not make any  error  of  law
    and that the Tribunal had properly considered  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules relevant to  deportation  including  Section  117  at
    paragraphs 19 to 21 of the determination and thus  properly  considered
    and applied the facts of the  case  to  the  applicable  law.   It  was
    submitted that the judge did consider the 2014 Act and that this was  a
    determination that was clear and well reasoned.

87. When beginning her oral submissions she stated  that  she  agreed  with
    Judge Lobo that paragraph 399A did not apply because at the time of the
    hearing he had not spent in  excess  of  twenty  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  However when we queried this having  referred  to  the  Rules
    that were in force at the date of the hearing  which  had  changed  the
    requirements of paragraph 399A, she conceded that the judge in fact was
    in error and that he had applied the old  2012  version  of  the  Rules
    rather than the new Rules  that  were  in  force  on  28th  July  2014.
    Nonetheless she submitted that even if that was an  error  of  law  the
    conclusion that he came to in relation to Exception 1  was  sustainable
    in that the judge had given  sufficient  reasons  to  demonstrate  that
    Exception 1 applied.  It was submitted that the decision was a safe and
    sustainable one.  She submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons.

88.   In answer to a question from the panel and the  evident  conflict  in
    the evidence concerning whether or not the appellant had  a  family  in
    Sierra Leone, she referred us to paragraph 63 but could not refer us to
    anywhere in the decision  where  the  judge  made  a  finding  on  this
    conflict in the evidence.  She accepted that a finding  on  this  issue
    would  be  very  important,  but  submitted  that  the   decision   was
    nonetheless safe and sustainable and that the error on the face of  the
    determination was insufficient to vitiate the determination when looked
    at as a whole.

Our Assessment

89. We have given careful consideration to  the  grounds  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State and the submissions made by way of response  by  Mrs
    Mustapha.  We have concluded that the determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  does  disclose  material  errors  of  law  and  the   correct
    application of the legal principles that should have  been  applied  to
    this appeal following the changes that came into effect  on  28th  July
    2014.

90. The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 26th September  2014
    by  which  time  Section  19  of  the  2014  Act  introduced  into  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a new Part  5A  containing
    new Sections 117A-D.  The new part is headed "Article 8  of  the  ECHR:
    Public Interest Considerations".   Sections 117A-D  set  out  statutory
    guidelines that must be applied when a court or tribunal has to  decide
    whether an immigration decision to remove someone from the UK would  be
    in breach of his Article 8 rights.  Section 117A is headed "Application
    of this Part";  Section 117B  is  headed  "Article  8  public  interest
    considerations in all cases" and  117C is headed "Article 8  additional
    considerations in cases involving foreign criminals".

91.  They provide as follows:-

         "117A   Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

         117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

         117C   Article  8  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals.

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

         (a)  is a British citizen, or

         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

         (a)  is a British citizen, or

         (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning  of
             the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)  who is not a British citizen,

         (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an  offence,
             and

         (c)  who -

             (i)  has been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                  least 12 months,

             (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused  serious
                  harm, or

             (iii)    is a persistent offender.

         (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to  an
             order under-

             (a)  section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity)  Act  1964
                  (insanity etc),

             (b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act  1995
                  (insanity etc), or (c) Article 50A of  the  Mental  Health
                  (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been
                  convicted of an offence.

         (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
             a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

             (a)  do not include a person  who  has  received  a  suspended
                  sentence (unless a  court  subsequently  orders  that  the
                  sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take
                  effect);

             (b)  do not include a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
                  period of imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by
                  virtue  of  being  sentenced  to   consecutive   sentences
                  amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

             (c)  include a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  detention,  or
                  ordered or directed to  be  detained,  in  an  institution
                  other than a prison (including, in particular, a  hospital
                  or an institution for young offenders) for that length  of
                  time; and

             (d)  include a person who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
                  detention, or ordered or directed to be detained,  for  an
                  indeterminate period, provided that it  may  last  for  at
                  least that length of time.

         (5)  If any question arises for the purposes of  this  Part  as  to
             whether a person is a British citizen, it is  for  the  person
             asserting that fact to prove it."

19.   The  2012  Rules  were  modified  by  Statement  of  Changes  to   the
    Immigration Rules of 10 July 2014  (HC  532)  which  were  laid  before
    Parliament on 10 July 2014. We have set out  below  the  relevant  2012
    Rules, as amended by  the  2014  Rules.   We  have  put  the  new  2014
    provisions  in  square  brackets  and  we  have  crossed  through   the
    provisions of the 2012 Rules which are deleted by the  2014  Rules,  in
    the hope that both the 2012 Rules and the 2014 Rules modifications  can
    be plainly seen:

         A362.    Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
              under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8  will
              only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at  [28
              July  2014]  are  met,  regardless  of  when  the  notice  of
              intention to deport or the deportation order, as appropriate,
              was served.

        ...

         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
             pursuant  to  the  order  would  be  contrary  to   the   UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
             Convention.  Where deportation would not be contrary to  these
             obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
             the public interest in deportation is outweighed.

        [A.398.  These rules apply where:

             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
                  deportation would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;

             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
                  against him to be revoked.]

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good [and in the public interest] because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                  years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good [and in the public interest] because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good [and in the public interest]  because,  in
                  the view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has
                  caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who
                  shows a particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of
                  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
                  paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will
                  only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
                  interest  in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
                  factors [the public interest in deportation will  only  be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A.]

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK and

                  (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the seven years immediately preceding the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                           to leave the UK [it would be unduly harsh for the
                           child to live in the country to which the  person
                           is to be deported]; and

                      (b)  there is no other family member who is  able  to
                           care for the child in the UK [it would be  unduly
                           harsh for the child to remain in the  UK  without
                           the person who is to be deported]; or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen,  [or]
                  settled in the UK, or in the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
                  humanitarian protection, and

                  (i)  the person has lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
                      continuously for at least the  15  years  immediately
                      preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration   decision
                      (discounting any period of imprisonment) and

                  (ii) there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
                      with that partner continuing outside the UK

                  [(i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person  is  to  be  deported
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and



                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported].

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural or family  )  with
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK; or

             (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                  half of his life living continuously in the UK immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
                  the UK.

         [(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and

        (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

        (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
        into the country to which it is proposed he is deported].

         399B.    Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave  may  be
              granted for periods not  exceeding  30  months.   Such  leave
              shall be given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of
              State deems appropriate.  Where a person who  has  previously
              been granted a period of leave under paragraph 399B would not
              fall for refusal under paragraph 322(1C), indefinite leave to
              remain may be granted.

20.  Paragraph 7.2 stated, in part:

                  "...The rules will  set  proportionate  requirements  that
                  reflect  the  Government  and  Parliament's  view  on  how
                  individuals' article 8 rights should be qualified  in  the
                  public interest to safeguard the  economic  well-being  of
                  the UK by  controlling  immigration  and  to  protect  the
                  public against foreign  criminals.  This  will  mean  that
                  failure  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules  will
                  normally mean failure to establish an article 8  claim  to
                  enter or remain in the UK and no grant of  leave  on  that
                  basis. Outside exceptional cases, it will be proportionate
                  under article 8 for an applicant who  fails  to  meet  the
                  requirements of the rules to be removed from the UK"."

         21.  An explanatory memorandum was also attached to  the  Statement
             of Changes made to create the 2014 Rules. Paragraphs 3.4 , 3.5
             and 4.7 provide:

                  "3.4.    The changes relating to family and  private  life
                      will come into force on 28 July 2014,  in  line  with
                      the commencement of section 19 of the Immigration Act
                      2014.  The  Home  Office  regrets  that  it  was  not
                      possible to finalise this Statement of Changes  on  a
                      basis that, consistent with  normal  practice,  would
                      have allowed the changes to be laid at least 21  days
                      prior to their coming into  force.  This  is  because
                      many of the changes to the Immigration Rules need  to
                      coincide with the coming into force of sections 17(3)
                      and 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 on 28 July 2014.

                  3.5. However, the substance of those changes which concern
                      the alignment of the Immigration  Rules  relating  to
                      family and private life with sections 117B, 117C  and
                      117D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
                      2002, inserted by section 19 of the 2014  Act,  along
                      with section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
                      Asylum Act 2002, were  extensively  debated  by  both
                      Houses  of  Parliament  during  the  passage  of  the
                      Immigration Act.

                  4.7. The changes set out in paragraphs 14 to  30  of  this
                      statement take effect on 28 July 2014  and  apply  to
                      all ECHR Article  8  claims  from  foreign  criminals
                      which are decided on or after that date."

  22. So far as the new Part 5A in the 2002 Act is concerned, Section 117A-D
      was in force on 28th July 2014.  The decision of the Court  of  Appeal
      in YM (Uganda) vs SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292  clarified  the  statutory
      framework to be applied and concluded that both the 2014 Act  and  the
      new Rules which the Act underpins must  be  considered  in  all  cases
      after 28th July 2014 (see paragraph 38 of that decision).

  23. The judge  set  out  what  he  considered  to  be  the  correct  legal
      principles at various points in the determination.  He  began  with  a
      side heading "Law, Burden of Proof, Standard of Proof"  at  [5-17]  of
      the determination and set out a number of matters.  Whilst he  made  a
      reference at [16] that it was necessary to keep in mind the provisions
      of Section 117B of the 2002  Act  and  in  appeals  about  deportation
      Section 117C, earlier in the section, he erroneously referred  to  the
      Rules as they were before the changes made in July 2014  and  directed
      himself at [9]:

        "9.  The Secretary of State in assessing whether deportation  would
             be contrary to the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8,  will
             consider whether paragraphs 399 or 399A apply, and if  they  do
             not, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
             factors."

    We observed that he went on to consider what  constituted  "exceptional
    circumstances" applying the decision in Kabia.  It is  therefore  plain
    from the determination that he erred in law in that he sought to  apply
    the Rules as they were before the changes made in July 2014.

  24. The judge returned to the law at [26] and whilst he made reference  to
      automatic deportation,  no  reference  was  made  to  the  legislative
      framework that should apply to the circumstances of the Appellant.

  25.    This  erroneous  approach  can  be  further  exemplified   by   his
      conclusions on the Rules at [52] and [54].  At [52] under the  heading
      "Paragraphs 399 and 399A" he recorded "The appellant has no  children,
      is not married and is not in a relationship".  The obvious error  here
      is that whilst this may be true of paragraph 399, paragraph 399A which
      deals with private life, was at the heart of this  Appellant's  claim.
      He went on to state under the heading "Part 3:  Applying the facts  to
      the law" at [54] "As paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply, it is  only
      in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  presumption  in  favour  of
      deportation will be outweighed by other factors" and at [56]  he  made
      further  reference  to  exceptional  circumstances.    And   at   [58]
      considered that the "evidence showed  that  the  appellant  enjoyed  a
      private life in the United Kingdom".  He went on to set out the public
      interest considerations at Section 117C(iii) and then went on to  make
      a finding that Exception 1 applied at [63].

  26. It is plain that the judge did not properly approach the decision that
      he was making within the correct legal framework and  appeared  to  be
      deciding the appeal by reference to the wrong Rules and the wrong test
      (that is the old 2002 Rules and  exceptional  circumstances)  and  had
      misunderstood that paragraph 399A (which he said did not apply) was in
      effect reflected in Section 117C(4) dealing with the issues of private
      life.

  27. Mrs Mustapha began her submissions by stating that the judge was right
      that paragraph 399A did not apply because he had  not  accrued  twenty
      years in the United Kingdom and discounted the time spent  in  prison.
      However after we questioned that in the light of the  changes  of  the
      Rules, she conceded that the judge should have applied the 2014  Rules
      and that was an error but in effect, it was not material,  because  he
      then went on to consider whether the Appellant met  Exception  1.   In
      this regard she submitted that he gave adequate reasons  and  made  no
      legal error on the facts before him and  gave  sufficient  reasons  to
      reach that conclusion.

  28. We do not agree with that submission and prefer that of Mr Tarlow, who
      submitted that the misdirection in law was further compounded  by  his
      failure to properly apply the matters identified in  Exception  1  and
      provide  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  reaching   such   a
      conclusion.

  29.  Exception 1 sets out three criteria (a) C has been lawfully  resident
      in the United Kingdom for most of C's life,  (b)  C  is  socially  and
      culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and (c)  there  would  be
      very significant obstacles to his  integration  into  the  country  to
      which C is proposed to be deported.  All three are cumulative  and  if
      one of the three considerations is not met, Exception 1 cannot apply.

  30.  The judge considered  Exception  1  at  [63].   Whilst  there  was  a
      consideration of his length of residence the Appellant having  arrived
      in the UK at the age of 6 and now at the age of 27 have been in the UK
      for 21 years, it cannot be said that the judge did not  consider  (a).
      However we find that he did not give any or any adequate reasons as to
      why the Appellant was socially and culturally integrated into the  UK.
      The judge identified that he spoke English and had  been  educated  in
      the UK and spoke and carried himself as a "south Londoner"  but  there
      do not appear to be any considerations of his  social  integration  in
      the UK beyond those matters.  Whilst neither party either before us or
      before the First-tier Tribunal provided any guidance as to  what  this
      might encompass, we consider that as  a  starting  point  the  factors
      highlighted in Section  117B  are  directly  relevant  to  integration
      including language and financial  self-sufficiency.   His  ability  to
      speak English does not by itself point to integration  as  English  is
      the language of Sierra Leone (see  COI  Report  paragraph  40  of  the
      refusal letter).  When considering that issue a relevant consideration
      absent from the judge's findings  would  be  the  course  of  criminal
      conduct that the appellant had embarked upon for which he had had  two
      convictions of possession with intent to supply Class A drugs, to make
      money from them and supply them to the community. Such conduct  points
      to a significant  degree of anti-social behaviour which cannot be seen
      as a measure of integration in terms of the application  of    Section
      117(4)(b) to the appellant's particular circumstances.

  31. As  to  the  third  consideration  there  will  be  "very  significant
      obstacles to his integration into the country to which he is  proposed
      to be deported" at [63], the judge concluded that the appellant had no
      friends or family in Sierra Leone, had been in the UK since he  was  6
      and his culture was that of a British person.   We  have  referred  to
      language previously and that English is the main  language  in  Sierra
      Leone.   Therefore  that  could  not  by  itself  constitute  a  "very
      significant obstacle".  The appellant's cultural connections  via  his
      family relationships in the UK  were  not  considered  and  the  judge
      appeared to proceed on the basis that  he  had  no  family  in  Sierra
      Leone.  We asked Mrs Mustapha if she could identify for  us  where  in
      the determination the judge made a finding on  the  disputed  evidence
      concerning whether or not he had family members.  The OASys Report  at
      AB45 stated that his mother lived in Sierra Leone.  She directed us to
      paragraph 63 but that was the judge simply reciting  that  he  had  no
      family but there was no finding upon the issue.   This  was  an  issue
      identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun at paragraph 7 when  she  set
      aside the decision of  the  panel  in  April  2014  and  thus  it  was
      incumbent on the judge to make  a  reasoned  finding  on  this  issue.
      Mrs Mustapha  agreed  that  this  was  an  important  issue  in  re-
      integration.  Thus  we  conclude  that  the  judge  did  not  properly
      consider or apply the considerations applicable to Exception 1.

  32. We also observe  that  where  the  judge  purportedly  considered  the
      offence committed when considering the public interest  considerations
      at [66] he sought to consider the dangers to community by  contrasting
      the sentence he received that being one of three  and  a  half  years'
      imprisonment against the range of sentences for those offences  rather
      than  considering  the  sentencing  remarks  of  the  judge  and   his
      antecedent history which gave the circumstances of  the  offence,  its
      seriousness and the fact that it was a second offence for  the  supply
      of Class A drugs.

  33. In the circumstances we consider that the determination  does  contain
      errors of law as identified above which are material to the outcome of
      the appeal.

  34.  We take into account the observations made by Mrs Mustapha that  this
      is  the  second  appeal  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  those
      circumstances we consider that having regard to its  history  and  the
      nature of the errors found, that the appeal should not be remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal but should remain with the Upper  Tribunal  to
      be re-made.  By reason of the nature of the error which  went  to  the
      findings  of  fact  alongside  the  wrong  application  of  the  legal
      principles, we consider that the Appellant would be required  to  give
      oral evidence and the hearing to take place before the Upper  Tribunal
      in accordance with the  directions  accompanying  this  decision.   We
      therefore set aside the decision with none  of  the  findings  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal preserved  to be re-made afresh on a  date  to  be
      fixed.

  35. Anonymity direction not made.



Signed                              Date 4/2/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

