
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01141/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ROLYS CHARLIE SEDJRO AIVOHOZIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Rolys Charlie Sedjro Aivohozin, is a citizen of  France
    who was born on 18 June 1981.  I shall hereafter refer to the appellant
    as the respondent and to the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they
    appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).   The  appellant
    claims to have been in the United Kingdom since September 2005.  He was
    issued with an EEA Registration Certificate on 26 August 2010.   On  23
    May 2014, the respondent decided  to  remove  the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom by way of deportation under  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 and Sections 5(1) and 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  The appellant had been convicted of three  counts  of  fraud  at
    Isleworth Crown Court and, on 10 May 2013, sentenced to a total  of  32
    months' imprisonment.  The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hillis)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16  April  2015,  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. I find that Judge Hillis erred in law such that his decision should  be
    set aside.  I have reached that decision  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, I agree with the respondent that, where the judge has found [44]
    that "the relevant test is whether or not deportation is  justified  on
    'serious grounds' of public policy", he has made no proper  finding  as
    to the continuous period of time during which this appellant  has  been
    living in the United Kingdom.  The judge was aware that the matter  was
    at issue because he records the submission of the  respondent  to  that
    effect [26].  Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations  provides  that  "a
    relevant decision may not be taken  in  respect  of  a  person  with  a
    permanent right of residence under  Regulation  15  except  on  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security ...".  The judge's decision
    is simply silent as to this disputed issue; he appears  to  have  taken
    for granted the fact that the appellant had been continuously living in
    the United Kingdom for the period which he claimed.

 3. Secondly, the judge was aware that the  appellant  was  subject  of  an
    European Arrest Warrant (EAW).  In his decision,  the  judge,  however,
    makes no mention of that warrant whatsoever.  It is possible  that  the
    warrant may have been of relevance in the judge's analysis; at [45] the
    judge had taken into  account  "all  the  circumstances  of  the  three
    offences of fraud, the contents of the  reports,  the  learned  judge's
    sentencing remarks and the oral  testimony  regarding  the  appellant's
    attitude since his release from prison".  The judge took  into  account
    also that the appellant had not offended whilst on bail  or  whilst  on
    licence following  his  release  from  prison  on  18  September  2014.
    Without the judge making any reference to the European Arrest  Warrant,
    it is difficult to see what influence, if any,  that  warrant  and  the
    circumstances surrounding it had  upon  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    failure to mention the warrant at all represents a serious omission  in
    that analysis.

 4. In the circumstances, I find that the judge has erred in law such  that
    his decision is required to be set aside.  I  consider  it  appropriate
    that this matter should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    Judge Hillis) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 16 April 2015 is
    set aside.  The appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Hillis) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.


Signed   Date 2 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
