
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01229/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 January 2014                          |On  4 February 2014       |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         THE HON MR JUSTICE FOSKETT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE hOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr M. Murphy, instructed by Cleveland & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent to this  appeal  (the  Appellant  before  the  First  Tier
   Tribunal - 'the FTT') is a Kosovan national.  His father (who was  killed
   in the civil war) was an ethnic Albanian from Kosovo.   The  Respondent's
   mother is Serbian.  The  family  came  from  Mitrovica  where,  at  least
   historically, there has been a difficult relationship between the Serbian
   and Albanian populations.  The Respondent left Kosovo in 2000 (when still
   under the age of 18) and was in due course  granted  refugee  status  and
   indefinite leave to remain in the UK in June 2002.  The precise basis for
   granting this status does not appear from the papers before  us,  but  it
   was probably because of fears for his safety from Serbians as a result of
   his Albanian ethnicity.


2. In the light of a conviction on 6 May 2009 for  the  serious  offence  of
   wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and a consequent sentence
   of 4 years  imprisonment,  the  Respondent  rendered  himself  liable  to
   automatic  deportation.   In  September  2011  the  Appellant  (i.e.  the
   Secretary of State) served notice of intention to cease the  Respondent's
   refugee status on the basis of a change of circumstances in Kosovo and by
   reason of the conviction to which we have referred.   (This  notification
   followed an earlier letter of 31 March  2011  to  similar  effect.)   His
   solicitors replied on 20 October 2011 making representations against  the
   contents of the letter serving notice of intention.

3. In due course, on 4 February 2013, the Appellant wrote to the  Respondent
   indicating that no compelling reasons had been provided  as  to  why  the
   UKBA should not cease his status as a refugee.   The  letter  highlighted
   what was said to be "significant changes in the country situation"  since
   he left Kosovo 12 years previously.  It is to be noted that the  decision
   letter, whilst highlighting various changes in Kosovo that were  said  to
   have occurred since 2000, did not refer to the Country Guidance  case  of
   SI v SSHD [2009] UKAIT 00011, a decision based  upon  evidence  heard  in
   October 2008.

4. Thereafter a deportation order was  served  on  the  Respondent  and  his
   appeal against that order was heard by the FTT in November 2013.  The FTT
   (Judge Coleman and Ms Endersby) allowed his appeal,  essentially  holding
   that there was no evidence that the situation faced by the Respondent  in
   2002 had changed at all.  There would, the FTT concluded, be  nowhere  in
   Kosovo where he  could  be  with  his  ethnic  group  because  his  mixed
   ethnicity would make him "regarded with suspicion by both sides and there
   was a real risk of persecutory  behaviour  at  the  hands  of  Serbs  and
   Albanians if returned to Kosovo".

5. Although the Secretary of State was represented  at  the  hearing  before
   the FTT, the Tribunal's attention was not drawn to the  Country  Guidance
   case to which we have referred above.  The Tribunal itself did not  refer
   to it at all.

6. After the FTT's decision was promulgated the Secretary of State lodged  a
   notice of appeal alleging a material error of law on the grounds that the
   FTT "did not consider the [the country guidance case]  ...  [which]  case
   concerns mixed parentage, similar to this Appellant and in particular ...
   [who] also spoke Albanian which is highly relevant to this case given the
   issue of perception."  It is also asserted in the Grounds of Appeal  that
   had those issues been considered the FTT "would have found  that  he  was
   not to be at risk and his deportation ... proportionate."

7. It is, on any view, deeply unattractive that a point such as this  should
   be taken at this stage when the relevance of the  Country  Guidance  case
   was not raised (a) in the decision letter itself and (b) at the contested
   hearing before the FTT.  That, of course, might go to the  issue  of  its
   true relevance when the case  is  considered  on  its  merits.   However,
   subject to the argument of Mr Murphy  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
   precluded from relying on this point now (see paragraph 9  below),  there
   is little doubt that a failure to address the significance of an arguably
   relevant Country Guidance case can amount to a  material  error  of  law.
   Such a  viewpoint  is  plainly  articulated  in  the  Senior  President's
   Practice Direction dated 10 February 2010,  the  relevant  paragraphs  of
   which read as follows:

      "12.2       A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
           IAT  bearing  the  letters  "CG"  shall   be   treated   as   an
           authoritative finding on the country guidance  issue  identified
           in the determination, based upon the evidence before the members
           of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine  the  appeal.
           As a result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced
           by any later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent  with  other
           authority that is  binding  on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  country
           guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so  far
           as that appeal:-


                 (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


                 (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.


      12.3  A list of current CG cases will be maintained on the  Tribunal's
           website. Any representative of a party to an appeal concerning a
           particular country will be expected to be  conversant  with  the
           current "CG" determinations relating to that country.


      12.4  Because of the principle that like cases should  be  treated  in
           like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a   clear,   apparently
           applicable country guidance case or to  show  why  it  does  not
           apply to the case in  question  is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
           grounds for appeal on a point of law."


8.    A judge of the FTT granted permission to appeal on that basis and  the
   preliminary issue before us was  whether  this  failure  of  the  FTT  to
   consider the country guidance case did indeed constitute a material error
   of law.

9. Mr Murphy contended, in the first instance, that the point was  not  open
   to the Secretary of State.  He submitted that the process before the  FTT
   is an adversarial process and that a point such as this ought to be taken
   at the appropriate stage and when it is not, it should not  be  permitted
   to be raised subsequently.  He reminded us of the well known approach  in
   Ladd v Marshall and said that no good reason had, or could be, shown  for
   the failure to draw attention  to  the  Country  Guidance  case.   As  an
   alternative submission, he suggested that raising  the  point  after  the
   initial hearing constituted an abuse of process.


10. We did not hear full argument on the issue, but we do not consider  that
   it is right to  describe  the  procedure  before  the  FTT  as  a  purely
   adversarial process.  It was described by Sedley LJ (with  whom  Munby  J
   and Mummery LJ agreed) as "as much inquisitorial as it is adversarial" in
   Shirazi v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1562 and in  the  following  passage  that
   appears in the judgment of Neuberger LJ, as he then was,  in  HK  v  SSHD
   [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 (with whose judgment Jacob LJ expressly agreed):

      " ... Relatively unusually for an English Judge, an Immigration  Judge
      has an almost inquisitorial function, although  he  has  none  of  the
      evidence-gathering or other investigatory powers of  an  inquisitorial
      Judge. That is  a  particularly  acute  problem  in  cases  where  the
      evidence is pretty unsatisfactory in extent, quality and presentation,
      which is particularly true of asylum cases. That is  normally  through
      nobody's fault: it is the nature of the beast."

11.   We respectfully  agree  that  these  descriptions  match  the  process
   involved.   We  think   that   Mr   Murphy   would,   with   considerable
   justification, be complaining vigorously if  a  client  of  his  lost  an
   appeal before the FTT and it emerged that a  country  guidance  authority
   had been overlooked by everyone that, if considered, would have led to  a
   different result.  Plainly, there comes a  time  when  it  is  no  longer
   appropriate for matters that were overlooked  to  be  considered  at  the
   appellate level, but where the point which amounts to an error of law  is
   taken within the time limit for appealing, then in our view  there  would
   be little, if any,  discretion  available  to  prevent  the  issue  being
   considered on appeal.  When the time limit for  appeal  has  expired,  it
   would require the exercise of discretion to enable the point to be taken,
   discretion to be exercised in all the  circumstances  of  the  particular
   case, including the reason for the delay in raising  the  point  and  the
   intrinsic strength of the point sought to be raised.

12.   As we have said, it is unattractive for an argument such  as  this  to
   be raised in the way it has been raised in this appeal, but it was raised
   very soon after the decision of the FTT and within  the  time  limit  for
   appealing.  Accordingly, we do not consider that it is inappropriate  for
   it to be raised or that to do so amounts to an abuse of process.

13.   In our judgment, the failure to consider  the  Country  Guidance  case
   was an error of law and, given the  nature  of  the  conclusions  in  the
   Country Guidance case, it was a material error in the sense that, if  the
   findings in that case were applied to the circumstances of this case,  it
   could have made  a  difference  to  the  outcome.   Mr  Murphy  contended
   otherwise and suggested that the FTT had addressed relevant material when
   it came to its decision and that the Country Guidance case would not have
   affected the conclusion.

14.   We can see the force of that  argument,  but  it  would  be  far  more
   persuasive if that material had been addressed against the background  of
   the findings in the Country Guidance case.  Our conclusion that there was
   a material error of law does not, of  course,  mean  that  the  FTT  that
   considers this matter afresh (because this, in our judgment,  is  a  case
   that should be remitted for re-consideration by a differently constituted
   FTT) will necessarily conclude that the Country Guidance case affects the
   outcome: it is possible that the same result will emerge depending on the
   evidence and the argument.  However, as we have indicated, it will be far
   more satisfactory for a properly constituted hearing to take place  where
   the implications, if any, for this case of the Country Guidance case  are
   taken into account.

15. We do not consider that the Respondent should be  disadvantaged  at  the
   remitted hearing by opening up any credibility findings already  made  in
   his favour.  He was found credible on a number of  issues  raised  before
   the FTT and, in our judgment, the findings to that effect  should  stand.
   If he raises new material then, of course, it will be open to the FTT  to
   consider his credibility and reliability on these matters  in  the  usual
   way, as it will be open for it to re-visit the findings made in  relation
   to Article 8 ECHR in light of any additional material relied upon.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  on  a  point
of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and, consequently,  it
is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal made an  Anonymity  Direction.  No  application  was
made before us to discharge such  direction  and  it  therefore  remains  in
place in the terms identified in the First-tier Tribunal's determination  of
15 November 2013.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
On his own behalf and on behalf of The Honourable Mr Justice Foskett
Date: 30 January 2014

