
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01110/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th August 2015                  |On 1st September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               fungai MOETSABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Aitken, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Mackinlay &
Suttie, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge R
    M M Wallace, promulgated on 15th September 2014.  The determination  at
    paragraphs 74 - 77 bears to dismiss the appellant's appeal "on  refugee
    grounds"  and  "on  human  rights  grounds",  to  find  "no  issue   of
    humanitarian  protection",  and  to  allow  the   appeal   "under   the
    Immigration Rules".

 3. It was apparent during the hearing on 24 August that  the  approach  of
    the parties had been rather muddled, and had led to some  confusion  on
    the part of the judge.  On examination of the papers after the hearing,
    even greater muddle comes to light.

 4. Proceedings up to the time of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    dealt largely with asylum issues, which are no longer live.  The record
    of the asylum  interview  dated  10th  February  2014  shows  that  the
    appellant disclosed that on 20th October 2011 she married a UK  citizen
    (also of Zimbabwean origin, now a psychiatric  nurse  employed  by  the
    NHS), and that they were expecting a child in a few months.

 5. The respondent issued a letter of 29 May  2014  letter  explaining  the
    decision appealed against.  The letter  records  the  foregoing  family
    information at paragraph 12 (j) but when it goes on later to deal  with
    family life, it says that the appellant has stated that she  "does  not
    have a partner nor children in the UK, they  reside  in  Harare".   The
    parts of the decision with which present proceedings are concerned  are
    all based on that misapprehension of the facts.

 6. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    seek to correct the error  about  family  circumstances.   They  simply
    insisted on that there was risk on return to Zimbabwe.

 7. The reality of the appellant's family life did emerge at the hearing in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  It is narrated at paragraphs 21 to  26.   The
    appellant and her husband by that time had a son, born  on  23rd  March
    2014. Paragraph 59 records that the Presenting Officer pointed out  the
    factual mistake in the decision.

 8. There is then misconception about the law.  The way in which the  judge
    was invited to deal with the aspect of the case which remains  live  is
    recorded in  the  determination  under  the  heading  'Submissions'  at
    paragraphs 38 to 50.  Both parties seem to have thought that part 5A of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  in  particular
    section  117C(5),  Exception  2,  is  not  in  a  statute  but  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  The submission for  the  respondent  was  that  the
    appellant did not benefit from that provision  because  the  effect  of
    deportation on the appellant's partner and child would  not  be  unduly
    harsh, while the appellant's solicitor submitted to the contrary.

 9. The judge's conclusions at paragraphs 64 to 73  are  based  on  finding
    that section 117C(5), Exception 2, applies in the appellant's favour.

10. At paragraph 73 the judge finds that the effect of deportation would be
    "unduly harsh on the appellant's partner".

11. The appellant and her spouse made it plain that if she were required to
    leave the country,  their  son  would  stay  here,  so  it  is  perhaps
    surprising that the judge did not specifically find that separation  of
    the infant from his mother would also be unduly harsh.

12. As a result of the confusion which had descended, the  judge  purported
    to allow the appeal under and not outwith the Rules.

13. The SSHD applied to the First-tier Tribunal for permission  to  appeal,
    on grounds which dispute the finding that deportation would be  "unduly
    harsh on [the appellant's] husband and child;  develop  that  argument,
    based on the circumstances of the case; and stress "the  strong  public
    interest in favour of the deportation of foreign criminals."

14. On 6th October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox refused permission to
    appeal, on the view that the  decision  gave  "perfectly  adequate  and
    sustainable cumulative reasons why the decision would result  in  undue
    harshness in  all  the  circumstances"  and  that  the  SSHD's  grounds
    amounted to no more than "special pleading for a different outcome".

15. In my opinion, and having heard the case further,  that  was  all  that
    needed ever to be said about those grounds: they are only  disagreement
    with the way the judge has answered the question, as it  was  posed  by
    both sides.

16. The SSHD then applied to the Upper Tribunal for permission  to  appeal,
    on grounds which try to demonstrate not that  Judge  Wallace  may  have
    erred in law (which would be the right question) but that Judge Cox did
    so (the wrong question).

17. The application seeks to  make  two  specific  points.   The  first  is
    unclear, but is based on Judge Cox going wrong  by  addressing  section
    117C of the Act rather than the Immigration Rules (and  saying  nothing
    about how any such confusion arose in the  first  place).   The  second
    complains that Judge Cox concentrated on "undue harshness" whereas  the
    test in section 117C is "very significant  obstacles  to  integration".
    That second proposed ground confuses section 117C(4) -  Exception  1  -
    with section 117C(5) - Exception 2 -  on  which  the  determination  is
    based.

18. On 3rd February 2015 UT Judge Storey granted permission:

         "It is arguable that the FtT erred in failing to decide the  appeal
         under the Immigration Rules, given that the Court of Appeal  in  MF
         (Nigeria) described the Rules on foreign criminal deportations as a
         'complete code'.

         It is also arguable that in seeking to apply Section 117C(4) (which
         could only have application outside the Rules)  and  deciding  that
         the appellant fell within one of the two exceptions, the FtT  erred
         by applying the  wrong  test,  (undue  hardship  rather  than  very
         significant obstacles  to  integration).   Also  a  live  issue  is
         whether the exceptions are self-contained tests which if met oblige
         a court or tribunal to find a breach of Article 8 or  whether  they
         are still subject to an overall proportionality assessment."

19. The  SSHD's  application  seems  to  have  misled  the  judge  granting
    permission into thinking that the  determination  did  not  purport  to
    decide the appeal under the Rules, when in fact it did so (even  if  on
    the basis of a misunderstanding).

20. In a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission (filed  late,  without
    objection by the respondent) the appellant  submits  as  follows.   The
    judge did not fail to have regard to the Immigration Rules, referred to
    in particular at paragraphs 58 and 59 of the determination.  The  Rules
    on foreign  criminal  deportations  are  no  longer  a  complete  code,
    following enactment of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  The  judge  explicitly
    applied the exception in Section 117C(5) not (4).  The  "unduly  harsh"
    test is the correct one.  As to the live issue identified in the  grant
    of permission, the Secretary of State has not made this point in either
    application.  It is "not good practice for the Tribunal to  supply  the
    Secretary of State with a ground of appeal she has not  sought  to  put
    for herself" and which she might indeed not wish to argue.  If  one  or
    other of the two Exceptions is satisfied,  "that  is  the  end  of  the
    enquiry".

21. Ms Aitken referred to Bossade (ss.117A-D interrelationship with  Rules)
    [2015] UKUT 415 and in particular head note 3 and 4, which suggest that
    Part  5A  considerations  have  only  indirect   application   to   the
    Immigration Rules, "limited to their role as statements  of  principles
    that can be used where appropriate to inform the meaning of  key  terms
    set out in such paragraphs".  She submitted that the judge should  have
    looked at the exceptions in the Immigration Rules at paragraphs 399 and
    399A,  more  stringent  tests  which  the  appellant  could  not   have
    satisfied, and the determination should therefore be reversed.

22. Mr Bryce relied upon MAB (para 399; "unduly  harsh")  USA  [2015]  UKUT
    00435, in particular at paragraphs 42 to  49.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant could not meet paragraphs 399 and  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as they stood at the date of the decision under appeal.  However,
    he submitted that the judge  was  not  shown  to  have  gone  wrong  by
    allowing the appeal, and any error she might have made  along  the  way
    was not material.

23. Mr Bryce referred to  the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  they
    presently stand, having been amended on 28th July 2014:

         '399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported ...'

24. Mr Bryce said that if the present decision did fall to  be  re-made  it
    could not be allowed under the Immigration Rules, because the  relevant
    provisions remain those as at the date of the  decision  under  appeal.
    However,  he  argued,  the  Rules  as  they   presently   stand   could
    nevertheless inform the consideration outwith  the  Rules  of  what  is
    proportionate, and the appeal would therefore fall to be allowed.

25. A point acknowledged by Mr Bryce  is  that  the  judge  went  wrong  at
    paragraph 65 in considering that the appellant's offences would  become
    "spent" within the next twelve months.  Given her  immigration  status,
    she does not reap that benefit.  However, the point was not made by the
    Secretary of State in any of her grounds and is incidental.

26. I reserved my determination.

27. The first set of grounds amount to no more than disagreement  with  the
    judge's assessment of undue harshness.  That  assessment  was  open  to
    her, was reached for good reasons, and in itself is in no way flawed.

28. The second set of grounds is misconceived in its approach, being framed
    as a challenge to the decision of Judge Cox.  Insofar as it is based on
    the judge having applied Exception 2 rather than Exception 1, these are
    alternatives, and if  either  applied  to  this  case  it  was  plainly
    Exception 2.

29. I do not find anything in either of the SSHD's sets  of  grounds  which
    amounts  to  identification  of  an  error  on  point  of  law  in  the
    determination.  The SSHD has not sought to  frame  further  grounds  or
    applied to amend.

30. The judge was asked by both representatives in the First-tier  Tribunal
    to resolve the case on the basis of undue harshness, and that  is  what
    she did.  Even if the SSHD had framed some accurate ground  of  appeal,
    that would first have to overcome the hurdle of whether the  judge  can
    be criticised by the respondent for taking exactly the  approach  which
    the respondent invited her to do.

31. The appellant has never received a  decision  from  the  respondent  in
    terms of the Rules which does take proper account of her  family  life.
    The explanatory letter does not deal  with  it,  because  she  was  not
    thought (at the relevant passages) to have any family life in  the  UK.
    If a fresh decision were to be reached now, then on the  basis  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's fact-based findings and  of  the  Rules  as
    they presently stand, the outcome should be in the appellant's favour.

32. In all the circumstances, while the judge may  have  been  led  by  the
    parties into an error of allowing the appeal  under  the  Rules  rather
    than on human rights grounds outwith the Rules, I see no reason to  set
    aside the determination or to reformulate the outcome.

33. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

34. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

27 August 2015
