
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01526/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 January 2014                             |On 13 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R T
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Stickler, instructed by Gloucester Law Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made under Rule 14 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that no report or  other
    publication of these proceedings or any part or  parts  of  them  shall
    name or indirectly identify the respondent or his children.   Reference
    to the respondent may be by use of his initials only.  Failure  by  any
    person, body or institution whether corporate or incorporate  (for  the
    avoidance of doubt to include either party to this  appeal)  to  comply
    with this order may lead to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    continue in force until the Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)  or  an  appropriate
    court lifts or varies it.

 2. For convenience, in the remainder of this determination I will refer to
    the parties as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Fiji and is 34 years old.  He arrived  in
    the UK on 7 February  2000  and  initially  served  in  the  army.   He
    voluntarily left the army in  January  2001  and  in  August  2002  was
    granted leave to remain until 21 August 2003.  In 2005 he  returned  to
    Fiji and between October 2005 and March 2006 he worked in Iraq.  On  13
    February 2008, he was granted entry clearance as a spouse  valid  until
    13 February 2010.  On 15 March 2008, he entered the UK with his  second
    wife (whom he had married in April 2006) and their  daughter,  "K"  who
    was born in August 2007.  On 26 April 2010, the Appellant  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

 4. On 8 June 2012, the appellant was convicted  of  a  number  of  driving
    offences before the Gloucester Magistrates' Court:  failing to  stop  a
    motor  vehicle  when  required;  using  a  vehicle  without  insurance;
    dangerous driving; and driving with excess alcohol.   In  addition,  he
    was convicted of failing to surrender to bail.  He was sentenced at the
    Gloucester Crown Court on 6 July 2012.  He was sentenced to a total  of
    eleven months' imprisonment for the  driving  offences  and  a  further
    consecutive period  of  one  month  imprisonment  for  the  failure  to
    surrender to bail.  The total sentence was, therefore,  one  of  twelve
    months' imprisonment.

 5. On 4 January 2013, the Secretary of State made a decision to deport the
    appellant on the basis that it was conducive to the public  good.   The
    automatic deportation provisions in the UK (Borders) Act 2007  did  not
    apply because, although the appellant had been sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months, that period was only made up by
    accumulating consecutive sentences (see s.83(1)(b)).

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  appeal  was
    heard on 11 September 2013 by Judge Troup and Mr F T Jamieson JP.  In a
    determination promulgated on 24 September 2013, the First-tier Tribunal
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The First-tier
    Tribunal did so only on a limited basis.  The appellant was involved in
    contact proceedings in relation to his daughter, K.  Before the  First-
    tier Tribunal there was an order of the Yeovil  County  Court  dated  4
    September 2013 in which the appellant was granted fortnightly  indirect
    contact with  his  daughter.   The  order  provided  for  a  directions
    appointment on 4 November 2013 with a final hearing on the  first  open
    date after 11 November 2013.

 7. In the light of these ongoing proceedings, the First-tier Tribunal  was
    referred to the Protocol on Communications between Judges of the Family
    Court and Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal issued by the Senior President of Tribunals and  the
    President of the Family Division on 19 July 2013.  In  particular,  the
    First-tier Tribunal was referred to para 6 of that protocol which is in
    the following terms:

         "6.  It is not the role of the judges  in  either  jurisdiction  to
             predict  the  outcome  of  the  proceedings   in   the   other
             jurisdiction.  Where the  decision  in  the  Family  Court  is
             likely to  be  a  weighty  consideration  in  the  immigration
             decision, it is anticipated that it will normally be necessary
             for the Tribunal to wait until  the  Family  Court  judge  has
             reached a decision on the issue relevant  to  the  immigration
             appeal.  If so, either the  appeal  will  be  allowed  by  the
             Tribunal in anticipation of a  short  period  of  leave  being
             granted or the hearing will be  adjourned,  depending  on  the
             anticipated timescale of the family proceedings."

 8. At para 15 of the determination, the First-tier Tribunal notes that the
    then Presenting Officer initially invited the Tribunal to  adjourn  the
    deportation appeal pending a final order in  the  contact  proceedings.
    Following a short adjournment, in order for the Presenting  Officer  to
    take further instructions, the Tribunal  records  at  para  18  of  its
    determination that the Presenting Officer then indicated that he  would
    "resist any request for an adjournment despite having urged us  earlier
    to do so."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal then  went  on  to  consider  the  two  options
    offered to it by para 6 of the Protocol, namely whether to adjourn  the
    proceedings to await the outcome of the Family Court proceedings, or to
    allow the appeal to the limited extent that a  short  period  of  leave
    should be granted until those proceedings were resolved.

10. At para 33 of its determination, the First-tier Tribunal set  out  rule
    21(4) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,
    dealing with the Tribunal's discretion to adjourn.   At  para  33,  the
    First-tier Tribunal concluded that it was not  appropriate  to  adjourn
    the hearing for the following reasons:

         "The final hearing in the Yeovil County Court is to  be  listed  on
         the first open date after 11 November which will, in any event,  be
         more than 28 days after the original hearing.


         Given that the only fortnightly indirect contact was ordered  on  4
         September, we have to suppose that any direct contact (if  allowed)
         will  be  introduced  in  gradual  stages   necessitating   further
         hearings.  An adjournment in the deportation proceedings therefore,
         even in the exceptional circumstances of the  contact  proceedings,
         is not likely to be final and, in all  probability,  is  likely  to
         lead to further adjournments over an indeterminate period."

11. The First-tier Tribunal, therefore, decided instead to allow the appeal
    for the following reasons:


         "We concluded therefore that in the interests of justice, we should
         allow the appeal, inviting the  Respondent  to  grant  leave  on  a
         limited basis to allow for the contact proceedings  to  take  their
         full course."


12. That latter conclusion relates  back  to  para  19  of  the  Tribunal's
    determination where it stated as follows:


         "19. With reference to the Protocol, we allowed  the  appeal  under
             Article 8 in anticipation that the Respondent  would  grant  a
             short period of leave to coincide with the conclusion  of  the
             contact  proceedings  in  the  Yeovil  County  Court,  and  we
             recommend that that period will be  for  not  less  than  four
             months."


The Secretary of State's Appeal


13. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On  15  October  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Pooler) granted the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal.
    The basis to that grant is set out in para 3 as follows:


         "It is arguable that the Tribunal erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
         appeal so as to enable the grant of a period of leave during  which
         the contact proceedings were to be concluded.   The  grounds  refer
         also to a failure  to  hear  evidence  and/or  submissions  on  the
         matters in issue (arguably a procedural error), a failure  to  make
         findings on matters in issue, in  particular  in  relation  to  the
         relevant Immigration Rules, and a failure to follow the Protocol on
         Communications between Family  Courts  and  the  IAC.   They  raise
         arguable points."


14. Thus, the appeal came before me.


15. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State,  relied  upon  the
    grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted.


16. Ms Stickler,  who  represented  the  appellant,  submitted  a  detailed
    skeleton argument in advance of the  hearing.   In  that  skeleton,  Ms
    Stickler submitted that the Tribunal had correctly directed  itself  in
    law in applying the Protocol and the relevant case law, namely Mohan  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1363, approving RS (Immigration and  Family  Court
    Proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC).  Further, the Tribunal  had
    given adequate reasons why it would be disproportionate to  remove  the
    Appellant pending a final order in the contact proceedings  which  were
    ongoing.


Discussion


17. In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in  allowing
    the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  limited  basis  that  it  would   be
    disproportionate to remove him  pending  the  outcome  of  the  contact
    proceedings  and  in  order  that  he  could   participate   in   those
    proceedings.


18. First, and as I have already pointed out, the Tribunal referred to para
    6 of the Protocol.  There it is noted that  where  a  decision  in  the
    Family  Court  is  likely  to  be  "a  weighty  consideration"  in  the
    immigration decision, then  it  will  normally  be  necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to wait for that decision either by  allowing  the  appeal  so
    that a short period of leave is granted or to adjourn  the  hearing  in
    order that the family proceedings can be  completed.   Those  were,  in
    essence, the two options open to the Tribunal  unless  the  appellant's
    claim under Art  8  could  not  succeed  on  any  basis  or  where  the
    individual was bound to succeed regardless of the outcome of the family
    proceedings.  Neither of those latter  two  courses  was,  in  reality,
    appropriate in this appeal. Neither course seems to have been  proposed
    by the Presenting Officer.


19. The Tribunal records (at para 15) that the Presenting Officer  accepted
    that:


         "The nature of [the Appellant's] offences  are  not  sufficient  to
         dismiss the appeal. The contact  proceedings  are  "core"  to  your
         decision."


20. The grounds argue that this was  a  misquotation  of  the  respondent's
    position before the Tribunal.  Mr Richards did not draw my attention to
    any material  to  contradict  what  is  recorded  in  para  15  of  the
    Tribunal's determination as a quotation from the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions.  In  any  event,  even  if,  as  the  grounds  argue,  the
    Presenting Officer was merely stating that the Tribunal had to consider
    Art 8 separately from the Rules, the  Tribunal  clearly  (at  para  27)
    determined for itself that the  nature  of  the  appellant's  offences,
    while serious, were not  in  themselves  sufficient  to  determine  the
    appeal against him regardless of a consideration  of  his  relationship
    with his daughter.  With that view, I entirely agree.


21. At para 14, the Tribunal referred to the Court of Appeal's decision  in
    Mohan and set out paras 43-47 of the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  RS
    which had been approved by the Court of Appeal.  The grounds argue that
    the Tribunal failed to make a finding and properly apply the Tribunal's
    guidance in RS, particularly at para 43(iv) and (iii).  Paragraph 43 of
    RS is as follows:


         "43. In our judgment, when a judge sitting in an immigration appeal
             has to consider whether a person with  a  criminal  record  or
             adverse immigration history should be removed or deported when
             there are family proceedings  contemplated  the  judge  should
             consider the following questions:


             i)   Is the outcome of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                  likely to be material to the immigration decision?


             ii)  Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude
                  the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective  of  the
                  outcome of the family proceedings or the best interest  of
                  the child?


             iii) In the  case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
                  appellant in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to
                  believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted
                  to delay or frustrate  removal  and  not  to  promote  the
                  child's welfare?


             iv)  In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally
                  want to consider:  the degree of the  claimant's  previous
                  interest in and contact with  the  child,  the  timing  of
                  contact proceedings and the  commitment  with  which  they
                  have been progressed, when a  decision  is  likely  to  be
                  reached, what materials (if any) are already available  or
                  can be made available to identify pointers  to  where  the
                  child's welfare lies?"


22. The Upper Tribunal continued at para 44 to identify what should then be
    decided having asked those questions as follows.


         "44. Having asked those questions, the  judge  will  then  have  to
             decide:-


             i)   Does the claimant have at least an  Article  8  right  to
                  remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings?


             ii)  If so should the appeal be allowed to  a  limited  extent
                  and a discretionary leave be directed?


             iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a short  period
                  of an  adjournment  to  be  granted  to  enable  the  core
                  decision to be made in the family proceedings?


             iv)  Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a
                  view on the present state  of  knowledge  of  whether  the
                  appellant would be allowed to remain in the event that the
                  outcome of the family proceedings is  the  maintenance  of
                  family contact between him or her  and  a  child  resident
                  here?"


23. At paras 20-32 of its determination, the First-tier  Tribunal  set  out
    its reasons for  concluding  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate pending the resolution of the contact proceedings.  At
    paras 31-32, the Tribunal directly addressed  the  questions  posed  in
    paras 43 and 44 of RS as follows:


         "31. Having regard to the questions posed in paragraph 43 of RS  we
             find that:


             i)   The outcome of the contact proceedings is  likely  to  be
                  material to the deportation decision;


             ii)  There  are  no  compelling  public  interest  reasons  to
                  exclude  the  Appellant  from  the   UK   at   this   time
                  irrespective of the outcome of the contact proceedings  or
                  the best interests  of  the  child.   We  find  that   the
                  Appellant has been at liberty  for  nine  months  and  has
                  observed the terms of his licence and  is  being  and  has
                  been treated for the symptoms of alcohol abuse  and  PTSD,
                  and


             iii) It  has  not  been  suggested  to  us  that  the  contact
                  proceedings were instituted to delay or frustrate  removal
                  and we find that they were not.


         32.  Having  made  those  findings,  we  go  onto  find  (following
             paragraph 44 i) and ii) of RS) that the Appellant has at least
             an Article 8 right to  remain  until  the  conclusion  of  the
             contact proceedings and, accordingly, the appeal is allowed to
             the limited extent identified in paragraph 19 above."


24. First, it is suggested in the grounds that the Tribunal failed to  make
    any finding in relation to question (iv) in para 43 of RS and failed to
    give adequate reasons for its findings in relation to question (iii) of
    RS.  I do not agree.


25. As regards the former, the  Tribunal  did  consider  the  circumstances
    surrounding the contact proceedings  and  the  appellant's  involvement
    with his daughter (see for example paras 7, 25, 29 and 30).  As regards
    the latter, the Tribunal was entitled to conclude, as it  did  in  para
    31(iii), that there was no reason to believe that the  proceedings  had
    been  instituted  to  delay  or  frustrate  the  appellant's   removal.
    Contrary to what is said in  the  grounds,  the  Tribunal  did  make  a
    finding on that matter and, on all the evidence before  it,  it  was  a
    finding that was properly open to the Tribunal.  It needed to  give  no
    further reasons for that finding.


26. Consequently, as can clearly be seen on reading the determination as  a
    whole, the Tribunal fully considered all the evidence and the  relevant
    question posed in RS at para 43.


27. Secondly, the grounds argue that the Tribunal was wrong in law to  find
    that  the  appellant's  removal  (at  least   temporarily)   would   be
    disproportionate warranting a grant of leave.  There  is  no  merit  in
    this  ground.   The  Tribunal  carefully  considered  the   appellant's
    circumstances including  his  offending.   It  was,  as  I  have  said,
    inevitable that the Tribunal would conclude  that  his  offences  alone
    could not justify his deportation without consideration of at least K's
    best interests.  Whether or not the Presenting Officer  submitted  that
    the outcome of the contact proceedings were "core", that  is  precisely
    what they were, and the Tribunal was correct to conclude that any final
    decision in respect of Art 8 and the appellant's deportation required a
    consideration of K's best interests and that in turn drew in the highly
    relevant (or as the Tribunal put it, "weighty considerations")  of  the
    contact  proceedings.   This  kind  of  circumstance  is   simply   not
    contemplated in the Immigration Rule at paras 398-399A.  That  was,  of
    course, according to the Secretary of State's grounds,  the  submission
    made by the Presenting Officer.  As  the  case  law  makes  plain,  the
    Secretary of State's proposition that it  would  be  "inappropriate  to
    grant a period of leave to  a  person  whose  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom is not deemed to be  conducive  to  the  public  good"  is  not
    sustainable (see, for example, RS and Mohan, both automatic deportation
    cases).


28. Each case must turn on its own facts and involve consideration, as  the
    Tribunal did here, of the individual's offending.


29. The Tribunal was entitled to find that the appellant had  "demonstrated
    his intention to settle in the UK".  He had, of  course,  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in April 2010.  The Grounds'  argument  that
    the Tribunal placed "undue weight"  on  this  is  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Tribunal's assessment.  It cannot  be  said  that
    the Tribunal placed an irrational weight upon it and therefore erred in
    law.


30. The main point is that, in the light of the Protocol and RS, the  final
    resolution of whether the appellant could be deported without breaching
    Art 8 could only be resolved in the light of the outcome of the pending
    contact proceedings.  The only rational outcomes for this  appeal  were
    either that it was  adjourned  for  those  contact  proceedings  to  be
    completed or the Tribunal allowed the appeal under Art 8 to the limited
    extent of directing that a short period of leave should be  granted  in
    order that the contact proceedings could be completed.  The  Presenting
    Officer initially argued for an adjournment but then resiled from  that
    position.  The Tribunal declined to adjourn the hearing  and,  entirely
    consistently with the Protocol and RS, concluded that the appeal should
    be allowed on the basis that the appellant's removal before the contact
    proceedings were completed would breach Art  8.   That  was  a  finding
    properly open to the Tribunal  on  the  evidence.   The  Tribunal  gave
    adequate and cogent reasons for its findings and  conclusion.   Nothing
    in the grounds of appeal persuades me that the Tribunal erred in law in
    allowing the appeal under Art 8 on the limited basis that it did.


31. For these reasons,  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.


32. It will, of course, be a matter for  the  Secretary  of  State  if  she
    wishes  to  re-consider  the  Appellant's  position  once  the  contact
    proceedings are resolved.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal only
    applies so long as those proceedings  are  pending  and  the  issue  of
    contact remains finally to be resolved.





                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
