
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01637/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 August 2016                          |On 18 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     sbh
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The appellant is a national of Sweden.  He appealed to a judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order  on  16  August  2014.   The  order  was  made  as  a
    consequence of the appellant being sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment
    on 10 January 2014 for sexual assault of a female child under  the  age
    of 13.

2.   The judge accepted that the appellant had lived in the  United  Kingdom
    since 1997 and that therefore he had resided in the United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  ten
    years which entitled him to the enhanced  protection  from  deportation
    afforded to  EEA  citizens  who  had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom.  The judge noted the  details  of  the
    offence for which the appellant was committed.  A NOMS Report on 3 June
    2014 assessed the risk of serious harm resulting from him committing  a
    further offence of sexual assault as high, and assessed the  likelihood
    of his reconviction as low.

3.   A letter was produced to the Tribunal, written on 20 April 2016 by  the
    appellant's probation officer.  I shall return to this in  due  course,
    but it is sufficient for now to say that it emphasised the high risk of
    serious harm that the appellant posed, giving  some  detail  for  this.
    The judge noted that no evidence had been  provided  of  the  appellant
    engaging with offending-related programmes in  prison  and  that  there
    were no rehabilitation elements in the criminal licence restrictions to
    which he was subject.  The judge noted that efforts had  been  made  by
    the representatives and by him to elicit  detailed  evidence  from  the
    appellant as to the work he was doing with  his  probation  officer  to
    identify and avoid risk situations but he had  failed  to  provide  any
    such  detailed  evidence  even  when  led.   He  considered  that   the
    appellant's demeanour throughout the hearing  did  not  demonstrate  an
    appropriate understanding of the seriousness of his  offending  or  the
    importance of the rehabilitation which it  was  necessary  for  him  to
    undertaken.  He considered that this assessment had been borne  out  by
    the comments made by the probation officer in her  letter.   The  judge
    went on to consider the issue of rehabilitation, and again  this  is  a
    matter to which I shall return  in  greater  detail  subsequently.   He
    recognised that the starting point for an EEA national with a permanent
    right of residence was that removal could not take place unless it  was
    on imperative grounds of public security.  He was  satisfied  that  the
    facts of this case were such as to amount to an  imperative  ground  of
    public security.  He went on to consider proportionality and Article  8
    of the ECHR in a further section of the decision which  again  I  shall
    have to return to.  There was thereafter a consideration of the  family
    life and private life and the conclusion of  the  judge  was  that  the
    appeal fell to be dismissed under the  EEA  Regulations  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

4.   Permission to appeal was sought, and granted, on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had erred in a variety of respects including failing to  consider
    proportionality under EU law as opposed to under the ECHR,  Article  8,
    misdirected himself in law in taking account of  public  revulsion  and
    general deterrence when assessing the  imperative  grounds,  failed  to
    take into account relevant factors, in particular failing to take  into
    account that his rehabilitation  programme  had  begun  in  the  United
    Kingdom and needed to continue in this country, giving undue weight  to
    the letter from the probation officer.

5.   Mr Khubber relied on and amplified the points made in the grounds.   He
    argued that the judge had failed fundamentally to apply the relevant EU
    provisions concerning deportation to the  particular  circumstances  of
    the case.  The judge had accepted that the  appellant  had  established
    entitlement to enhanced  protection.   The  proportionality  evaluation
    under EU law was not the same as  the  proportionality  question  under
    Article 8 and in particular when it was accepted that the appellant was
    entitled to the highest level  of  protection.   This  was  clear  from
    authorities such as Straszweski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 and in  particular
    in the judge's reliance on  matters  such  as  "public  revulsion"  and
    "social abhorrence" at paragraphs  57  and  59  of  the  decision.   Mr
    Khubber argued that the key question in a case where the highest  level
    of protection had been established was whether there was  a  likelihood
    of further similar offending.  The judge appeared to have confused risk
    of offending and the kind of harm that might be occasioned.   The  risk
    was a low one and that was of significance albeit that if harm occurred
    it would be serious harm and it was necessary under Regulation 21(5)(c)
    of the EEA Regulations to show  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat.   Realistically, imperative grounds had not  been  made
    out where he had  been  assessed  as  being  at  a  low  likelihood  of
    reoffending  and  that  was  reinforced  by  his  subsequent  lack   of
    reoffending.  The factors relevant to proportionality  which  had  been
    set out in the skeleton guidance before the judge had  not  been  taken
    into account.

6.    The  judge  had  also  misdirected  himself  on   the   relevance   of
    rehabilitation.  He was incorrect in concluding that the appellant  was
    not engaging with  his  rehabilitation  and  had  again  conflated  two
    different issues, whether he  had  actually  become  rehabilitated  and
    whether he needed to continue with the current existing  rehabilitation
    programme in the United Kingdom.  A further point was that taking  into
    account his demeanour was irrelevant.  It was important to bear in mind
    that with regard to the comment that  no  evidence  had  been  provided
    concerning his engagement with offending related programmes in  prison,
    it had been shown to the judge that the appellant had applied  for  the
    thinking skills programme to assist him with future conduct but he  had
    been told that because he was a prisoner who was assessed as presenting
    below a certain level of risk he could not be  considered  for  such  a
    programme.  Also the judge had attached undue weight to the letter from
    the probation officer provided a day before the hearing.   Less  weight
    should have been given to it  because  it  had  not  been  possible  to
    explore fully its contents that would have been possible if it had been
    provided earlier, and in particular  none  of  the  documentation  upon
    which the assessment was based had been provided.  It was  also  argued
    that the judge had not adequately engaged with Article  8.   There  was
    confusion between the finding that the appellant was not  socially  and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom and the  acceptance  that
    he was entitled to the highest level of protection because  of  his  EU
    law rights.  The strength and quality of his family  and  private  life
    had not been properly appreciated.

7.   In his submissions Mr Whitwell relied upon the Rule  24  response.   He
    argued that the fact that  the  heading  to  paragraph  60  to  63  was
    "Proportionality - Article 8 ECHR" was no more than a typographical  or
    formatting error and one had to look to the substance of what was  said
    there.  The core question was the risk of relevant reoffending which it
    was said was not inconsistent with the existence of  the  two  separate
    legal regimes.  It was not always inappropriate to take account of such
    matters as public revulsion and deterrence as could be seen  from  what
    had been said in Straszewski.  Each case turned on its own facts.

8.   With regard to the letter from the  probation  officer  the  point  was
    that it had to be seen in context.  She had felt it necessary to  write
    to the Home Office because despite the low risk  of  reoffending,  more
    needed to be said.  It was clear from paragraph 58  that  a  number  of
    factors had been taken into account going to reconviction.   Paragraphs
    52 and 53 should be read in terms of risk of reconviction  as  well  as
    harm.  The matters complained of  were  points  of  disagreement  only.
    With regard to rehabilitation it was a question of  how  one  read  the
    evidence.  Paragraph 53 was not concerned only with demeanour but there
    were other relevant matters contained there as  well.   The  judge  had
    found that the appellant had not actively engaged with the  UK  process
    that it would be all right to return him to Sweden.  He had not engaged
    with the process in spirit.  It was a question of the extent to which a
    person could ever be rehabilitated for this kind of offence.  Paragraph
    63 needed to be read as a whole.  There had been no application for  an
    adjournment to mitigate the effects of the letters from  the  probation
    officer, and weight was a matter for the judge.

9.    By  way  of  reply  Mr  Khubber  argued  that  the  determination  was
    structurally flawed and it could not just be taken in the round.  There
    was a flaw in the lack of evaluation  of  the  relevant  factors  under
    Regulation 21(5)(c).  As regards the letter from the probation officer,
    the questions with which she was concerned were not the same  as  those
    with which the Tribunal was concerned.  The latter had to consider  the
    relevant legal questions and this was crucial, referring as it  did  to
    the actuality of risk.  It was important to note that  the  process  of
    rehabilitation had begun and was continuing.  The question was  whether
    that would be  compromised.   The  judge  had  confused  two  different
    issues.   The  fact  was  that  the   appellant   was   engaging   with
    rehabilitation and there was a low risk of reoffending.   The  Tribunal
    was taken to passages in Straszewski and also in I [2012] QE 799.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  It is clear from, inter alia, the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Straszewski, that in a case where the removal of an  EEA  national  who
    has acquired a permanent right of residence in the  United  Kingdom  is
    contemplated, on the grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security,
    significant importance is to be attached to the right of free  movement
    which can be only interfered with where he represents a serious  threat
    affecting some aspect of public policy or public security and,  in  the
    case of a person such as the appellant in this case, that there must be
    imperative grounds of public security where it is accepted that he  has
    resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for  a
    continuous period of ten years.

12.  At paragraphs 11 to 20 the Court of Appeal considered the relevance  of
    matters such as deterrence and public revulsion in such  a  case.   The
    decision to remove an EEA national who  enjoys  a  permanent  right  of
    residence must be based exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  the
    person concerned.  Though cases such as Bouchereau [1978]  QB  732  and
    Marchon [1993] IAR 384 took into account elements  of  deterrence,  the
    Court of Appeal in Straszewski could see some  force  in  the  argument
    that Marchon could no longer be regarded as representing Community law.
     It went on to say at paragraph 20 that save  in  exceptional  cases  a
    serious threat to an aspect of public policy or public security was  to
    be determined solely by reference to the conduct of  the  offender  (no
    doubt viewed  in  the  context  of  any  previous  offending)  and  the
    likelihood of reoffending.  General considerations  of  deterrence  and
    public revulsion normally had no part to play in the matter.

13.  The passages which are challenged  in  the  judge's  decision  in  this
    regard are essentially paragraphs 57 and 58.  Paragraph 57 begins  with
    a reference to Article 83(1) of the TFEU concerning  sexual  abuse  and
    exploitation of children and the  serious  nature  of  those  offences.
    This was also apparent from the UN Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the
    Child and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.  The
    judge went on to say that the national court is entitled to find  that,
    according to the particular values of the legal  order  of  the  Member
    State in which it had jurisdiction, offences such  as  those  committed
    pose a  direct  threat  to  the  calm  and  physical  security  of  the
    population.   The judge went on to say that  the  public  revulsion  at
    such offences is a significant factor, as is the fact that the  elderly
    appellant received a sentence of immediate imprisonment for what was  a
    first offence.  At paragraph 59 the judge recognised that the  starting
    point for an EEA national with a permanent right of residence was  that
    removal might not take place unless on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security.  He said that public  security  included  the  protection  of
    children from sexual assault and, because of the social  abhorrence  at
    such offences, and the vulnerability of the victims  on  the  long-term
    impact of such violence, he was satisfied that this was  an  imperative
    ground of public security.

14.  It has been argued that there  are  difficulties  with  both  of  these
    paragraphs.  They place express reliance on,  in  paragraph  57  public
    revulsion, and in paragraph 59 social abhorrence, with  regard  to  the
    former the public revulsion at such offences was described as  being  a
    significant factor.  As regards paragraph 59, what was said can however
    be reconciled to legal principle by the fact that it was a remark  made
    in the context of considering whether  or  not  there  were  imperative
    grounds of public security in this case.  That was a matter  considered
    in I where among other things the court  said  that  criminal  offences
    which  constituted  a  particularly  serious  threat  to  one  of   the
    fundamental interests of society or which posed a direct threat to  the
    calm and physical security of the  population  might  fall  within  the
    concept of "imperative grounds of  public  security"  as  long  as  the
    manner in which such offences  were  committed  disclosed  particularly
    serious characteristics.  One can  see  also  from  paragraph  57  some
    reflection of this in the reference there to a  direct  threat  to  the
    calm and physical security of  the  population.   I  do  not  read  the
    conclusion on what is meant by imperative grounds of public security as
    precluding taking into account in the consideration of whether  or  not
    conduct crosses the threshold elements of public revulsion  and  social
    abhorrence.   It  is  a  different   question   from   the   issue   of
    proportionality, and of course, as the Court of Appeal  in  Straszewski
    emphasised at paragraph 24, it is worth noting  that  even  in  a  case
    where it is  considered  that  removal  is  prima  facie  justified  on
    imperative  grounds  of  public  security,  the   decision-maker   must
    consider, among other things, whether the offender has a propensity  to
    reoffend in a similar way.

15.  It is relevant to note that the subsequent  paragraphs  i.e.  paragraph
    60 to 63 purport to be concerned with proportionality and Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  It is also relevant to note that the  passages  set  out  at
    paragraphs 57 to 59 are part of the section headed "Imperative  Grounds
    of  Public  Security".   The  judge  at  paragraph  60  said  that   no
    deportation  of  the  appellant  could  take  place   unless   it   was
    proportionate and based exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  the
    appellant which represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  That  is
    clearly uncontroversial, and it  is  also  relevant  to  note  that  at
    paragraph 61 the judge made it clear that in arriving at  his  decision
    he had not taken into account considerations of general  prevention  of
    the  commission  of  such  offences  nor  matters  isolated  from   the
    particulars of the index offence nor had he reached his decision  based
    solely or mainly upon the commission of the  index  offence.   He  made
    clear his understanding that it was  the  present  risk  posed  by  the
    appellant which was the appropriate factor.  He went on to say that for
    the reasons he had mentioned above he was satisfied that  the  personal
    conduct of the appellant both in the commission of the offence  and  in
    his subsequent reaction to attempted rehabilitation led him to conclude
    that he represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    to one of the fundamental interests of society, namely  the  prevention
    of crime and the protection of children from sexual violence.

16.   In  my  view  that  is  a  perfectly  adequate   evaluation   of   the
    proportionality issue in this case.  It was properly open to the  judge
    in my view to attach the weight  he  did  to  the  probation  officer's
    letter.  No doubt a key component of the evaluation to be made  is  the
    level of risk, but I consider that it was properly open to the judge to
    factor into that evaluation a high risk of serious harm should low risk
    be triggered.  I do not consider that it was  wrong  of  the  judge  to
    attach weight to the letter from the probation officer.  As Mr Whitwell
    argued, she clearly felt a compulsion to make the point she did.  It is
    relevant to note the following from her letter:

         "The nature of the  risk  is  of  sexual  harm  and  the  resulting
         emotional trauma which could be long  lasting.   The  dynamic  risk
         factors  that  have  led  to  this  assessment  are  HX's  apparent
         capability  to  orchestrate  lone   contact   with   children,   as
         demonstrated  at  the  time  of  the  offence  and  his   lack   of
         understanding of the way in which relationship and  other  personal
         difficulties can contribute to sexual offending, leading in turn to
         a lack of internal controls.   HX  has  also  demonstrated  only  a
         limited understanding of the impact that sexual offending can  have
         upon children and has minimised the seriousness of his offence.  He
         has  also  struggled  to  take  responsibility  for  his  offending
         behaviour."

     I do not agree with Mr Khubber that  the  probation  officer  could  be
    said to have fallen into the trap of relating her remarks only  to  the
    nature of the offence committed.  She clearly had other concerns as are
    set out in the final two sentences of the quotation set above about his
    ongoing attitude.

17.  It was also relevant to  note  the  lack  of  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's engagement with offending  related  programmes  in  prison.
    The point that  Mr  Khubber  makes  about  the  course  for  which  the
    appellant was not eligible is not without relevance, but this has to be
    seen in the context of the judge's findings at paragraph 53  about  the
    appellant's failure to provide detailed evidence as to the work he  was
    doing with his probation officer to identify and avoid risk  situations
    and the fact that he did not appear to appreciate the  significance  of
    this type of evidence.  The judge was entitled to  comment  as  he  did
    about the appellant's demeanour, and also to  consider  that  that  was
    borne out by the probation officer's remarks in her letter.

18.  As regards the  issue  of  rehabilitation,  Mr  Khubber's  argument  in
    essence is that because rehabilitation has been commenced it  would  be
    wrong not to allow it to continue in the United  Kingdom.   This  again
    has to be seen in the light of the judge's remarks at paragraph  53  in
    the probation officer's letter.  It is not irrelevant that if he is not
    effectively engaging with  rehabilitation  in  this  country  then  his
    removal  would  not  interfere  with  such  rehabilitation   and   such
    rehabilitation as there is could continue  in  Sweden.   There  was  no
    application to adjourn in respect of the  probation  officer's  letter,
    and I consider that the fact that it  was  not  backed  up  by  further
    evidence does not diminish the weight to which the judge  was  entitled
    to attach to it.  It was a professional opinion provided  by  a  person
    who has been the appellant's probation officer for some period of time.
     It is relevant to note from paragraph 27 that he sees her every  week.



19.  Nor do I  see  any  arguable  error  with  respect  to  the  Article  8
    evaluation.   The  challenge  here   is   essentially   a   matter   of
    disagreement.  The fact that paragraph 63 is tagged on as  it  were  to
    the proportionality evaluation is a consequence of  the  rather  untidy
    structuring of that part of  the  judge's  decision.   I  am  satisfied
    however that paragraph 63 has to be seen as a  separate  evaluation  of
    proportionality  in  the  context  of  Article  8  as  opposed  to  the
    evaluation in the context of EU law at paragraphs 60 to 62.

20.  Bringing these matters together, I consider that the challenge  to  the
    decision has not been  made  out.   Although  the  structuring  of  the
    decision of the judge could have been clearer, I am satisfied  that  he
    did give an appropriate consideration to proportionality under  EU  law
    in the context of the relevant tests.  He did  not  take  into  account
    irrelevant matters in that evaluation, and  the  remarks  about  public
    revulsion and social abhorrence were in the context of deciding whether
    or not the offence was one such as to give rise to  imperative  grounds
    of public security, a conclusion to which it was open to the  judge  to
    come.  The evaluation of the rehabilitation issue was properly open  to
    the judge, and no effective challenge is made out  in  respect  of  the
    Article 8 findings either.  As a consequence I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge did not materially err in law in his decision  and  his  decision
    dismissing the appeal is maintained.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 18 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



