
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: dA/01272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    s n d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Watterson, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, SND, was born  in  August  1977  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica.  She appeals against the decision by the respondent to make  a
    deportation order in respect of her.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge  M
    J Gillespie; Mrs Lydia Schmitt) dismissed the appeal on all grounds  in
    a decision promulgated on 19 March 2015.  The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. As I told the representatives at the  hearing  at  Field  House  on  11
    January 2016, I find that the grounds of appeal  have  merit.   I  have
    concluded that the Tribunal erred in law such that its  decision  falls
    to be set aside.  I shall briefly give my reasons for that decision.

 3. The first ground of appeal challenges the Tribunal's  approach  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim  to  having  been  gang  raped  on
    account of her brother's involvement with a notorious gang  in  Jamaica
    (the Evil Blacks).  The Tribunal had before it a report of Dr Cohen who
    found that there was "very strong evidence of multiple serious assaults
    having occurred" to the appellant.  It was clear from the  report  that
    the injuries were the likely consequence of a violent  sexual  assault.
    Ms Watterson, for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had
    rejected the appellant's credibility before taking consideration of  Dr
    Cohen's evidence.  I agree.  The Tribunal stated at [49]  that  it  had
    "serious reservations as to the viability of Dr  Cohen's  findings"  on
    account of the "mendacious inventiveness of the  appellant  upon  which
    these findings have been formulated."  The  Tribunal  appears  to  have
    overlooked the fact that Dr Cohen had been instructed  specifically  to
    give  expert  evidence  in  relation  to  physical  injuries   on   the
    appellant's body.  That these injuries existed appears not to have been
    in doubt so it is  unclear  why  the  appellant's  alleged  "mendacious
    inventiveness" should have had any affect upon the manner in  which  Dr
    Cohen described the physical  injuries  which  she  discovered  on  the
    appellant's body.  This is not, of course, to say that the injuries may
    not have been sustained for reasons other than those described  by  the
    appellant in her  evidence;  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  (with
    evident reluctance) that the appellant had, at some time, been sexually
    assaulted. However, the Tribunal's reasoning gives the firm  impression
    that it had concluded that the appellant's case was without credibility
    even before it set about reading Dr Cohen's report.  By  doing  so,  it
    fell into serious error (see Mibanga (2005) EWCA Civ 36 ).

 4. I observe that the language  used  throughout  the  decision  does  not
    exactly give an indication that the Tribunal has taken an  open-minded,
    even-handed approach to  the  evidence.   There  are  passages  of  the
    decision bearing headings  such  as  "Other  Indications  of  Falsity",
    "Another Example Indicative of  Untruthfulness"  and  (more  obscurely)
    "Belated and Colourable (sic) Evolution of  the  Allegation  of  Rape."
    The use of such language by way of the prefacing  of  analysis  of  the
    evidence does little to convey the impression of impartiality and open-
    mindedness on the part of the decision maker.

 5. At [45], the Tribunal even goes so far as to find  that  the  appellant
    has lied regarding advice she received from  her  solicitors  following
    her conviction in a Criminal Court.  The Tribunal wrote that,
         "... we regard as fabrication the statement by the  appellant  that
         she has been advised legal representatives that  she  will  not  be
         given an effective sentence following  her  recent  conviction  but
         will have some suspended punishment ... we do not accept that  such
         advice would be likely to be professionally given  or  communicated
         to the appellant."

    As it transpired, the appellant did receive  a  suspended  sentence  in
    line with the advice of her solicitors.   It  is  not  clear  from  the
    decision why the Tribunal considered that it was in a  better  position
    than the solicitors to  second-guess  the  likely  sentence  which  the
    appellant would receive.  Once again, the impression  is  given  of  an
    analysis of the evidence which was  subjective  and  possibly  partisan
    rather than clinical and objective.

 6. It was the appellant's account that she had been  targeted  for  sexual
    assault on account of her brother's gangster activities with the  "Evil
    Blacks".  The Tribunal has failed to make an assessment of the risk  to
    the appellant of returning to Jamaica as the sister of  this  notorious
    gang  member.   The  Upper  Tribunal,  considering  an  appeal  of  the
    appellant's brother, had found that, despite his absence  from  Jamaica
    for twelve years, "he could not pass unnoticed for long  in  any  large
    town in Jamaica."  In consequence, the Upper Tribunal  found  that  the
    brother would be at risk on return.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    present appeal failed properly  to  engage  with  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's case.

 7. Finally, the Tribunal found that care arrangements for the  appellant's
    child (K) would be likely to break down and that it was not in K's best
    interests for him to be in the care of his mother and father.   As  the
    grounds point out, that finding was entirely  contrary  to  conclusions
    reached by the Family Court.  The Tribunal sought to justify  taking  a
    different approach from the Family Court  because  "the  situation  has
    developed" [66] but,  as  Ms  Watterson  submitted,  the  only  obvious
    "development" has been the appellant's most recent  criminal  offending
    which took place in April 2014, that is before the proceedings  in  the
    Family Court were concluded.  I find that the Tribunal  has  reached  a
    finding as regards the best interests of  the  child  without  properly
    explaining why that finding differs from that of the Family Court which
    had before it substantially the same evidence. Its  failure  to  do  so
    amounts to an error of law.

 8.  In  the  circumstances,  I  set  aside   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination.  Further detailed fact-finding  is  required  because  I
    also set aside all of the findings of fact of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is, therefore, necessary for the matter to be returned to the First-
    tier Tribunal and for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 19 March 2015 is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  matter  is  returned
to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Gillespie/Mrs  Schmitt)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 28 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
