
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th February, 2014                         |On 28th February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          James Felipe Christiansen

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr McIndoe, Solicitor, Latitude Law Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  to
    whom I shall refer in this determination as the "claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of the United States of  America,  who  was
    born on 10th November, 1978.

Immigration History

3.   The respondent was  born  in  Nicaragua  and  adopted  by  Mr  and  Mrs
    Christiansen.  On 5th March, 1980, Mr and  Mrs  Christiansen  took  the
    respondent to the United States of America, where  he  was  naturalised
    and became a United States citizen in  the  state  of  Wisconsin.   His
    adoptive parents then divorced and his mother was  granted  custody  of
    the respondent.  The respondent's mother then decided to return to  the
    United Kingdom, bringing the respondent with her and  the  respondent's
    United States passport stamped  with  indefinite  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom on 3rd November, 1983, when he entered.

4.   The respondent has remained in the United Kingdom ever since.

5.   On 13th  April,  2011,  the  respondent  was  committed  for  trial  to
    Caernarfon Crown Court for the supply of  a  controlled  drug  Class  A
    heroin and for possessing with intent  to  supply  a  controlled  drug,
    Class B cannabis resin.  On 15th April, 2011, he was convicted  on  one
    count of offering to supply a Class B controlled drug, namely cannabis,
    two counts of possession with intent to supply a controlled drug, Class
    B cannabis, and two counts of possessing a Class C controlled drug with
    intent to supply.

6.   On 11th October, 2011, the  respondent  was  convicted  at  Mold  Crown
    Court of possession with intent to supply a controlled  drug  Class  A,
    namely heroin.  On 12th October, 2011, the respondent was sentenced  at
    Mold Crown Court for the convictions on 15th April  and  11th  October,
    2011, and was sentenced to a total of four years' imprisonment.

7.   On 4th April, 2012, the respondent was notified  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation.  A deportation order was made on 20th June, 2013
    which  was  subsequently  served  with  a  letter  giving  reasons  for
    deportation dated 24th June, 2013.

8.   The respondent appealed and his appeal was heard  by  a  panel  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney sitting with Dr
    de Barros) who, in a determination promulgated on  7th  November,  2013
    allowed the respondent's appeal.

9.   The respondent challenged the appeal  and  leave  was  granted  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the panel  erred  in  failing  to  have
    adequate consideration to  the  risk  of  re-offending,  the  need  for
    deterrence and the public interest.  In granting permission, First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Astle said that all grounds may be argued.

10.  The first challenge suggested that the  panel  allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, but there was no  asylum  aspect  of  the  respondent's
    claim.  Mr Harrison agreed with me and it is perfectly clear  from  the
    determination that the respondent had a deportation appeal on the basis
    of his Article 8 human rights claim and, where the  panel  referred  at
    the end of the determination to "the asylum appeal  is  allowed",  that
    was clearly a typing error.  He accepted  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
    refer to asylum anywhere in the body of the determination and  all  the
    determination was concerned solely  with  the  respondent's  Article  8
    rights and his deportation appeal.

11.  It was then suggested that the  Tribunal's  findings  were  flawed  and
    should be set aside.  Mr Harrison agreed that the typing error  at  the
    end of the determination did not justify my setting aside  the  panel's
    findings.

12.  The grounds went on to suggest that the panel  erred  by  finding  that
    the respondent had no ties in the United States and point out that  the
    respondent's father lives in the United States.  Mr Harrison  suggested
    that it was  really  a  question  of  degree.   He  accepted  that  the
    respondent had not seen his father for  some  fifteen  years  and  that
    there was no evidence that the respondent  had  any  friends  or  other
    relatives in the United States or that he had ever been educated there.

13.  Mr Harrison told me he did not rely on the second challenge.   I  asked
    Mr Harrison whether the third  challenge  was  not  in  fact  a  simple
    disagreement with the judge's decision.  He told me that he had nothing
    further that he felt he could usefully add.

14.  Having carefully read the determination and the papers in  this  appeal
    before the hearing of the appeal I advised Mr McIndoe that  I  did  not
    need to hear from him.

15.  I am satisfied, having carefully read the determination  in  the  light
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department's grounds of  appeal,
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not make any error on a point of  law.



16.   At  paragraph  4  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  set  out  the
    requirements of Section 32(v)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and  at
    paragraph 5, it set out the terms of Article  8.   The  panel  reminded
    itself of the words of Lord Bingham at paragraph 17  of  R  (Razgar)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC  368  and  noted
    that it was agreed between the parties that the issue for the  Tribunal
    was  the  question  of  proportionality.   The  panel   then   properly
    considered paragraph 339A of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,
    HC 395, as amended  ("the  Immigration  Rules").   It  noted  that  the
    claimant accepted that the respondent spent over twenty  years  in  the
    United States, but  claimed  that  the  respondent  did  have  ties  to
    America.  The Tribunal reviewed all the evidence, including documentary
    evidence submitted, and noted submissions made to  it.   It  found  the
    evidence of the respondent and his mother both,

         "credible and convincing."

     The Tribunal noted statements  from  the  respondent's  father  and  Ms
    Toole and from the respondent's uncle.  In relation to the respondent's
    convictions they said, at paragraph 31:-

         "The fact remains however that the respondent has been found guilty
         of a most serious offence.  That is an offence which the respondent
         quite rightly regards as abhorrent to the public as well as putting
         the public at risk.  Further the feature which the sentencing judge
         took into account was that this happened whilst the respondent  was
         on bail.  We have therefore taken full account of the crimes  which
         the respondent has committed and the intention  of  the  respondent
         both to protect the public and to  send  out  a  clear  message  to
         anyone contemplating criminality as a foreign  national  that  they
         will be deported."

17.  The Tribunal noted that the respondent had lived in the United  Kingdom
    for some 29 years and that he had last visited his father when  he  was
    between 10 and 12 years of age.  He apparently keeps in touch with  his
    father, but has not seen him for some fifteen years.  I believe that on
    the evidence before them  they  were  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent had no social or cultural ties with the United States.  They
    noted at paragraph 36:-

         "In regarding 'family ties' we think that the  respondent  intended
         something more than an Article 8 reference  to  family  life.   Had
         they intended family life we believe that they would have stated so
         in the Rules.  Therefore the  fact  that  the  [respondent]  has  a
         father in the United States does not necessarily  mean  that  there
         needs to be family life with that father in the United States.   We
         note however that the [respondent] has not seen his father for some
         fifteen years and when he did last see him that was in  the  United
         States but  was  in  St  Lucia.   This  may  not  be  important  in
         establishing whether or not he had family ties but it  reemphasises
         our decision that he has no social or  cultural  ties  in  America,
         given that even when he  last  saw  his  father  that  was  not  in
         America."

18.  That may  not  have  been  the  most  elegant  way  of  expressing  the
    Tribunal's view. The Tribunal  considered  carefully  the  respondent's
    position with regard to social, cultural or family ties with the United
    States and whilst it may be noted that the respondent's father lived in
    the United States it also noted that they were not  particularly  close
    and had not seen each other in  some  fifteen  years.   The  respondent
    himself had been in the United Kingdom since the age of 5 and had never
    returned  to  the  United  States.   He  had  effectively  severed  all
    connection with the United States save for the  fact  that  his  father
    lived there.  The respondent and his father  are  not  close  and  have
    clearly not been close for many years.  The respondent was  brought  up
    by his mother, latterly in the United Kingdom and I  believe  that  the
    Tribunal were entitled to find as they did.  The Tribunal went to add:-

         "We note that whilst initially the [respondent's] father came  over
         to see him in the United Kingdom this seems to have ceased when the
         [respondent] in effect became an adult.  They now  appear  to  have
         contact  on  a  Christmas,  birthday  cards   and   odd   telephone
         conversations basis."

19.  The Tribunal  noted  that  the  respondent  had  provided  evidence  of
    cultural and social ties to the United Kingdom and they did not believe
    that the respondent's building skills and knowledge  would  necessarily
    easily transfer to the United States.  I assume that  this  is  because
    building regulation control, building materials,  and  building  design
    and construction is not necessarily the same in America as it is in the
    United Kingdom.

20.  At  paragraph  40  of  the  determination,  the  Tribunal  referred  to
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60  and  concluded
    that the respondent did not have family ties in the United States.

21.  Under the heading at the end of the determination "Decision"  reference
    is made to "the asylum appeal is allowed" but as  Mr  Harrison  pointed
    out, it is clear from the body of the determination that  the  Tribunal
    were dealing with the respondent's deportation  appeal  and  Article  8
    human rights and this reference is clearly taken in error.

23.  I do not believe there is  any  merit  in  the  third  challenge  which
    suggests that the panel failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the
    respondent's criminality, risk of offending,  and  public  interest  in
    deportation.  The panel demonstrated  that  they  have  considered  the
    judge's sentencing remarks and they did note the very serious nature of
    the offences.  However, they were faced with a respondent who has spent
    his entire adult life in the United Kingdom.

24.  I have concluded that the Tribunal did not err in its  decision,  which
    I uphold.  The respondent's appeal is allowed.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
