
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01846/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2015                      |10 July 2015                         |
|Ex tempore judgment                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                 ivan ovsak
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnyez, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Slovakia, born on  5  October  1987.   He
    comes before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal involving his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
    dated 15 July 2014 to make a deportation order against him.

 2. That decision was a response to  criminal  offences  committed  by  the
    appellant, in particular offences of  theft,  interference  with  motor
    vehicles  and  fraud  by   false   representations   which,   including
    implementation of a suspended sentence, resulted in a total sentence 13
    months' imprisonment on 6 March 2014 at Ballymena Magistrates' Court.

 3. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S.  T.  Fox  on  20
    November 2014 whereby he dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations
    and under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The decision to  make  a  deportation
    order  was  subject  to  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") because  the  appellant  is  a
    citizen  of  Slovakia.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  number  of
    findings.  I summarise them as follows.

 4. They were that the appellant's criminal record is not  in  dispute  and
    that it was conceded by the appellant that when he entered  the  UK  in
    2006 he already had  a  drug  problem.   It  seemed  to  have  been  an
    established fact or an agreement between  the  parties  (the  appellant
    having been represented before the First-tier Tribunal) that he had not
    established permanent residency because, so the  First-tier  judge  put
    it, he had not been in the UK for 10 years.  There was consideration by
    the judge of an apparent waiver by the appellant of the wish to  remain
    in the UK, he having  apparently  communicated  to  the  respondent  an
    intention to return to Slovakia.

 5. Judge Fox concluded that the appellant was motivated to  commit  crimes
    without any fear or conscience.  It was also concluded that he had  not
    engaged in any rehabilitation programmes whilst in prison or since  his
    release. It was also found at [26] that he does not give any indication
    that he intends to engage with any rehabilitation services as he  feels
    they would be of no  use  to  him.   The  judge  found  that  that  was
    significant.  He concluded that although the appellant had  resided  in
    the UK for approximately eight years, "his offending mitigates  against
    any reasonable degree of integration that might apply to him."

 6. At [27] it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  worked  for  some
    employers but he had also been unemployed for considerable  periods  of
    time.  The appellant apparently had a history of  not  turning  up  for
    work "when the mood struck him".  Judge Fox felt that that may have had
    something to do with his drug-related problems.  He concluded that  the
    appellant will not, and could not, fully integrate into UK society.  He
    found that there were rehabilitation services available in Slovakia but
    it  was  his  conclusion  that  the  appellant  did  not  want  to   be
    rehabilitated.

 7. There is reference at [30] to the absence of the appellant's stepfather
    from the bail hearing. This was found  to  be  significant  because  he
    referred to the opportunities that the appellant has  had  through  his
    family to assist him, preventing him from re-offending.   He  concluded
    that the appellant had no  realistic  proposal  of  family  support  to
    assist in his rehabilitation.   He  further  found  at  [32]  that  the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate that he would be influenced to  any
    degree at all by his family.  Although the appellant had said  that  he
    would shortly be obtaining employment, Judge Fox concluded  that  there
    was no evidence before him that that assertion had any weight.  At [35]
    is a finding that the prospects of rehabilitation could not  constitute
    a significant factor in the balancing exercise.

 8. He went on to refer to links that the appellant has with  Slovakia  and
    at [36] said that he accepted that the appellant's present links do not
    appear to be strong apart from his nationality and ability to speak the
    language. That single factor did not suffice to outweigh the other ones
    to which he had referred.

 9. In relation to the risk of re-offending the judge stated at  [45]  that
    the probation report is indicative of a moderate risk  of  re-offending
    and that the appellant displayed no willingness to submit to family  or
    state control.  In the same paragraph it was found that  the  appellant
    had not established that he is a "reformed character".  In the light of
    those findings the appeal was dismissed.

10. The grounds of appeal are wide-ranging and make a number of points.   I
    can say at the outset, as I indicated to the parties  at  the  hearing,
    that it seems to me that there is considerable force in a number of the
    points made in the grounds.  I will deal with some but not all of them.



11. In the grounds it is said that the judge misdirected himself whereby he
    stated that the burden of proof lies on  the  appellant  to  show  that
    returning to Slovakia would expose him to a risk of persecution for one
    of the five Refugee Convention grounds or to a breach of his  protected
    human rights or rights under the Immigration Rules.  It  is  said  that
    the judge ought to  have  had  regard  to  regulation  21  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and in particular reg.21(5)(c).  There was no reference  in
    the determination to  reg.21  at  all.   I  agree;  there  is  no  such
    reference.

12. Significantly it is said in the grounds that the  burden  lies  on  the
    respondent to prove that the appellant constitutes a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society and that it was necessary for  the  respondent  to
    justify interference with the appellant's EU rights.  It  is  asserted,
    and again I agree, that the judge did not grapple with that feature  of
    the EEA Regulations, or the standard or burden of proof.

13. During the course of the determination it is to be noted that the judge
    at [5] referred to the Refugee Convention which plainly has no part  to
    play in this appeal.  At [19] it is stated that

         "The Respondent denies that removal of the Appellant, in accordance
         with any subsequently issued removal directions, would be in breach
         of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  either  under   the   1951
         Convention, the 1950 Convention, or the Immigration Rules".

14. Again the reference to the Refugee Convention is misplaced, although at
    [40] it is noted that the appellant does not advance a claim under  the
    1951 Convention.

15. The grounds refer to alleged mistakes in relation to material facts  as
    to the appellant's family in the UK.  Mistakes of  fact  sometimes  can
    give rise to an error of law but not always. However, in  this  case  a
    significant feature of  the  determination  is  what  appears  at  [13]
    whereby it is stated that the appellant was subject to a total sentence
    of 30 months' imprisonment for his latest offences, whereas in fact the
    sentence was 13 months' imprisonment.  That is significant  because  at
    [35] one sees that in the last  sentence  the  judge  stated  that  his
    offences are properly deemed serious.  Whilst  not  doubting  that  his
    offences are to be  regarded  as  serious,  it  is  difficult  to  have
    confidence that the judge  was  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  latest
    sentence of imprisonment was one of 13 months' imprisonment and not  30
    months.

16. Similarly, at [47] it is stated that "the offences  have  escalated  in
    nature and it is reasonable to assume that they would  continue  to  do
    so."  Again if the judge was  right  that  a  sentence  of  30  months'
    imprisonment had been imposed it would probably be correct to say  that
    the offences had escalated in nature. However, it is not apparent  that
    the judge made that assessment in the light of a  correct  appreciation
    of the sentence imposed on the appellant for his latest offences.  This
    potentially affects the assessment not only of the risk of re-offending
    but the application of the EEA Regulations as a whole.  The grounds  of
    appeal at ground 3 raise the issue of the judge's conclusion  that  the
    offences had escalated in nature.

17. At [19] of the grounds it is said that the ACE Report  is  insufficient
    evidence on which to base a finding that the appellant  is  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious  threat  and  that  the  judge  failed
    adequately to deal with  the  contents  and  context  of  that  report.
    Various features of the report are referred to, it being suggested that
    the judge did not refer to those positive features of the report in the
    appellant's favour.  Again, in my judgement, there  is  merit  in  that
    argument.

18. Various other issues are raised in the grounds but it does not seem  to
    me to be necessary to deal with each of them  because  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge's analysis is legally erroneous.

19. Additionally, it is to be observed that there is a conflation of issues
    in the judge's reasons, for example in relation to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Thus one sees at  [47],  ostensibly  under  a  heading  that  is
    expressed to relate to Article 8, the conclusion that  the  appellant's
    offences  were  a  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public   and
    deportation is justified on the grounds of  public  policy  and  public
    security; the latter phrase  relating  to  the  EEA  Regulations  which
    require an individual to represent a genuine, present and  sufficiently
    serious threat etc.

20. There is no structured assessment of  the  EEA  Regulations  and  their
    application in a deportation case of an EEA national. Such a structured
    approach is necessary, to avoid a lack of focus on the issues that need
    to be determined. The defect in the determination in  this  respect  is
    one of substance not mere form.

21. In all these circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Judge
    did err in law in his conclusions and that the errors of law  are  such
    as to require the decision to be set aside.

22. I have also concluded, having canvassed the views of the  parties,  and
    considering the Senior President's Practice Statement at 7.2, that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de
    novo before a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S.T.  Fox.
    Further Case Management  Directions  can  be  left  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

23. Except  as  agreed  between  the  parties,  no  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved.

    Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision is set aside and the appeal remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a judge other than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S.T. Fox



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  8/07/15
