
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01585/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th May 2014                              |On 14th May 2014             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O M
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Lane instructed by Rodman Pearce Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier  Tribunal  composed   of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   PJM
        Hollingworth and Mr GF Sandall who allowed the appeal on the  basis
        OM fell within one of the exceptions to automatic deportation;  for
        the reasons set out in the determination.


     2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis the
        Panel had failed to have due regard to the country guidance case of
        CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 and
        did not find that OM fell within one of the categories contained in
        that case as being at risk on return. There is also a challenge  to
        the finding OM is entitled to succeed under Articles 2 and/or 3  of
        the ECHR which are said to be fundamentally flawed.


     3. Whilst I accept there is arguable merit in the assertion there  was
        insufficient evidence and inadequate findings made to  support  the
        Panel's conclusion that the high threshold of  Article  2  will  be
        breached, I do not find that the Secretary of State has established
        any arguable legal error material to  the  decision  to  allow  the
        appeal.


     4. The Panel clearly considered the evidence with the degree  of  care
        required in an appeal of this nature, that of anxious scrutiny, and
        made  findings  in  relation  to  key  elements  which  have   been
        adequately reasoned.  The test is not  whether  every  judge  would
        make a similar finding but whether the findings made are within the
        range of findings the Panel were entitled to make on the  basis  of
        the evidence they were asked to consider. The Panel  made  findings
        relating to the nature and extent of the  relationship  between  OM
        and his aunt Adela which are at the core of the  assessment  as  to
        risk. The grounds do not challenge such findings.


     5. The grounds also fail to challenge the conclusion in  paragraph  46
        of  the  determination  that  the  familial  relationship  will  be
        established at the point of return at Harare airport, as  a  result
        of which a direct risk will rise. This is a finding  in  accordance
        with the country guidance case of  HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
        Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 which  was  reaffirmed  in  CM.   As
        there is an unchallenged finding that OM faces a real risk of  harm
        that will engage Article 3 and which arises  on  the  basis  of  an
        imputed or actual adverse political opinion, the decision to  allow
        the appeal under the Refugee Convention or Article 3 cannot be said
        to be outside the range of permitted findings. It was therefore not
        necessary for the Panel to consider the prospects  for  OM  outside
        the airport even though they did.  On  the  basis  of  the  pleaded
        grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted  the  Secretary
        of State has not discharged the burden upon  her  to  the  required
        standard to establish that the Panel made any legal error  material
        to the decision to allow the appeal.


Decision

     6. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 14th May 2014
