
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01725/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sBS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramall of Counsel instructed on direct access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Directions Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Matthews promulgated on 3 June 2015 which allowed  the  appeal  against
    deportation.  The appeal is brought before me by the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department.  For the  purposes  of  this  determination  I
    refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and  to  SBS  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The background to this matter is that SBS was born in Belize  in  1972.
    His mother married a British national and he moved with his mother  and
    step father to the United Kingdom on 29 November 1989 at the age of 17.
     He has remained in the United Kingdom since that date with  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 4. On 12 July 2014 following guilty pleas to an offence of possession with
    intent to supply a Class B drug namely cannabis he received a  sentence
    of twelve weeks' imprisonment.  That offence  followed  seven  previous
    convictions for twelve offences between 15 April 1994  and  27  January
    2014 for  offences  including  affray,  going  equipped  for  burglary,
    possessing a controlled drug Class A, possessing a controlled drug with
    intent to supply Class C, resisting or obstructing a  constable.   None
    of the previous convictions  attracted  a  custodial  sentence.   As  a
    result of the 12 week sentence in 2014, however, the Secretary of State
    deemed his deportation to be conducive  to  the  public  good.   On  19
    August 2014 a decision was made to make a deportation order  by  virtue
    of Section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971.

 5. It is not disputed that the appellant has three British  children  born
    to three different British mothers.  His oldest child BM was born on  7
    November 2003.  His second child, EM, was born on 26 October  2013  and
    his third child, a second son, LH was born on  5  November  2013.   The
    appellant does not maintain that he has a relationship with the mothers
    of any of the children any longer.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was allowed because the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant came within the provisions
    of paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) and (b).  It  was  accepted  that  he  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  children  under  the
    age of 18 who were British and that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to live in Belize and to remain in the UK without him.

 7. It is not disputed that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his three British children.  This appeal turns on the
    finding that it would be "unduly harsh" for them to remain  in  the  UK
    without him.  The Secretary of State does not  object  to  the  finding
    that it would be unduly harsh for them to travel to Belize with him.

 8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  comments  as  follows  on  the  appellant's
    relationship with his children at [36] to [48] of the determination:

         "36. I shall consider each child separately,  taking  Brent  first.
             From the  oral  and  documentary  evidence  I  find  that  the
             appellant has had a very  close  relationship  with  BM  since
             birth.  I accept that for a  period  of  about  twelve  months
             before BM's second birthday the appellant had fallen out  with
             BM's mother and spent less time with  BM  since  that  time  I
             accept and find that the appellant has acted as  BM's  father,
             has provided financial support when he is able to do so,  sees
             his son every weekend and for much of the time  during  school
             holidays, and has been involved in selection of the  secondary
             school to which BM will shortly go.  I also note that BM has a
             close relationship with the appellant's mother.

         37.  In relation to EM, the  appellant  similarly  sees  her  every
             weekend and also once or twice  during  the  week,  she  lives
             close to the  appellant.   The  appellant  provides  financial
             support when he is able to do so.  EM is  also  close  to  the
             appellant's mother.

         38.   In  relation  to  LH  the  appellant  has  a  more  difficult
             relationship with LH's mother and so sees LH once  per  month,
             again he provides financial support when he can.

         39.  I find from the documents and oral evidence before me that all
             of the appellant's three children are British citizens as  are
             their mothers.

         40.  I accept that the children are normally  resident  with  their
             mothers, all of whom have employment and in the case of BM and
             EM's mothers they also have other children in the UK by  other
             relationships.  I do not find that the mothers of any  of  the
             three children could be expected to, or are able  to  relocate
             to Belize.  In relation to the children I  do  find  that  the
             appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  each
             of them.  Brent, who is 11, has a long established  and  close
             relationship with his father that has continued for  a  decade
             in round terms, he sees him very frequently, as does EM who is
             of course younger having been born in 2013.

         42.  I find that the appellant has a  full  paternal  role  in  the
             lives of BM and EM, and contributes  emotional  and  financial
             support to them to the best of his abilities.  I find that  he
             also has a parental role also in the case of LH though that is
             somewhat limited by the fact that he sees LH less frequently.

         43.  These findings are  at  stark  contrast  to  the  respondent's
             understandable doubts given the lack of evidence available  at
             that stage.

         44.  It is perhaps sensible at this stage to turn to the applicable
             law, since it is  agreed  that  in  considering  the  proposed
             deportation and whether or not there is a relevant  exception,
             I  must  apply  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399   of   the
             Immigration Rules.  In relation to that provision  I  do  find
             that  this  appellant  has   three   children   with   British
             citizenship.  I must then go on to consider whether  it  would
             be unduly harsh for those children to return with their father
             to Belize, or to remain in the UK without him.  In doing  this
             I take account too of the provisions of  Section  117  of  the
             Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002.  In so  doing  I
             observe that the appellant is fluent in  English,  and  has  a
             positive work history as set out in his  pre-sentence  report,
             he has been in the UK  entirely  legally  when  fathering  his
             children and has genuine and subsisting relationships with all
             of his children.  The question of the harshness  or  otherwise
             of separation from the children is addressed below.

         46.  None of the appellant's children have any experience of living
             in Belize,  their  mothers  are  British  citizens  unable  to
             contemplate moving to Belize as a result of their own jobs and
             family circumstances beyond their links to the appellant.  The
             children are all settled in the UK, Brent is  about  to  enter
             secondary education.  Deportation will inevitably separate the
             appellant from his children, or possibly separate the children
             from their British mothers with whom they are settled.  I find
             that it would be unduly harsh to consider moving the  children
             to a separate country given that it would separate  them  from
             their maternal families.

         47.  I must consider the impact upon the children of the  appellant
             returning alone to Belize.  To do so would effectively  remove
             an  established  father  figure  from  certainly  two  of  the
             children.  BM has a ten year full parental  relationship  with
             the appellant.  I find that such a lost would  be  emotionally
             devastating for BM in particular, and would occur  at  a  very
             important stage  of  his  education.   I  recognise  that  the
             appellant could still speak to his son by Skype, but find that
             to be no real substitute for the regular real contact that  is
             enjoyed every weekend for two of the children.

         48.  I find that it would be unduly harsh for BM and EM  to  remain
             in the United Kingdom without their father because  he  has  a
             close relationship with them and sees  them  date  (sic)  very
             regularly supports them financially and emotionally and is  in
             every sense the father figure  from  whom  the  children  will
             inevitably  benefit.   BM  in  particular  I  find  would   be
             devastated by the loss of his father.  The best  interests  of
             the children could not be clearer, to keep  the  appellant  as
             their father figure and for him to continue the regular day-to-
             day, face-to-face and positive  role  that  he  has  in  their
             lives.

         49.  In making  this  finding  I  have  kept  close  at  heart  the
             appellant's previous convictions but I am satisfied, as I have
             already found, that there is a low risk of  further  offending
             and the frequency  of  his  offending  is  reducing.   I  take
             account too of the nature of the offences and their  age.   It
             is in those circumstances that I discount the  offending  from
             substantially undermining this man's role as a father figure."

Finding on Error of Law

 9. Mr Smart clarified the Secretary of State's challenge at  the  hearing.
    He maintained that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  the  "unduly
    harsh" assessment because a range of factors that he  was  required  to
    take into account from paragraphs 117B and  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had not  been  considered.   In  making
    that submission the respondent relied on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the case of KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015]
    UKUT 543.  The headnote of that case states:

         "The  Immigration  Rules,  when  applied  in  the  context  of  the
         deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete  code.  Where  an
         assessment is required to be made as to whether a person meets  the
         requirements  of  para  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  that
         comprises an assessment of that person's claim under article  8  of
         the  ECHR,  it  is  necessary  to  have  regard,  in  making   that
         assessment, to the matters to which the Tribunal must  have  regard
         as a consequence of the provisions of s117C. In  particular,  those
         include that the more serious the offence committed, the greater is
         the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  a   foreign   criminal.
         Therefore, the word "unduly" in the phrase "unduly harsh"  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come  into  play,  the  impact  on  the  child,
         children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being  deported  is
         inordinately or excessively harsh."

10. Mr Smart also identified a second challenge from the  grounds  relevant
    to the "unduly harsh" assessment in that the respondent considered  the
    finding that this criteria was met to be irrational or perverse and not
    open to the judge on the evidence before him.

11. I found that I was in agreement with Mr Bramall's submissions  opposing
    the grounds of the Secretary of State.  He relied on two  decisions  of
    the Upper Tribunal which found, contrary to KMO, that in the assessment
    under the Immigration Rules of the  "unduly  harsh"  test  it  was  not
    correct to import the  additional  criteria  or  consideration  of  the
    matters set out in paragraphs 117B and 117C.  The two cases  relied  on
    by Mr Bramall were MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015]  UKUT  435
    (IAC) in which the headnote states:

         "1.  The phrase "unduly harsh" in para 399 of the Rules (and
             s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not import a balancing
             exercise requiring the public interest to be weighed against
             the circumstances of the individual (whether child or partner
             of the deportee). The focus is solely upon an evaluation of
             the consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.

         2.   Whether the consequences of deportation will be "unduly harsh"
             for an individual involves more than "uncomfortable,
             inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome or merely difficult and
             challenging" consequences and imposes a considerably more
             elevated or higher threshold.

         3.   The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if they are
             "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly" so if they are
             'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into account of
             all the circumstances of the individual.

         (MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223
         (IAC) at [46] and BM and others (returnees - criminal and non-
         criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC) at [109] applied.)"

    and the case of Bossade (ss. 117A-D  -  interrelationship  with  Rules)
    [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC):

         "1.  For courts and tribunals, the coming into force of Part 5A  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (ss.117A-D)
             has not altered the need for a two-stage approach to Article 8
             claims.

         2.   Ordinarily a  court  or  tribunal  will,  as  a  first  stage,
             consider an appellant's Article 8 claim by  reference  to  the
             Immigration Rules that set out substantive conditions, without
             any  direct  reference  to  Part   5A   considerations.   Such
             considerations have no direct application  to  rules  of  this
             kind. Part 5A considerations only have direct  application  at
             the second stage of the Article 8  analysis.  This  method  of
             approach does not amount to according priority  to  the  Rules
             over primary  legislation  but  rather  of  recognising  their
             different functions.

         3.    In  the  context  of  foreign  criminal  cases  (because  the
             provisions found in Part 13 of the Rules are a  complete  code
             encompassing both stages of the Article  8  assessment),  this
             means that Part 5A considerations have no direct role  at  the
             first stage when a court or tribunal is  deciding  whether  an
             applicant meets the substantive conditions of  paragraphs  399
             or 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules.  They  only  have  direct
             application at the second-stage,  viz.  assessment  under  the
             rules  that  involve  a   proportionality   assessment:   viz.
             paragraph 398 and (in revocation  cases)  paragraph  390A.  In
             cases other  than  those  concerning  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals, where the Rules are not a  complete  code,  it  may
             still be necessary to conduct this second  stage  outside  the
             Rules: see Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  AJ
             (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 at [39].

         4.   Whilst Part 5A considerations may have indirect application to
             the Immigration Rules, including those setting out substantive
             conditions such as paragraphs 399 and 339A, this is limited to
             their role as statements of principles that can be used  where
             appropriate to inform the meaning of key terms set out in such
             paragraphs.

         5.   New paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules remains similar to
             the  old  in  considering  the  foreign  criminal   deportee's
             situation both in  the  UK  and  in  the  country  of  return.
             However, so far as concerns focus on a person's  situation  in
             the UK, time in the UK is no longer relevant as such except in
             the  context  of  lawful  residence  (399A(a))  and  paragraph
             399A(b) introduces new criteria  that  relate  to  social  and
             cultural integration in the UK. So far as  concerns  focus  on
             the situation in the country  of  return,  paragraph  399A  no
             longer looks at 'ties' per se but at the more inclusive notion
             of integration and obstacles thereto. By  requiring  focus  on
             integration both in relation to a  person's  circumstances  in
             the UK as well as in the country  of  return,  the  new  Rules
             achieve a much more  holistic  assessment  of  an  appellant's
             circumstances.  Thereby  they  bring  themselves   closer   to
             Strasbourg jurisprudence on Article 8 in expulsion cases which
             has always seen consideration of both dimensions as  requiring
             a wide-ranging assessment: see  e.g.  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands
             (GC) App.No. 12738/10, 31 October 2014, paragraphs 106-109."

12. Put simply, I prefer the arguments relied on in the  cases  of  Bossade
    and MAB that the now well established principle  that  the  Immigration
    Rules relating to deportation in part 13  are  a  "complete  code"  and
    preclude importation of the s.117 considerations  in  a  paragraph  399
    "unduly harsh" assessment. MAB applies the "complete code" ratio of  MF
    Nigeria at [32] and [33] and again at [42] to [49].   The  Tribunal  in
    those paragraphs highlights the importance placed  by  the  legislation
    and in case law from the Court of Appeal on  the  pre-eminence  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the  approach  set  down  in  cases  such  as  MF
    Nigeria, identifying at [48]  that  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality  and
    Immigration  Act  2002  only  becomes  relevant  in  a   second   stage
    consideration outside of the provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A. The
    Tribunal identifies at [49] of MAB that the  interpretation  that  they
    apply is also indicated in the Secretary  of  State's  own  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions which indicate that a case "will  succeed"  if
    the exceptions set out in paragraphs 399 or 399A are met.

13. This position is MAB is further supported by the Upper Tribunal in  the
    case of Chege (section 117D -  Article  8  approach)  [2015]  UKUT  165
    (IAC).  Chege was decided by a High Court Judge  sitting  as  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge and set down that the consideration under 399  and  399A
    takes place simpliciter  before  moving  on  to  the  consideration  of
    proportionality which only then includes  the  Section  117B  and  117C
    criteria.

14. The Tribunal in Bossade reaches  the  same  conclusion.   The  Tribunal
    identifies at [30], as in MAB, that there is an inexorable clarity from
    MF Nigeria onwards going through to SSHD v  SS  Congo  that  the  Rules
    remain  a  complete  code  and  require  a  two-stage   analysis   when
    considering an Article  8  claim  against  deportation.   At  [35]  the
    Tribunal identifies that there is nothing expressly stating  that  Part
    5A applies to consideration under the Immigration Rules and  provisions
    of paragraphs 399 and 399A.  At [36] the Tribunal identifies that a key
    characteristic of the Immigration Rules is that they can  be  or  maybe
    determinative of a person's immigration status and that nothing in Part
    5A acts to the contrary.

15. I noted also that the Tribunal in KMO referred only to the case of  MAB
    and did not take into account the learning of the Tribunal in  Bossade.
    It is also of note that the Tribunal  in  MAB  drew  support  from  two
    Presidential decisions which made  no  attempt  in  an  "unduly  harsh"
    assessment to introduce the Section 117B and 117C criteria.

16. So  for  those  reasons,  having  preferred  the  legal  interpretation
    provided by MAB and Bossade, I found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    did not err in not carrying out a 117B  and  117C  criteria  assessment
    when establishing whether  the  "unduly  harsh"  test  under  paragraph
    399(a) was met.

17. As regards the respondent's  second  challenge,  the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal were open to it on the basis of the evidence before it of  the
    particularly strong relationship between the appellant and,  certainly,
    his older child, the evidence from that child's mother referring to the
    devastation that would occur were the appellant to  be  deported.   The
    respondent's grounds did not, in my judgment, show that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge acted out with a range of responses reasonably  open  to
    him on the evidence before him such that the finding that the  children
    would be in "unduly harsh" circumstances could be said to be irrational
    or perverse and amount to legal error.

18. For those reasons I did not find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  on
a point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 29 October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
