
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01774/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 1st September 2016               |On: 6th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          George Alexandru Stonescu
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Romania date of birth  28th  December
       1986.  On the 5th May 2015 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  McGarr)
       allowed his appeal against a decision to deport him from  the  United
       Kingdom with reference to the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2006 ('the Regs'). The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department now has permission to appeal against that decision[1].

       Background

    2. The Respondent claims to have lived in the United Kingdom since  2002
       when he came here to live with his parents; he was then aged  9.   On
       the 24th July  2013  he  was  convicted  at  Salford  magistrates  of
       possession of a Class A drugs (cocaine) with an intent to supply.  He
       was sentenced  to  two  years  in  prison.  The  Secretary  of  State
       consequently took a decision to deport him, served on the  24th  June
       2014.

    3. The basis of the  decision  was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
       satisfied  that  the  Respondent  posed  a   genuine,   present   and
       sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy. It was
       not accepted that the Respondent had acquired a  permanent  right  of
       residence, since he had failed to demonstrate that he had been living
       in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  in
       accordance  with  the  Regs.    He  could  not  therefore  claim  the
       'enhanced protection' against removal that such a status would bring.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal agreed with the Secretary of State in respect
       of the Respondent's status. He may have lived in the UK  on  and  off
       since childhood but the Judge could not  be  satisfied  that  he  had
       acquired a permanent right of residence. The evidence about  when  he
       had arrived, and when and whether he  had  worked,  was  unclear  and
       contradictory. Having considered the evidence, both  documentary  and
       oral, the Tribunal concluded that  it  could  safely  find  that  the
       Respondent had lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  only  since
       April 2009. He had not therefore demonstrated that he had  accrued  a
       five year period immediately prior to his sentence. Having made those
       findings  the  Tribunal  directs  itself,  at  paragraph  62  of  the
       determination, thus:

           "With regard to the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  under
           Regulation 19(3)(b) and Regulation 21 on the basis  of  "serious
           grounds" of public policy, I remind myself that the  removal  of
           an EEA national using this provision cannot be invoked to  serve
           economic ends. Furthermore, measures taken on grounds of  public
           policy shall comply with the principle of proportionality and be
           based  exclusively  on  the  conduct  of  the   Appellant.   The
           conviction recorded against the Appellant shall  not  in  itself
           constitute  grounds  for  taking  such  measures   as   removal.
           Critically, the personal conduct of the Appellant must represent
           a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
           of the fundamental interests of society"

    5. The determination goes on to consider the following facts:  that  the
       Respondent was an addict of, and dealer in, Class A drugs (noting  in
       passing that it may be that he was doing this for considerably longer
       than the Crown Court sentenced him for), that he is now drug-free and
       is assessed by NOMS as presenting a low risk of serious  harm  and/or
       re-offending, and that he completed several  educational  courses  in
       prison, that his early release would indicate good conduct  and  that
       there is nothing to suggest he has "misbehaved" since his release. At
       the centre of these deliberations is the following, at paragraph 64:

           "In any event, I find that it was the  Appellant's  decision  to
           present himself to the police which demonstrates a clear  desire
           on his part to turn his  life  around  and  put  drugs  and  his
           lifestyle behind him. Though the Appellant was  convicted  of  a
           serious drugs offence, which demanded a period of  imprisonment,
           there was strong mitigation in his  favour  including  his  good
           character, his cooperation with the police and guilty  pleas  at
           the first opportunity for which he was given full credit by  the
           sentencing judge who gave him a below tariff sentence. I  cannot
           ignore this."

    6. The determination concludes with the Tribunal reminding itself of the
       principles of proportionality,  the sentencing remarks of HHJ Leeming
       and its assessment of the evidence, noting that "little  weight"  had
       been placed on the evidence of the Appellant,  his  mother  and  aunt
       because of inconsistencies in it.  Overall  the  Tribunal  cannot  be
       satisfied that there are serious grounds justifying deportation.

       The Secretary of State's Appeal

    7. The grounds of appeal, drafted by Senior Presenting Office Mr Bramble
       and where appropriate amplified by Mr  Harrison's  oral  submissions,
       are that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law:

             a) In directing itself that the Secretary of State had to  show
                there were "serious grounds" for deportation;

             b) In placing too much weight on the appellant's own  assertion
                that he was a reformed individual.

       My Findings

       Ground 2: the Respondent's Evidence

    8. For reasons that will become clear, I deal with Ground 2 first. It is
       manifestly without any merit at all. Weight is a matter for the First-
       tier Tribunal and save in cases of irrationality the  Upper  Tribunal
       will not interfere with a Judge's discretion on such matters. In this
       case the Judge expressly records that he gave "little weight" to  the
       Respondent's oral evidence. The evidence that  led  him  to  conclude
       that this was truly a reformed character before him was  nevertheless
       clear. The uncontested facts spoke for  themselves.   The  Respondent
       had handed himself in to the police and asked  for  help.  He  wanted
       rehabilitation. He had been a model prisoner who  had  been  released
       early and who had taken the educational opportunities afforded to him
       by the prison service. He had no offences recorded since his  release
       and there was no evidence to show that he had not complied  with  his
       parole/bail conditions. The NOMS assessment was that he  presented  a
       low risk. All of that evidence pointed one way. There was in fact  no
       evidence at all to  indicate  that  this  man  presented  a  risk  of
       reoffending.  Ground 2 is not made out.

       Ground 1: the correct test

    9. The  legal  framework  to  be  applied  in  this  case  derived  from
       Regulations  19(2)(b)  and  21  of  the  Regs  (the  relevant   parts
       highlighted):

           Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

           19.-   (1)  A person is not entitled to be admitted to the
                United Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if his exclusion
                is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or
                public health in accordance with regulation 21.

                (2)    A person is not entitled to be admitted to the United
                Kingdom as the family member of an EEA national under
                regulation 11(2) unless, at the time of his arrival-

                    (a)    he is accompanying the EEA national or joining
                    him in the United Kingdom; and

                    (b)    the EEA national has a right to reside in the
                    United Kingdom under these Regulations.

                (3)    Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who has
                been admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the
                United Kingdom under these Regulations may be removed from
                the United Kingdom if-

                    (a)    he does not have or ceases to have a right to
                    reside under these Regulations; or

                    (b)    he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the
                    United Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary
                    of State has decided that his removal is justified on
                    the grounds of public policy, public security or public
                    health in accordance with regulation 21.

                (4)    A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) as
                the automatic consequence of having recourse to the social
                assistance system of the United Kingdom.

                (5)    A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if
                he has a right to remain in the United Kingdom by virtue of
                leave granted under the 1971 Act unless his removal is
                justified on the grounds of public policy, public security
                or public health in accordance with regulation 21.

           Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public
           health grounds

           21.-   (1)  In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an
                EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
                security or public health.

                (2)    A relevant decision may not be taken to serve
                economic ends.

                (3)    A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a
                person with a permanent right of residence under regulation
                15 except on serious grounds of public policy or public
                security.

                (4)    A relevant decision may not be taken except on
                imperative grounds of public security in respect of an EEA
                national who-

                    (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom for a
                    continuous period of at least ten years prior to the
                    relevant decision; or

                    (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant
                    decision is necessary in his best interests, as provided
                    for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted
                    by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th
                    November 1989.

                (5)    Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
                public policy or public security it shall, in addition to
                complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,
                be taken in accordance with the following principles-

                    (a)    the decision must comply with the principle of
                    proportionality;

                    (b)    the decision must be based exclusively on the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;

                    (c)    the personal conduct of the person concerned must
                    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                    society;

                    (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case
                    or which relate to considerations of general prevention
                    do not justify the decision;

                    (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions do not
                    in themselves justify the decision.

                (6)    Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of
                public policy or public security in relation to a person who
                is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must
                take account of considerations such as the age, state of
                health, family and economic situation of the person, the
                person's length of residence in the United Kingdom, the
                person's social and cultural integration into the United
                Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with his
                country of origin.

   10. The Tribunal had found that the  Respondent  had  not  been  in  this
       country  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  prior  to   his
       imprisonment and so he could not qualify for any enhanced protection.
       The Secretary of State complains that at paragraphs 62 and  again  at
       70 the determination contains the phrase "serious grounds  of  public
       policy". I accept Mr Harrison's submission that this must  constitute
       misdirection.  The Tribunal had already rejected any  assertion  that
       the Respondent had acquired a permanent right of residence and it did
       not therefore need to assess whether Regulation 21 (3) applied.

   11. I am not satisfied however  that  this  error  was  material  to  the
       outcome of the appeal.  It is apparent from the body of the reasoning
       that the Tribunal was in fact  applying  the  relevant  tests,  those
       derived from Regulation  21  (1),(2)  and  (5).  The  proportionality
       balancing exercise focuses on those  issues.  Even  if  it  could  be
       demonstrated that the Tribunal did erroneously apply the higher  test
       of "serious grounds" it does not matter,  because  on  the  facts  as
       found this was plainly an appeal which fell  to  be  allowed  in  any
       event. The only  matter  weighing  against  the  Respondent  was  his
       conviction. The Tribunal expressly noted at  paragraph  61  that  the
       removal  action  was  pursued  under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  and   not
       19(3)(a). Weighing  against  that  was  considerable  mitigation  and
       crucially, the evidence discussed at paragraph 8 above. There was  no
       evidence at all that this young man's conduct represented a "genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of   the
       fundamental interests of society". Dealing Class A drugs is plainly a
       serious threat to  society  but  there  being  such  a  low  risk  of
       reoffending his past  conduct  was  not  sufficient  to  warrant  his
       deportation.

       Conclusion

   12. The Secretary of State had justification for her submission that  the
       term "serious grounds" should  not  have  found  its  way  into  this
       determination, but viewed overall it is apparent that this is not the
       test that was in fact applied. The appeal would have been allowed  on
       the facts as found under any of the alternative tests  in  Regulation
       21.

   13. I would note in closing that Mr Stonescu represented himself at  this
       hearing and gave every indication of being  the  reformed  individual
       that the First-tier Tribunal  believed  him  to  be.  He  gave  brief
       evidence about his efforts to secure employment and was very happy to
       report that he was due to start work the day after the  hearing.   He
       has been reporting each week as he is required to do. He  is  looking
       forward to establishing himself in gainful  employment  and  starting
       his life afresh on the right side of the law.




       Decisions

   14. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no  material
       error of law and it is upheld.

   15. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          2nd September 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 1st June 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Grimmett

