
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01060/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 12 January 2015                            |On 19 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                             DAWID MICHAL RAD?O
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal (a panel comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page
    and First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney), promulgated on 4 November  2014
    in which they allowed the appeal of Mr Rad?o (to whom I refer to as the
    claimant) against the decision of the respondent made on 27 May 2014 to
    make a deportation order against him.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Poland and has lived in the United Kingdom
    since 10 October 2008.  He has, however, between 18 August 2009  and  3
    February 2014 received eleven convictions for twenty offences including
    battery, harassment, breach of restraining order, threats to damage  or
    destroy  property,  failing  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  a
    community order and the possession of class B drugs.  In addition he is
    convicted of failing to surrender to custody  at  the  point  of  time,
    theft (shoplifting), driving a vehicle  otherwise  in  accordance  with
    licence,  three  counts  of  driving  whilst  excess  alcohol,  driving
    uninsured and driving whilst disqualified.

 3. The respondent took the decision to deport the claimant  on  the  basis
    that it was considered that his personal conduct represents a  genuine,
    present and serious threat to safety and security of the public of  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The claimant's case is that his removal  would  be  in  breach  of  his
    rights pursuant to European law, specifically that it was not justified
    pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 on the basis that he is established  here  and  has  a
    daughter from a previous relationship with another Polish national,  Ms
    Prus, and that he is in contact with her every weekend and  during  the
    week.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found:-

      i) that the appellant had not acquired a permanent right of  residence
         [18] as his periods of imprisonment had interrupted his  period  of
         residence in the United Kingdom;

     ii) that he is currently employed [23];

    iii) that the claimant has  regular  contact  with  his  daughter  whose
         interests are a primary consideration [28], [29];

     iv) that the case was finally balanced [31];

      v) that given the age of the daughter [32] that there would have to be
         substantial grounds for removing a  father  and  it  would  not  be
         sufficient for her to be cared by her mother alone;

     vi) that those grounds would  be  made  out  if  the  threat  that  the
         appellant posed to the public in the period of  his  offending  was
         still present [32];

    vii) that they accepted that the claimant's resolve to avoid alcohol and
         drugs was genuine [33];

   viii) that he had attended AA  meetings  to  address  his  problems  with
         alcohol and is still no longer drinking [34]; and

     ix) that they had to give weight of the requirement identified in  Essa
         (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316;

      x) that an EEA national should  be  given  an  opportunity  to  become
         rehabilitated in the EEA Member State where the offences have taken
         place; and

     xi) that on balance the appellant should be given  the  opportunity  to
         further his rehabilitation to continue  working  and  have  contact
         with his daughter and that there was no evidence that  he  poses  a
         present threat but that "this is finely balanced".

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) that the Tribunal's finding [34] that the appellant should be given
         an opportunity to further his rehabilitation  indicated  that  they
         believed  he  required  continuing  rehabilitation  yet  this   was
         contradicted by the further finding that there is no evidence  that
         he poses a present threat and thus findings were  perverse  to  the
         degree that they were irrational;

     ii) that the Tribunal had failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  the
         finding that the claimant did not pose a present threat in that the
         persistence of his offending demonstrates  a  genuine  present  and
         serious threat to the safety and security  of  the  public  of  the
         United Kingdom and a finding that he has abstained from alcohol and
         re-offending for  a  period  of  less  than  four  months  was  not
         sufficient to demonstrate that he  was  no  longer  a  present  and
         genuine threat for the purposes of Regulation 21(5)(c);

    iii) that  the  Tribunal  had  materially  misdirected  themselves  with
         respect  to  Essa   in   that   the   requirement   to   facilitate
         rehabilitation, a factor that the panel had taken into account, was
         not a factor to be taken into account given that this relates  only
         to those who have acquired permanent residence.

 7. On 1 December  2014  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald
    granted permission stating:-

         "For reasons given the panel concluded that there was  no  evidence
         the appellant posed  a  present  threat.   They  referred  to  Essa
         concluding that an EEA national should be given an  opportunity  to
         become rehabilitated in the EEA Member  State  where  the  offences
         have taken place.

         For the reasons given in the grounds it is arguable that the  panel
         have misunderstood what the Upper Tribunal was saying in  Essa  and
         to do so is an arguable error in law.  Given that this was a finely
         balanced case (paragraph 35) permission to appeal  is  granted  for
         reasons given in the grounds."

 8. Ms Everett submitted that it is clear from its determination  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had misdirected themselves in law  with  regard  to
    Essa and that it was clear that they had, impermissibly,  given  weight
    to the possibility of future rehabilitation.  She submitted  that  this
    was a material error given that  they  had  said  that  the  matter  is
    "finely balanced" [35] and [31].

 9. In reply, the claimant said that he was a changed person; that  he  was
    now living again with his partner and their daughter.  He said that  he
    was still working full-time and that his deportation would be unfair.

10. In Essa the Upper Tribunal held:-
    23.   As we observed in our ruling and directions the Court of  Justice
       in Tsakouridis used the  term  'genuinely  integrated'  to  describe
       those for whom the prospects of rehabilitation were a relevant issue
       in the assessment of the balance.
     ...
    26. We agree that the Court's reference to genuine integration  must  be
        directed at qualified persons and  their  family  members  who  have
        resided in the host state as such for five years or more. People who
        have just arrived in the host state, have not yet  become  qualified
        persons, or have not been a qualified person  for  five  years,  can
        always  be  removed  for  non-exercise  of  free   movement   rights
        irrespective of public good grounds to curtail free movement rights.
        If their presence during this time makes them a  present  threat  to
        public policy it would be inconsistent  with  the  purposes  of  the
        Directive to weigh in the balance against deportation  their  future
        prospects of rehabilitation.
     ...
    32. We observe that for any deportation of an EEA  national  or  family
       member of such national to  be  justified  on  public  good  grounds
       (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been achieved)  the
       claimant must represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact
       of a criminal conviction is not enough. It is not permissible in  an
       EEA case to deport a claimant on the  basis  of  criminal  offending
       simply to deter others.  This tends to mean,  in  case  of  criminal
       conduct short of the most serious threats to the  public  safety  of
       the state, that a candidate for EEA  deportation  must  represent  a
       present threat  by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  re-offend  or  an
       unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  In such a case, if there is
       acceptable evidence  of  rehabilitation,  the  prospects  of  future
       rehabilitation do not enter the balance,  save  possibly  as  future
       protective  factors  to  ensure  that  the  rehabilitation   remains
       durable.
    33.   It is only where rehabilitation is incomplete or  uncertain  that
       future prospects may play a role in the overall assessment.

11. Two propositions flow from this: first that rehabilitation or rather  a
    prospect of future rehabilitation can arise logically only if there  is
    a  propensity  to  re-offend.   Second,  the  consideration  of  future
    prospects of rehabilitation can only be taken into account  in  respect
    of those who have acquired permanent residence.  In this case the panel
    found, as they were  entitled  to  find,  that  the  claimant  had  not
    acquired permanent residence.  They could not therefore have taken into
    account the possibility of future rehabilitation nor is it a matter  to
    which  they   could   properly   have   given   weight   in   assessing
    proportionality.

12. There is in this case a tension between the panel's finding  "There  is
    no evidence that the appellant poses a present threat: but  should  the
    appellant go on to commit further offences  he  would  have  difficulty
    claiming that he was a changed man again" indicating that  he  did  not
    require further rehabilitation, see Essa at [32].  The panel could  not
    properly have taken into account the prospects of rehabilitation having
    found that the appellant  had  not  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
    residence.  That would not, however, be a material error if it could be
    established that they had properly concluded that he did not  represent
    a present threat then the prospects of future rehabilitation would  not
    properly enter into the factors to be weighed in the balance.

13. There is significant merit in  the  respondent's  submission  that  the
    panel's findings of the prospect of future rehabilitation  were  to  be
    taken into account, which are predicated on assumption  that  he  still
    presents a threat, and the apparent finding that he does not.

14. Whilst the panel concluded [35] that the respondent had not shown  that
    the appellant presents a genuine and serious  threat,  that  conclusion
    was infected  by  taking  into  account  the  possible  rehabilitation.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision did involve the making of
    an error of law in that the panel wrongly took into account a factor  -
    possible future rehabilitation - which should not have been taken  into
    account in assessing either proportionality of removal or as appears to
    be the case, whether the claimant  represents  a  genuine  present  and
    serious threat.

15. I have considered whether the matter should be remade within the  Upper
    tier.  I consider that it should not.  The claimant says that he is now
    once again living with his partner and their child.  If that is so, and
    findings on that issue would  need  to  be  reached,  then  that  is  a
    significant factor which  would  need  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing proportionality; it would also be necessary to  evaluate  and
    reach findings on whether the claimant is still abstaining from alcohol
    and has  avoided  any  further  arrests  or  criminal  convictions.   I
    therefore remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a  fresh
       decision on all issues.



Signed                                  Date:  15 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


