
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01024/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     QDB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lay, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn who in a determination dated  10
    September 2015 allowed the appeal of QDB  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 29 May 2014  to  make  a  deportation  order
    under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I will refer  to  QDB  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 27 January  1987.
     He entered Britain in August 2003 and claimed asylum.  His application
    was dismissed in a determination promulgated on 21 January 2004.

4.   On 25 August 2010 he was issued with  a  certificate  of  marriage  and
    married NV, who is also Vietnamese, on  24  August  2010.  She  has  an
    autistic son,  HT,  who  had  been  born  on  29  September  2008.  The
    respondent  has  accepted  that  he  is  British  although  his   birth
    certificate states that his father  was  Vietnamese  and  there  is  no
    evidence before me to show that his  father  had  indefinite  leave  to
    remain when he was born.  On 3 February 2012 the appellant was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain because, it appears, of his  relationship
    with HT.  The appellant and NV have a son,  WB,  who  was  born  on  22
    November 2009 and a daughter, JB, was born on 22  December  2012.  They
    all were granted discretionary leave until 2 February 2015.   There  is
    no evidence of the current status of NV, WB and JB.

5.   On 6 September 2013 the appellant  was  convicted  of  five  counts  of
    sexual assault and was sentenced on  18  October  2013  to  30  months'
    imprisonment.  He was required  to  sign  the  Sex  Offenders  Register
    indefinitely.

6.   Thereafter the respondent notified the appellant that he was liable  to
    automatic deportation and in a letter dated 2 June 2014  she  gave  her
    reasons for concluding that  it  was  appropriate  that  the  appellant
    should be deported under the provisions of Section 32 of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.

7.   The Secretary of State noted that HT was aged 5 years and 8 months  and
    a British citizen but considered it would be unreasonable to expect  HT
    to leave Britain stating that there was another family member  who  was
    able to care for HT in the UK.  The Secretary of State pointed out that
    although it might be difficult for NV to raise and care for HT  without
    the appellant being physically present, she had done this whilst he was
    in prison with no concerns from social services.  In any event  it  was
    considered that HT would be able to readjust to life  in  Vietnam  with
    the help, care  and  support  of  his  mother  and  stepfather  if  the
    appellant and his wife wished to remain  as  a  family  unit.   It  was
    stated there  was  no  reason  or  evidence  to  suggest  it  would  be
    impossible or exceptionally difficult for HT to relocate to Vietnam.

8.   It was noted that the appellant's own children were of a young age  and
    considered that it would not be unreasonable to expect  them  to  leave
    Britain but should it be decided that they should not do so NV would be
    able to look after them.  It was further pointed out that  NV  was,  in
    any event, not British or settled in Britain and  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside Britain.

9.   It was also considered there was no reason  why  the  appellant  should
    not be returned to Vietnam where he had family roots and ties.

10.  The decision was appealed.  On  the  day  of  hearing  the  appellant's
    Counsel  produced  a  supplementary  bundle  which  included  a  social
    worker's report and a letter from HT's school.  The Presenting  Officer
    asked for an adjournment so that  these  could  be  considered  by  the
    caseworker but this was refused by the judge.

11.  The judge heard evidence from the appellant  who  stated  he  regretted
    what had happened, that he would not commit an offence again and  asked
    for a chance to start again.  He said that he had not taken any courses
    in  prison  to  address  his  offending  behaviour  because  none   was
    available.  There were no prison or probation reports.

12.  The judge heard evidence about HT who is autistic and  whose  behaviour
    is difficult and erratic.

13.  In paragraphs 72 onwards the judge set out her  conclusions.   She  set
    out the terms of paragraphs 390, 398 and 399 of the Rules  and  Section
    117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended  by
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

14.  In paragraph 79 she stated that she was  satisfied,  having  heard  the
    appellant's evidence, that  he  had  accepted  responsibility  for  his
    offence and was remorseful and although she had not had the benefit  of
    reading any report assessing the risk of re-offending she was satisfied
    that the current risk had been reduced by the appellant's  "significant
    change in attitude".

15.  The judge went on to state that she was  satisfied  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for HT to accompany the appellant to Vietnam. She referred
    to a report by an independent social worker, Diane Jackson who had said
    that HT was at risk of suffering emotional harm that would  affect  his
    ability to reach his educational and social potential  if  he  did  not
    receive good care throughout his minority and that would happen if  his
    father were removed from caring for him.

16.  Miss Jackson stated that  she  considered  that  HT's  behaviour  would
    deteriorate if the appellant were deported and that  it  was  extremely
    likely in her opinion that the children would be looked  after  by  the
    local authority, HT would be separated from his  siblings  which  would
    lead to further loss for HT in that he would lose his  mother  and  his
    siblings. It was Miss Jackson's opinion that the best interests of  the
    children could only be met if their father was allowed to remain in the
    United Kingdom with their mother.

17.  HT's former head teacher had written stating that the appellant made  a
    significant contribution to the care of his family  and  that  she  had
    been particularly impressed with the quality of his engagement with HT.

18.  Having noted HT's education, health and  care  plan  which  gave  it  a
    "diagnosis for severe disorder in understanding of language and  spoken
    language" the judge noted the terms of  the  psychiatric  report  which
    dealt with NV's depressive symptoms.

19.  The judge concluded that the appellant was central to the life  of  his
    family and stated that the respondent did not afford any basis on which
    she could conclude that NV could look after HT  satisfactorily  if  the
    appellant were removed to Vietnam and found that it was unduly harsh to
    leave HT in the UK without his father.  She therefore stated  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and allowed the appeal.

20.  The Secretary of State appealed stating that the judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons as to why  she  considered  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would have an "unduly harsh" impact on family  life  if  they
    remained here without  the  appellant.  The  grounds  quoted  from  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in LC (China) [2014] EWCA which stated:-



         "... It follows that neither the fact that the appellant's children
         enjoy British nationality nor the fact that they may  be  separated
         from their father for a long time will be sufficient to  constitute
         exceptional circumstances of  a  kind  which  outweigh  the  public
         interest in his deportation.  The appellant's children will not  be
         forced to leave the UK since, if she chooses to do so, their mother
         is free to remain with them in this country."

21.  The grounds of appeal also refer  to  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348 where it had been stated that:-

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up forever  because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour.  That is what deportation does ..."

    It was stated that the judge had failed to identify what set  the  case
    apart from the normal consequences caused by deportation.

22.  The grounds went on to refer to  the  public  interest  in  deportation
    stating that the impact of deportation could  be  harsh  or  even  very
    harsh without being unduly harsh depending on the extent of the  public
    interest in deportation and of the family life affected.  It was stated
    that the judge had failed to adequately reason why the case fell within
    the definition of "duly harsh"  as  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    children would be neglected or suffer any harm if  they  remained  here
    without the appellant.  There was nothing to show  why  the  children's
    mother could not provide adequate care  for  the  children's  essential
    needs to be met and why family life could not  continue  from  Vietnam.
    There was clearly a support network in Britain.

23.  It was pointed out that NV would  be  entitled  to  receive  assistance
    from the local authority and that should have been taken  into  account
    and therefore the impact on the children would not be unduly harsh.

24.  The respondent referred to the terms of the determination of the  Upper
    Tribunal and MAB (para 399 "unduly harsh") USA  [2015]  UKUT  00435  in
    which "unduly  harsh"  was  stated  to  be  more  than  "uncomfortable,
    inconvenient,   undesirable,   unwelcome   or   merely   difficult   in
    challenging" consequences and imposed a considerably more  elevated  or
    higher threshold.  Moreover it was stated there  was  nothing  to  show
    there would be an unduly harsh impact on the children if they went with
    their mother and the appellant to Vietnam.  While it was accepted  that
    HT was a British citizen it would be a matter for the parties to decide
    whether or not  NV and the children would accompany  the  appellant  to
    Vietnam or remain in Britain. The fact that the appellant's partner and
    children might not wish to relocate with him was not enough to tip  the
    balance considering the public interest.

25.  It was argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  public
    interest in the deportation of those who commit crimes.  Reference  was
    made to the judgment in Danso [2015] EWCA Civ 596 which stated that the
    protection of the public from harm by way of future offending was  only
    one of the factors that made it conducive to the public good to  deport
    criminals.  Other factors  included  the  need  to  mark  the  public's
    revulsion of the offence and the need to deter others.  It  was  stated
    that the judge had not considered those factors.  It  was  argued  that
    there was no evidence  on  which  the  judge  could  have  reached  the
    conclusion that there was a low risk of offending but even if there was
    a "low risk" that still amounted to a "real risk".

26.  It was pointed out  that  the  appellant's  criminal  history  included
    multiple sexual assaults on a young female and it was pointed out  that
    the judge  had  noted  that  the  appellant  had  not  initially  taken
    responsibility for the offence and had given an inconsistent account in
    relation to his trafficking claim.  It was therefore  unclear  how  the
    judge had come to the conclusion that the appellant was at a  low  risk
    of re-offending.

27.  It was also argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  acknowledge  the
    factors in Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 and balance the clear public interest against the  rights  of  the
    appellant.

28.  Finally, it was argued that the judge  had  given  weight  to  material
    matters in that she had relied on the reports presented on the date  of
    hearing and that it was unclear from the letter from HT's head  teacher
    whether or not she was aware of the serious nature of  the  appellant's
    offending.  Similarly the social  worker  report  and  the  psychiatric
    report had not taken that factor into account.  The  judge  had  simply
    accepted the reports at face value without considering they would  have
    predominantly been based on the appellant's and NV's oral testimony.

29.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  Mr  Bramble  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal.  He further argued that the judge had not considered
    whether or not the whole family could return to Vietnam and  had  given
    no reasons for finding it to be unduly harsh for HT  to  accompany  the
    appellant to Vietnam that was a matter which had been dealt with in the
    refusal letter which had been ignored by the judge. It was, however, an
    option available to the appellant and NV.  Moreover he emphasised  that
    the judge had failed to analyse the public interest in deportation  and
    the importance of the effect of deportation on foreign  criminals.   He
    stated the judge had not engaged with the sentencing  remarks  and  nor
    had she properly considered the issue of whether or not the removal  of
    the appellant would have an unduly harsh effect on HT.

30.  In reply Mr Lay argued that the judge  had  followed  the  decision  in
    MAB.   The  basis  of  that  decision  had  been  that  the  issue   of
    proportionality was not a factor when dealing with the issue of whether
    or not removal was unduly harsh.  He referred to the  headnote  in  MAB
    which stated that:-

         "1.  The phrase "unduly harsh" in paragraph 399 of the  Rules  (and
             Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not import  a  balancing
             exercise requiring the public interest to be  weighed  against
             the circumstances  of  the  individual  (where  the  child  or
             partner of the  deportee).   The  focus  is  solely  upon  the
             valuation of the consequences and impact upon  the  individual
             concerned."

    Quite correctly, however, Mr Lay refers me to the determination in  KMO
    (Section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC) which made it  clear
    that the Immigration Rules, in the context  of  the  deportation  of  a
    foreign criminal were a complete code, that it was  necessary  to  have
    regard to all relevant  factors  and  that  that  included  the  public
    interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal  and  that  the  word
    "unduly" the phrase "unduly harsh" required consideration  of  whether,
    in the light of the  seriousness  of  the  offences  committed  by  the
    foreign criminal and the public interest considerations that came  into
    play, the impact on  the  child,  children  or  partner  of  a  foreign
    criminal being deported was inordinately or excessively harsh.

31.  Mr Lay went on  to  argue  that  the  decision  in  KMO  had  not  been
    promulgated at the time of the determination and  therefore  the  judge
    would be entitled to follow the determination in MAB -  the  judge  was
    applying the law as it stood.  He argued that the judge had taken  into
    account all relevant factors and  had  properly  weighed  them  up  and
    reached conclusions which were open to her.  In any  event  she  argued
    that the judge had made a clear decision under Rule 399A that it  would
    be unduly harsh for HT  to  live  in  Britain  without  the  appellant.
    Having done so conclusions under paragraph 398(c)  were  in  effect  an
    alternative conclusion - a belt and  braces  exercise.   He  emphasised
    that the clear decision under MAB  was  that  exception  2  in  Section
    117C(5) made no reference to the issue of the public  interest  in  the
    deportation  of  this  appellant.   He  argued  they  would  find  that
    therefore there was no error of law in the determination of the judge.

32.  In reply Mr Bramble again referred to  the  headnote  at  MAB  and  the
    definition of unduly harsh and emphasised what he referred  to  as  the
    over-arching position of the public good in the deportation of  foreign
    criminals.

Discussion

33.  I find that there are material errors of law in  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Judge.  The reality is that the public interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is clearly set out in  Section  32  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 which emphasises that the  Secretary  of  State
    must make a deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal and that
    the deportation of a foreign criminal was conducive to the public good.
     The conditions to be met  include  that  the  person  must  have  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve  months.   The
    provisions of the Rules must then be considered. When  considering  the
    rights of an appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR paragraphs  398  and
    399 must be considered. Paragraph 398(b) states that the deportation of
    the foreign criminal is conducive to the public  good  when  they  have
    been the victim of an offence for which they had been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at  least  twelve
    months.

34.  The exceptions in paragraph 399A raise the issue of whether or  not  it
    would be "unduly harsh" for the child to live in the country  to  which
    the person is to be deported or for the  child  to  remain  in  Britain
    without the person who is to be deported.

35.  The judge has simply not engaged with the issue of whether  or  not  it
    would be unduly harsh for HT to  live  with  the  appellant  and  other
    members of his family in Vietnam.  The term unduly harsh is defined  in
    the headnote in the determination in MAB  and  there  was  nothing  put
    forward - and in the determination there is certainly no evidence cited
    - that it would be unduly harsh for HT  to  live  in  Vietnam.   It  is
    accepted that he cannot be expected to leave Britain  but  as  is  made
    clear in the judgments both in Lee and in LC (China)  the  decision  on
    whether or not this family decides  to  leave  Britain  and  return  to
    Vietnam is a matter for them.  The reality,  of  course,  is  that  the
    appellant and his wife's own two children are young and  could  clearly
    adapt to living in the country of their nationality and neither NV  nor
    the appellant has settled status here.

36.  The evidence before the judge regarding the  difficulties  which  would
    be faced by NV should the appellant be removed and should she decide to
    remain in Britain with HT was based upon the social worker's report and
    that of HT's head teacher.   There  is  nothing  in  those  reports  to
    indicate that either of them were either aware of the importance of the
    public interest in the deportation of a man who had committed a serious
    sexual offence or that they had engaged with the question of what  life
    would be like for this family in Vietnam.  Moreover they have failed to
    deal with the fact that in the past NV  was  able  to  look  after  the
    children without the help of social services while the appellant was in
    prison. It appears that the social worker's report was  only  based  on
    what the appellant and NV had told her.  There is no critical  analysis
    of the reports.

37.  Moreover there appears no reason why the judge has concluded  that  the
    appellant was not likely to re-offend but while I accept that  that  is
    what the appellant stated and indeed that was his wife said that is  at
    odds, not only with the persistent nature of the appellant's offending,
    but also the sentencing remarks of the judge and the judge's conclusion
    that the appellant remained in "total denial". It is of note  that  the
    judge ended his comments by stating "As long as you  remain  in  denial
    there remains a significant risk of harm in this case."  On  the  basis
    of those remarks it is difficult to  understand  how  the  judge  would
    reach the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  no  longer  at  risk.
    Moreover,  of  course  the  appellant  remains  on  the  Sex  Offenders
    Register.

38.  Of particular concern is the fact that the judge did  not  engage  with
    the public interest in the deportation of this foreign criminal.  While
    I realise that the decision in MAB was before the judge and that in KMO
    was not, I still consider that the whole context of  the  consideration
    of deportation and the terms of Section 32 of the 2007 Act, through the
    terms of the Rules and, indeed, also the terms of Section 117C  of  the
    2002 Act as amended make it clear that the public interest issue is one
    that should be at the forefront of  a  judge's  mind  when  considering
    deportation.

39.  For these reasons I find there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and I set aside her decision.

40.   I  consider  that,  taking  into  account  the  Senior  President   of
    Tribunal's Practice and Directions that it  is  appropriate  that  this
    appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

Decision

 1. The determination of the Judge in the First-tier is set aside.

 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier tribunal for a hearing afresh.



Directions.

  . The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh in the First-tier.

  . Both parties should produce skeleton arguments  to  be  served  on  the
    Tribunal and on each other 14 days before the hearing.

  . The appellant's skeleton shall be cross referenced to  an  indexed  and
    paginated bundle of all statements and reports which must be served  14
    days before the hearing.

  . Time estimate 3 hours; Vietnamese Interpreter.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

