

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01023/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2013                           |On 31 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     BMG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr F Okungbowa, Duncan Lewis & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1) A panel comprising Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walker  and  Mr  B
      Yates dismissed this appeal  against  a  decision  by  the  respondent
      refusing to revoke a deportation order.

   2) The appellant was  convicted  in  November  2010  of  being  knowingly
      concerned in fraudulent  evasion  of  prohibition  or  restriction  of
      importation of Class A controlled drugs and sentenced to  imprisonment
      for 54 months.  A deportation order  against  him  was  signed  on  15
      October 2012.  An appeal against deportation was unsuccessful.

   3) In November 2012 the appellant made an asylum claim, which was treated
      by the respondent as an application for revocation of the  deportation
      order.  The refusal to revoke the deportation order was dated  16  May
      2013.  In the view of the respondent the asylum claim was  subject  to
      section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on  the
      basis that the appellant's offence was a particularly serious one  and
      he constituted a danger to the community.  The respondent argued  that
      the appellant was not entitled to refugee status in terms  of  section
      72 and that he was not eligible for humanitarian protection  in  terms
      of paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules.

   4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal upheld the respondent's  decision
      under section 72 on the basis that the appellant had been convicted by
      a final judgment of a particularly serious  crime  and  constitutes  a
      danger to the community of the UK.  The appellant had  claimed  asylum
      on the basis that he feared being killed at the hands  of  a  gang  in
      Jamaica, who had threatened him in order to extract  money  from  him.
      The appellant was not entitled to refugee status  or  to  humanitarian
      protection.  So far as Articles 2 and 3 were  concerned,  the  country
      information showed there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
      appellant could seek help and assistance from the authorities  if  the
      need arose.  There was also the possibility of internal relocation.

   5) This left for consideration the appellant's right to private or family
      life.  The Tribunal noted that the appellant has four children in  the
      UK by four different partners.  These children have been born  over  a
      period of less than 6 years.  The first, B, was born in November 2004,
      the second, K, was born in February 2006, the third, D,  was  born  in
      May 2010 and the  youngest,  T,  was  born  in  September  2010.   The
      Tribunal noted that the youngest child was conceived  while  his  wife
      was approximately 4 or 5 months pregnant with the  third  child.   The
      Tribunal  commented  that  this  did  not   show   much   loyalty   or
      responsibility  toward  his  then  current  partner  or  his  existing
      children.  The Tribunal had  doubts  about  the  appellant's  declared
      intention to commit himself to his wife and to be a good father to all
      of his children.

   6) The Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant's wife, SG.   When  she
      was asked about the effects on her of the  appellant's  offending  and
      imprisonment she referred to the serious financial hardship which  had
      resulted for her and her daughter.  The Tribunal's impression was that
      the appellant's wife was more concerned  with  financial  issues  than
      with "domestic and purely marital ones".  The Tribunal heard  evidence
      from the appellant's sister-in-law and a cousin of  his  wife.   These
      witnesses spoke highly of the appellant and  said  that  the  children
      looked up to him as a male  role  model.  They  did  not  seem  to  be
      concerned that the appellant had been involved in  serious  crime  and
      this led the Tribunal to have some reservations  about their evidence.



   7) The Tribunal accepted that the appellant is living with his  wife  and
      daughter, D,  and  that  there  was  family  life  although  of  short
      duration.  The Tribunal did not accept  that  the  appellant  has  any
      family life with any of his other partners, although no claim had been
      made by the appellant in this regard.  The  Tribunal  did  not  accept
      that the appellant has family life with his other children.  There was
      a lack of evidence from the mothers and/or guardians of these children
      as to whether they consented to any contact with the appellant and, if
      so, what the extent of this was.  In relation to the  youngest  child,
      T, there was no evidence that the appellant had ever  seen  her  apart
      from a claim by the  appellant  that  he  had  seen  her  twice.   The
      Tribunal  accepted  that  the  appellant's  wife  and  D  are  British
      citizens.  At the date of the hearing the appellant  had  been  living
      with them for 2 months.

   8) The Tribunal accepted that the greatest interference with family  life
      would be  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  and  D.   In  their
      relationship the appellant and his wife had been apart for longer than
      they had been together.  His daughter, D, was now aged 3 and had spent
      most of her life not living with and not really  knowing  her  father.
      They had only been living together  as  a  family  for  the  past  two
      months.   The  interference  with  family  life  resulting  from   the
      appellant's deportation was outweighed by the  public  interest.   The
      best interests of the appellant's children were  for  them  to  remain
      with their primary carers, who were their mothers in  respect  of  the
      first three, and a special guardian in relation to T.

   9) The application for permission to appeal on behalf  of  the  appellant
      contended that the Tribunal had failed to take into account  a  report
      by an independent social worker in  respect  of  D.   It  was  further
      contended that the Tribunal did not give adequate reasons in  relation
      to proportionality and, in particular, did not mention or refer to  an
      OASys report.  This referred  to  the  appellant's  low  risk  of  re-
      offending and the efforts he had made to rehabilitate.  It was further
      contended  that  there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  refusing   an
      adjournment to enable the appellant's probation officer to  provide  a
      report to cover the period for which the appellant was on bail and his
      conduct since the offence was committed.  The  probation  officer  was
      unable to provide a report because she was on holiday and was not  due
      to return from holiday until after the hearing  date.   Permission  to
      appeal was granted on these grounds on the basis that the interests of
      a child were involved and it was "just arguable that if the panel  had
      expressly  considered  and  made  findings  taking  into  account  the
      independent social worker's report and the OASys  report,  they  might
      have come to a different conclusion."

Submissions

  10) At the hearing before me Mr Okungbowa relied upon the application  for
      permission to appeal.  He referred to the report by independent social
      worker in respect of D.  The Tribunal was not correct at paragraph  70
      of the determination to say that the appellant barely knew  the  child
      before his release.  The social worker stated at page 3  that  D  knew
      her father.  The Tribunal did not consider the effect  of  removal  on
      the children and did not consider the best interests of  the  children
      at all.  These were detailed in the social work report.  Reference was
      made to the case of SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155.  There were no
      adequate reasons for finding that the effect on D's family life  would
      be limited.  There was no consideration  of  the  OASys  report.   The
      Tribunal's assessment was one-sided as they had  considered  only  the
      seriousness  of  the  offence.   This  was  a  one-off  offence.   The
      appellant was seeking to rehabilitate himself.  He had been a low risk
      prisoner.  Reference was made to the case of Maslov.

  11) In relation to procedural unfairness, Mr Okungbowa submitted  that  an
      adjournment had been sought for an updated  report  from  OASys.   The
      Tribunal did not consider this relevant because of the short time  the
      appellant had spent with his daughter.  The Tribunal should  have  had
      regard to the lapse of time since the offence was committed.   On  the
      basis  of  procedural  unfairness  the  Tribunal's  decision  was  not
      sustainable and should be set aside.  The appeal should be remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant has now spent five months with
      his child and further evidence could be provided in relation to  this.



  12) For the respondent, Mr  Wilding  submitted  there  was  no  procedural
      unfairness in not adjourning.  The Tribunal gave clear reasons for not
      adjourning and if the appellant's representatives  considered  that  a
      report was necessary then they had had sufficient time to obtain this.



  13) Mr Wilding continued that it was argued on  behalf  of  the  appellant
      that the Tribunal did not consider the risk  of  re-offending  or  the
      appellant's behaviour in prison.  These  matters  were,  however,  the
      bare essentials of what would be expected by an offender and would not
      necessarily  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   deportation.    The
      appellant had been at liberty so far for only five months and had  not
      re-offended but this was not a weighty factor either.  This was a long
      sentence for a first offence.  The appellant had not been convicted of
      selling drugs on the street but of involvement in the  importation  of
      Class A drugs.  The sentence had triggered the  automatic  deportation
      provisions and only in  exceptional  circumstances  would  the  public
      interest be outweighed, having regard to paragraphs 388 and 389 of the
      Rules.

  14) Mr Wilding further referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
      MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  The Immigration Rules in  relation
      to deportation were a complete code and only a  very  compelling  case
      would succeed, especially if imprisonment was for  greater  than  four
      years.

  15) Mr Wilding referred also to SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550  and  the
      weight to be given to the legislation in  the  2007  Act.   The  OASys
      report would have added very little of substance  to  the  appellant's
      case if explicitly considered.  It was argued for the  appellant  that
      there was a low risk of re-offending but the risk of re-offending  was
      not an issue which the Tribunal weighed against the appellant.

  16) Mr Wilding continued that the Tribunal had accepted that  there  would
      be an effect on the appellant's wife and daughter of  his  deportation
      and none of their  findings  at  paragraph  70  in  this  regard  were
      incorrect.   The  Tribunal  found  family  life  established  but  the
      interference to that family life was outweighed by  the  public  good.
      The Tribunal had section 55 of  the  2009  Act  in  mind.   There  was
      nothing to suggest the Tribunal  did  not  have  all  the  documentary
      evidence before it.  Even if there was an error it was not material in
      terms of MF (Nigeria).  The appellant had not lived with his  daughter
      for a long period and she was born when he was  in  Jamaica.   He  had
      been arrested at the airport on his return.  The  social  work  report
      did not grapple with the severity  of  the  situation  and  gave  very
      little attention to the  appellant's  conviction  and  sentence.   The
      Tribunal accepted that it was in the best interests of the children to
      be with their primary carers.  It had to be accepted that  deportation
      will separate families.  This was a case with serious offending  where
      family life was less than settled and the appellant had a short period
      to establish a relationship with his child.  Any failure  to  consider
      the social work report, if it was an error,  was  not  material.   The
      Tribunal found at paragraphs 68-69 that the public interest outweighed
      the interference with family life.  The social work report  would  not
      have had any significant bearing on the outcome  of  the  appeal.   At
      paragraph 70 the Tribunal accepted there was interference with  family
      life and rightly  found  against  the  appellant.   Having  regard  to
      paragraph 70 the failure to mention the social work  report  expressly
      was not an error.

  17) In response Mr Okungbowa submitted that as the social work report  had
      not been tested before the Tribunal or considered by them, it was  not
      possible to say what effect it might have had on the  outcome  of  the
      appeal.

Discussion

  18) Mr Wilding relied on the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
      (Nigeria).  This judgment was handed down not only after  the  hearing
      of  this  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but   after   the
      application for permission to  appeal  was  made.   Nevertheless,  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal must be  read  in  accordance
      with the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  which  sets  out  the
      applicable law and the correct approach to  be  taken  in  deportation
      appeals of this nature.

  19) The Court of Appeal held that the new Rules in relation to deportation
      and family life are a complete  code.   If  the  appellant  could  not
      benefit from paragraphs 399 or 399A then it was necessary to  consider
      whether there was circumstances  which  were  sufficiently  compelling
      (and  therefore  exceptional)  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
      deportation.  It was pointed out at paragraph 42 that  in  considering
      whether removal was a proportionate interference with an  individual's
      Article 8 rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
      deportation and something very compelling is required to outweigh  the
      public interest in removal.

  20) In this appeal it is submitted on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the
      Tribunal failed to take into account a report by an independent social
      worker on the relationship between the appellant's  daughter,  D,  and
      her father and failed to have regard to an OASys report on the risk of
      re-offending and the efforts the appellant had made to rehabilitate.

  21) In general terms, Mr Okungbowa had some  justification  for  expecting
      that a Tribunal should take into account an expert report  and  either
      accept it or give good reasons for its rejection.  Mr Wilding  pointed
      out, however, that at paragraph 70 of the determination  the  Tribunal
      accepted that the interference with the appellant's family life  would
      have its greatest effect on his wife and on his daughter, D.  This was
      outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   Mr   Wilding
      submitted that the report by the independent social worker  showed  no
      more than what the Tribunal had already concluded, namely  that  there
      would be interference  with  the  appellant's  family  life  with  his
      daughter, and with hers with him, and would not affect  the  balancing
      exercise, in terms  of  which  the  public  interest  outweighed  this
      interference.

  22) I accept Mr Wilding's argument in  this  regard.   The  appellant  was
      sentenced to imprisonment for a period of more than four years,  which
      is not only sufficient to invoke the automatic deportation  provisions
      in section 32 of the 2007 Act but  takes  the  appellant  outwith  the
      protection for family life provided by paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the
      Immigration Rules.  This is a clear  indication  of  the  considerable
      weight to be given to the public interest where an offender  has  been
      sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  four  years  or   more.    In   such
      circumstances, even if the appellant had enjoyed settled  family  life
      with his child or indeed, several children for a considerable  period,
      the public interest in deportation would not necessarily be outweighed
      by the interference with family life, even having regard to  the  best
      interests of the child or children.  In the circumstances in which the
      Tribunal in this appeal found that family life had  been  carried  on,
      the Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  public  interest  in
      deportation outweighed the interference with family life.

  23) Mr Okungbowa further argued that the Tribunal erred in  not  referring
      to the OASys report, on the basis of which the appellant constituted a
      low risk of re-offending.  He had  been  a  model  prisoner  and  made
      attempts to rehabilitate.  He had committed no further offences.

  24) Mr Wilding's submission was that these factors would not outweigh  the
      public interest in deportation but were simply a  starting  point  for
      considering the balancing exercise in relation to the public interest.
       By this submission I took Mr Wilding to mean that were these  factors
      absent then it would be much more difficult for the appellant to  show
      that the interference with his private or family life  outweighed  the
      public interest but, even where these factors were in the  appellant's
      favour, they did not lead to the conclusion that the  public  interest
      would be insufficient to justify the interference with the appellant's
      private or family life.

  25) I accept Mr Wilding's argument in this  regard.   Furthermore,  as  Mr
      Wilding went on to submit, the basis of  the  Tribunal's  decision  in
      respect of Article 8 was not the risk of re-offending but  the  nature
      of the conviction and sentence, which the Tribunal  categorised  as  a
      very serious crime.  The tribunal went on to  say,  at  paragraph  69,
      that while this was his only conviction he appeared to be a person who
      would ignore rules and regulations when it suited him.  He had entered
      the UK with only one month's leave to remain but became an overstayer.
       Even after he was apprehended he failed to report and managed to stay
      at large for a considerable period.  Even at a time  when  he  claimed
      that he wanted to regularise his situation and obtain leave to  remain
      as a spouse he was actively involved in criminality.  During this same
      period he was in what he claimed was a  brief  relationship  with  his
      fourth "baby-mother".  In the view of the  Tribunal  this  showed  the
      appellant to be a person who was quite prepared to do what  he  wanted
      and to ignore his responsibilities to others, whether the community at
      large or individuals.

  26) The Tribunal was entitled to find that the nature of  the  appellant's
      conviction and sentence was sufficient in itself to  show  the  public
      interest in deportation without having  regard  to  the  risk  of  re-
      offending or the appellant's behaviour in prison.  In other words,  it
      was not the appellant's future behaviour which  led  the  Tribunal  to
      conclude that the public interest in this deportation  outweighed  the
      interference under Article 8 but his past behaviour.  The Tribunal did
      not err in making its decision in this way.

  27) The final point is that  of  procedural  unfairness.   As  Mr  Wilding
      pointed out, the Tribunal considered the adjournment  application  and
      gave their reasons for refusing to  adjourn  at  paragraph  7  of  the
      determination.  The Tribunal considered that an up-to-date  report  by
      the probation officer would add little to the appellant's case as  the
      probation officer had seen the appellant on only a limited  number  of
      times between his release in July and the  hearing  on  16  September.
      This was a decision the Tribunal was entitled to make and there was no
      unfairness to the appellant arising from this.

Conclusions

  28) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of error on a point of law.

  29) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

  30) The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity  and,  for  the
      reasons given by it, I continue this direction in the form of an order
      under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
