
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                           |On 05 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                            THE HON LORD MATTHEWS
                 (sitting as a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  mS J D o
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Karen Reid, Counsel instructed by Charles
                    Simmons, Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because the decision touches on the welfare of children  who
    might be harmed by publicity and we see no legitimate  public  interest
    in their identities rather than the facts of the case.

 2. This is a case where we do not think it will be of any value to anybody
    to set out a long explanation of its history. Suffice it to say it  has
    been previously decided unsatisfactorily and comes  before  us  on  the
    direction of the Court of Appeal.

 3. The appellant is a foreign national and is a citizen of Brazil. However
    it is accepted that for reasons we need not explain the case is  to  be
    dealt with under the provisions  relating  to  EEA  nationals  and  the
    particular Rules that  apply  to  deportation  in  such  cases.   As  a
    consequence of this it  is  accepted  that  in  order  to  justify  the
    decision the Secretary of State has to  show  that  the  person  to  be
    removed represents a "genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society under  Regulation
    21(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations".

 4. It is accepted that the appellant has behaved badly and as a result  of
    that has been sent to prison for eighteen months.  It is  accepted  too
    that she is the mother of two British citizen children  who  are  small
    and their best interests lie in being in the care of  their  mother  in
    the United Kingdom which is their country of nationality.

 5. The appellant was convicted in 2013.  She has not been in  any  trouble
    since.  We know from  our  experience  that  for  many  offenders  this
    represents a significant break. It is wholly consistent with  a  person
    who is  intent  on  living  industriously  and  honestly  and  entirely
    inconsistent with a  person  who  represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.

 6. We have been  greatly  assisted  in  this  case  by  both  parties  and
    particularly Mr Melvin for the Secretary  of  State  who  narrowed  the
    issues right down to this  one  point  and  to  Mr  Melvin's  realistic
    submissions limited to that point.  We mean him no disrespect  when  we
    say we found his submissions unpersuasive. We are satisfied  that  this
    is not a case where the appellant represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat and we have no hesitation in  allowing  her
    appeal.

    Notice of Decision

 7. The appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
    allowed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 January 2019                |

