

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01254/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |                  Decision & Reasons    |
|On 17 August 2015                     |Promulgated                             |
|                                      |On 5 November 2015                      |
|                                      |                                        |
|                                      |                                        |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between


                              AURIMAS PRANAITIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms V. Easty of counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms S. Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who  is  a  citizen  of  Lithuania,  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of a panel of the First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision  of  the  respondent
      made on 25 June 2014 that he should be deported on the basis that,  as
      a consequence of his criminal offending, both in Lithuania and in  the
      United Kingdom, he posed a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
      threat to the interests of public policy if he were allowed to  remain
      in the United Kingdom.


   2. In order to inform the discussion that follows it is  helpful  to  set
      out at the outset the reasons given by the respondent for  making  the
      decision under challenge in these proceedings:


           "On 2 February 2006 at the District Court of Kedainai region  in
           Lithuania, you were convicted of robbery and were sentenced to 2
           years' imprisonment. Between 18 July 2005 and  6  May  2014  you
           have amassed 18 convictions for 29 offences.  These  include  18
           theft   and   kindred   offences,   9   offences   relating   to
           police/court/prisons,  one  offence  against  property  and  one
           firearm/shotgun/offensive  weapons  offence.  The  Secretary  of
           State has  considered  the  offences  of  which  you  have  been
           convicted and your conduct, in accordance with regulation 21  of
           the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.  She
           is  satisfied  that  you  would  pose  a  genuine,  present  and
           sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy if
           you were to be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom and  that
           your deportation is  justified  under  regulation  21.  She  has
           therefore decided under regulation 19(3)(b) that you  should  be
           removed and an order made in accordance with  regulation  24(3),
           requiring you to leave the United Kingdom  and  prohibiting  you
           from re-entering while the order is in force. For the purpose of
           the order section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act  19971  will
           apply. The Secretary of State proposes to  give  directions  for
           your removal to Lithuania,  the  country  of  which  you  are  a
           national."


   3. Ms Easty, who appears for the  appellant,  pursues  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal the following grounds of appeal against the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal:

        a. The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  their  conclusion  that  the
           appellant had the benefit only of the lowest level of protection
           afforded by regulation 21 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
           2006 ("the EEA regulations");


        b. Although the panel referred  to  regulation  21(6)  of  the  EEA
           regulations,  they  failed  to  have  regard  to   the   matters
           identified by that regulation. As it was a mandatory requirement
           that they did so, that failure discloses also a  material  error
           of law;

        c. It was an error of law for the panel not to have carried  out  a
           comparative assessment of the  prospects  of  rehabilitation  in
           Lithuania as opposed to the United Kingdom;

        d. The panel erred in their finding that the  appellant  could  not
           meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
           Rules and that there would not be an impermissible  infringement
           of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR because  they  gave
           no reasons whatever for reaching that conclusion and  failed  to
           carry out any adequate assessment.

   4. The relevant provisions of both the EEA regulations and the  Directive
      they implement into domestic  law,  the  Citizens'  Directive  2004/38
      ("the Directive") are annexed to this decision. For  present  purposes
      it is sufficient to note that the effect of  these  provisions  is  to
      provide three levels of protection against removal, depending upon the
      extent to which the EEA national has demonstrated becoming  integrated
      into the United Kingdom as a result of  continuous  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom.


   5. Thus, an EEA national cannot be  removed  on  the  grounds  of  public
      policy, public  security  or  public  health  unless  the  threat  his
      continued  presence  poses  is  "genuine,  present  and   sufficiently
      serious", having taken into account the factors set out in  regulation
      21(5) and (6), which we examine in detail below.


   6. The EEA regulations provide  enhanced  levels  of  protection  against
      removal for EEA nationals who  have  become  integrated  in  the  host
      member state as a consequence of living  for  a  sufficiently  lengthy
      period of time in that member state. Thus, regulation  21(3)  provides
      that an EEA national with a permanent right  of  residence,  which  is
      acquired  as  a  consequence  of  completing  five  years'  continuous
      residence in accordance with the regulations, cannot be removed except
      upon serious grounds of public policy or public  security.  Regulation
      21(4) provides the highest level of protection for an EEA national who
      has "resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least
      ten years prior to the relevant decision". Such  a  person  cannot  be
      removed except upon imperative grounds of public security.


   7. The appellant, both at the date of the decision and at the date of the
      hearing, had been residing in  the  United  Kingdom  for  about  seven
      years. During that period he committed a number of offences  of  theft
      from shops (offences that have been referred to as  "shoplifting")  so
      that he could not point to a single continuous period  of  five  years
      residence during which he had not served a prison sentence. That meant
      that he did  not  qualify  for  permanent  residence.  However,  after
      deducting from his overall period or residence in the  United  Kingdom
      the periods spent in prison, he could demonstrate that he had spent an
      overall period residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
      EEA regulations of more than five years.


   8. Before the First-tier Tribunal it was argued that,  as  the  appellant
      had spent a total of more than  five  years  residing  in  the  United
      Kingdom after the periods spent in prison were deducted, therefore  he
      could aggregate those periods before and after  the  prison  sentences
      and so qualify for permanent  residence.  That  argument  was  plainly
      wrong and the panel were clearly correct to  reject  it.  Although  Ms
      Easty, realistically, did not pursue that submission before the  Upper
      Tribunal, she did advance a submission relating to the possibility  of
      aggregating  periods  of  residence  before   and   after   terms   of
      imprisonment, not to qualify  for  permanent  residence  but  to  have
      access to  the  intermediate  level  of  protection  against  removal.
      Therefore, it is necessary to be clear about the reasons why the first
      argument that she does not pursue is one that cannot succeed.


   9. In Nnamdi Onuekwere v SSHD [2014] EUECJ C-378/12 the Court of  Justice
      addressed these questions:


           1) In what circumstances, if any, will a period of  imprisonment
              constitute  legal  residence  for   the   purposes   of   the
              acquisition of a permanent right of residence  under  Article
              16 of [Directive 2004/38]?


           2) If a  period  of  imprisonment  does  not  qualify  as  legal
              residence,  is  a  person  who  has  served   a   period   of
              imprisonment permitted  to  aggregate  periods  of  residence
              before  and  after  his  imprisonment  for  the  purposes  of
              calculating the period of five years needed  to  establish  a
              permanent right of residence under [Directive 2004/38]?

      The answer to the first question was delivered in uncompromising terms
      at paragraph 22 of the judgment:


           "As is clear from the very terms  and  the  purpose  of  Article
           16(2) of Directive 2004/38, periods of  imprisonment  cannot  be
           taken into consideration for the purposes of the acquisition  of
           a  right  of  permanent  residence  for  the  purpose  of   that
           provision."


  10. The answer to the second question was also  a  clear  and  unambiguous
      one. Having observed  that  the  "condition  of  continuity  of  legal
      residence  satisfies  the   integration   requirement   which   is   a
      precondition of the acquisition of the right of  permanent  residence"
      and that the imposition of a prison sentence  is  indicative  of  non-
      compliance with values expressed by the society  of  the  host  Member
      State in its criminal law:


           "It follows that the answer  to  the  second  question  is  that
           Article 16(2) and (3) of Directive 2004/38 must  be  interpreted
           as meaning  that  continuity  of  residence  is  interrupted  by
           periods of imprisonment in the host Member State..."


      Thus entitlement to a right of permanent residence arises not just  as
      a consequence of the passage of time spent in the host  Member  State.
      It is recognised  that  a  person  who  has  spent  a  continuous  and
      uninterrupted period of five years residing  in  accordance  with  the
      regulations, that is, exercising Treaty rights, will have demonstrated
      something else, that being becoming integrated into the host state. On
      the other  hand,  a  person  who  has  not  managed  to  accumulate  a
      continuous period of five  years  residence  in  accordance  with  the
      regulations because he has demonstrated the very  opposite  of  moving
      towards becoming integrated in the host state  by  the  commission  of
      criminal offences, has not demonstrated that he has become integrated.
      This reflects the ambition of  recital  17  in  the  preamble  to  the
      Directive:

           "Enjoyment of permanent residence by  Union  citizens  who  have
           chosen to settle long  term  in  the  host  Member  State  would
           strengthen the feeling of Union citizenship and is a key element
           in promoting social cohesion, which is one  of  the  fundamental
           objectives of the Union. A right of permanent  residence  should
           therefore be laid down for all Union citizens and  their  family
           members who have resided in the host Member State in  compliance
           with the  conditions  laid  down  in  this  Directive  during  a
           continuous period of five years without becoming subject  to  an
           expulsion measure."

  11. When approaching the discussion concerning the  levels  of  protection
      from deportation, it is important to keep in mind that there  are  two
      different concepts in play. One is a right to permanent residence as a
      result of becoming integrated  in  the  host  state  as  evidenced  by
      meeting  the  requirements  of  regulation  15.  The  other   is   the
      proportionality of the proposed removal, given  the  extent  to  which
      integration has been demonstrated and the level of risk occasioned  by
      the continued presence of the EEA national in the Member State.

  12.  The  recognition  of  a  right  of  permanent  residence  under   the
      regulations is the recognition of a status  of  integration.  It  does
      more than certify a  period  of  legal  residence.  Therefore  an  EEA
      national who has established that and who subsequently  finds  himself
      facing deportation as a consequence of  criminal  offending  is  in  a
      different position from such a person who can also demonstrate a total
      of five years residence in accordance with  the  regulations  but  not
      accumulated in one continuous period.


  13. Although, therefore, Ms Easty  accepts  that  the  appellant  did  not
      qualify for permanent residence, she submits that,  drawing  upon  the
      jurisprudence relating to access to the highest  level  of  protection
      and  applying,  by  analogy,  the  same  approach  to  access  to  the
      intermediate level of protection, a person such as the appellant could
      access that intermediate level of protection by aggregating five years
      residence after deducting periods of imprisonment. Ms  Petterson,  who
      resists that interpretation, concurred  with  Ms  Easty's  observation
      that there appears to be no direct authority on the point.


  14. It is, therefore, necessary to examine what is required to access  the
      highest level of protection against deportation on the  basis  of  ten
      years residence.


  15. In SSHD v MG (C-400/12) the Court  of  Justice  was  concerned,  inter
      alia, with the question of whether the ten years'  residence  demanded
      by Article 28 in order to have the benefit of  the  highest  level  of
      protection against deportation had to be continuous and  unbroken,  or
      whether it could comprise an overall period of residence punctuated by
      periods of imprisonment but amounting to ten years  after  periods  of
      imprisonment had been deducted. The Court concluded that:


           "... on a proper construction of Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive
           2004/38, the 10 year period of residence  referred  to  in  that
           provision  must,  in  principle,  be  continuous  and  must   be
           calculated by counting  back  from  the  date  of  the  decision
           ordering the expulsion of the person concerned."


      But the Court went on to indicate that the absence of a continuous and
      unbroken period of 10 years residence did not necessarily disqualify a
      person from having the benefit of the highest level of protection:


           "As for the question of the extent to which  the  non-continuous
           nature of the period of residence during the 10 years  preceding
           the decision to expel the person  concerned  prevents  him  from
           enjoying enhanced protection, an overall assessment must be made
           of that person's situation on each occasion at the precise  time
           when the question of  expulsion  arises  (see  to  that  effect,
           Tsakouridis, paragraph 32).
           ...


           ...Article 28(3) of Directive 2004/38  must  be  interpreted  as
           meaning that a period of imprisonment is, in principle,  capable
           both of interrupting the continuity of the period  of  residence
           for the purposes of that provision and of affecting the decision
           regarding the grant of  the  enhanced  protection  provided  for
           thereunder, even where the person concerned resided in the  host
           Member State for the 10 years prior  to  imprisonment.  However,
           the fact that the person resided in the host  Member  State  for
           the  10  years  prior  to  imprisonment  may   be   taken   into
           consideration as part of  the  overall  assessment  required  in
           order to determine  whether  the  integrating  links  previously
           forged with the host Member State have been broken."

  16. The decision of the Court of Justice in SSHD v MG  was  considered  by
      the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MG  (prison-Article  28(3)(a)  of   Citizens
      Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  concluded
      that:


           "The judgment should be understood as meaning that a  period  of
           imprisonment during those 10 years does not necessarily  prevent
           a person from qualifying for enhanced protection if that  person
           is sufficiently  integrated.  However,  according  to  the  same
           judgment, a period of imprisonment must have a  negative  impact
           in so far as establishing integration is concerned."


  17. We respectfully agree. Further, an understanding of  the  reasons  for
      that explains also why the tension the Tribunal detected  between  the
      decisions of the Court of Justice in Onuekwere and SSHD  v  MG  is  in
      fact illusory.


  18.  The  fact  that  different  concepts  are  in  play  in  respect   of
      qualification for permanent residence and access to the highest  level
      of protection against removal is evident from the  vocabulary  of  the
      relevant provisions of the Directive and the EEA Regulations  and  the
      significance and purpose of  the  distinction  is  reinforced  by  the
      recitals to the Directive.  Thus,  in  respect  of  qualification  for
      permanent residence, Article 16 of the Directive  requires  that  that
      the EEA national must have (emphasis added):


           "... resided legally for a continuous period of five years..."


      And the EEA regulations demand that the EEA national must have:


           "... resided in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
           Regulations for a continuous period of five years..."


      By contrast, in order to qualify for the highest level  of  protection
      against removal, Article 28(3)(a) of the Directive requires  that  the
      EEA national has


           "... resided in the host  Member  State  for  the  previous  ten
           years..."


      And regulation 21(4) of the EEA Regulations provide  that  a  relevant
      decision may not be taken except on imperative grounds in  respect  of
      an EEA national who:


           "has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
           least ten years prior to the relevant decision"


  19. It will be seen that in order to qualify for permanent residence there
      must be a continuous period  of  five  years  residence  spent  either
      "legally" or "in accordance with these regulations", which  continuous
      period of legal or regulation compliant residence is not  achieved  if
      punctuated by a prison sentence.  On  the  other  hand,  in  order  to
      qualify for the highest level of protection against removal  something
      quite different is  required.  The  Directive  requires  a  period  of
      residence of at least ten years, and  the  EEA  regulations  demand  a
      continuous period of residence and not that the period of residence be
      in accordance with  the  regulations.   This  explains  the  different
      approach taken by the Court of Justice in Onuekwere and SSHD v MG.


  20. We can anticipate one argument that might be raised  in  criticism  of
      this analysis. It is possible that a  person  might  not  qualify  for
      permanent residence because he has never managed  to  accumulate  five
      years continuous residence without committing an offence for which  he
      was imprisoned, yet manages to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
      sufficiently long time to accumulate  at  least  ten  years  residence
      after discounting periods of imprisonment. That  would  mean  that  he
      would have access to the enhanced level of protection even  though  he
      had not first secured permanent residence.


  21. We do not see this to raise any  particular  difficulty.  As  we  have
      observed,  provisions  for  permanent  residence  and  for  protection
      against removal are catering for different objectives.  The  rationale
      of the Directive and the EEA regulations is that its arrangements  are
      founded upon the concept of integration. A person who has not  managed
      to secure a right of permanent residence because he has been unable to
      avoid prison for more than  five  years  at  any  one  time  but  has,
      nonetheless, resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  ten  years  after
      deducting periods of imprisonment will be someone in respect  of  whom
      the respondent could have, but either did  not  or  was  not  able  to
      remove him at some early point in time. That person will be unable  to
      demonstrate integration by completing the  five  year  period  without
      serving a prison sentence but will be able to show that  his  presence
      has been tolerated for ten years while exercising Treaty rights in the
      United Kingdom so that, applying the principle of  proportionality  as
      required by the Directive and  so  by  the  EEA  Regulations  also,  a
      removal decision cannot be justified.


  22. Having said that, the fact that a period of residence of ten years has
      been punctuated by periods of imprisonment is not  irrelevant  because
      this is  one  of  the  factors  that  falls  to  be  considered  under
      regulation 21(5) and (6).

  23. It follows from this  that  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to  the
      intermediate level of protection and  the  panel  that  dismissed  his
      appeal made no error of law  in  applying  only  the  basic  level  of
      protection provided by regulation 21.


  24. The second ground pursued is that,  although  the  panel  referred  to
      regulation 21(6) of the EEA regulations, they failed to have regard to
      them  in  reaching  their  decision.  Of  course,  the  provisions  of
      regulation 21(5) also come into play. In the context of  this  appeal,
      the following matters were, therefore, of particular relevance:


        a. The principle of proportionality;
        b. Whether the personal conduct of  the  appellant  meant  that  he
           continued to represent   a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
           serious threat;
        c. Recognition that the fact  of  the  appellant  having  committed
           offences in the past did  not  of  itself  justify  the  removal
           decision;
        d. The appellant's family and economic situation;
        e. His length of residence in the United Kingdom;
        f. The appellant's social and cultural integration into the  United
           Kingdom and the extent of his links with Lithuania.


  25. The judge recorded in the determination the relevant  evidence  relied
      upon by the appellant. At paragraph 15 he said this:


           "(the  appellant)  accepted  he  had  broken  the  law  on  many
           occasions but he saw crime as a way to survive. It was something
           he had grown up to know. He said he realises now that  this  way
           of life is not acceptable. So he is doing everything he  can  to
           become a respectable resident in the UK. He said  that  he  will
           now stop committing crime if he is allowed to  remain  here.  In
           the past, crime was all he knew because  his  parents  moved  to
           Germany when he was young and he became friends with people  who
           led him into believing that crime was the only way  to  live....
           The decision to deport him made him realise for the  first  time
           that the "stupid things he was doing" could have such an adverse
           effect on the rest of his life..."


  26. The judge went on to record the appellant's evidence  of  having  been
      involved with a "dangerous gang of people" in Lithuania  who  had  led
      him to be involved "in their gun crime". The appellant's evidence  was
      that, having moved to  the  United  Kingdom,  his  circumstances  were
      entirely different. He has made many friends here and he has a  sister
      and  nephew  who  live  here.  Importantly,  he  had  formed  a  close
      relationship with Ms Rebecca Hill, a British citizen with who  he  now
      lives. The judge noted his evidence about this relationship:


           "He described her as an amazing woman who was  able  to  forgive
           him for his past and who wanted to have a future with him.  When
           he was in prison she stood by him and put up her  own  money  to
           stand surety for him when he was released  on  immigration  bail
           and agreed for him to live  with  her.  They  have  cohabited...
           since he was released on immigration bail on 1 August 2014."


  27. The panel heard oral evidence from Ms Hill of which they said this:


           "Since she and the appellant have been living together since his
           release from immigration detention he has proved to her that  he
           is trustworthy and determined to prove that he is now an honest,
           law abiding citizen. He rarely stays out late and when  he  does
           they are together... She has introduced him to her  friends  and
           he has now built a new social group with people who  have  never
           been involved in crime. This has made the appellant feel ashamed
           of what he has done in the past and has given him inspiration to
           look up to these people and to be the good person that they  all
           believe him to be. He has "traditional views on life" and  wants
           to get married and provide for his family. He still has a lot to
           prove to her parents though, so he wants to gain their trust and
           acceptance for her hand in marriage. For this reason  alone  she
           believes the appellant will not offend again. She said he is her
           future and she could not see her life with anyone else..."


  28. Ms Hill discovered that the appellant had a history of offending  only
      after he was last  convicted  and  imprisoned  in  January  2014.  The
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  Ms  Hill  could  not
      move to Lithuania for a number of reasons. She has  been  employed  by
      Barclays Bank PLC for about three years and has a continuing need  for
      expensive treatment for a long standing health issue. She  would  need
      to work in Lithuania to fund that health  treatment  on  a  long  term
      basis but would  not  be  able  to  find  employment  because  of  the
      obstacles of both language and ill-health.


  29. Having reviewed the appellant's history of offending, describing it as
      "truly appalling "and noted that since moving to  the  United  Kingdom
      his offending has been as "a persistent shoplifter", the panel said:


           "it is against this that we consider  the  evidence  of  Rebecca
           Hill who supports the appellant's evidence  that  he  is  now  a
           changed man who would be a law abiding citizen if he is  allowed
           to remain and someone who would never re-offend."




      But concluded that:


           "We cannot be satisfied on the evidence before us that there  is
           no present, genuine  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
           interests of public policy."


      That was because he had in the past committed offences of  shoplifting
      even when in employment and he had not been deterred  from  committing
      offences by the sentences imposed for earlier ones. He  had  committed
      no fewer than sixteen offences over a period of four  years.  Although
      reminding themselves that a relevant decision cannot be  solely  based
      upon a person's previous convictions, the panel observed:


           "The past, however, in a case like this, must surely indicate  a
           risk of future offending..."


      The panel went on to say:


           "... there is one part of the decision letter we  do  not  agree
           with. Whilst  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
           undertaken any rehabilitative work while in  custody,  it  could
           not be expected because  his  prison  sentences  in  the  United
           Kingdom have  been  so  short  that  it  is  unlikely  that  any
           rehabilitative work would have been under taken with him.


           We consider the prospect of rehabilitation in the United Kingdom
           is something to be viewed with pessimism. It is established that
           in applying Regulation 21 a decision maker must consider whether
           a  decision  to  deport   may   prejudice   the   prospects   of
           rehabilitation from offending in the host country and weigh that
           risk  in  the  balance  when  assessing  proportionality   under
           Regulation 21 above. Apart from the opportunity to work and  the
           appellant's relationship with Rebecca Hill there is no  evidence
           of opportunities for rehabilitation in the United Kingdom.."


      On which basis the appeal was dismissed.


  30. For the reasons that follow, we are satisfied that the panel fell into
      legal error.


  31.  First,  as  Ms  Petterson  accepted,  although  the  panel  correctly
      identified the prospects of rehabilitation as a significant  issue  to
      inform their decision, they carried out no comparative analysis of the
      prospects of rehabilitation in the United Kingdom as compared with  in
      Lithuania. In Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316
      (IAC) Blake J said, at paragraphs 33 and 34:
           "It is only where rehabilitation is incomplete or uncertain that
           future prospects may play a  role  in  the  overall  assessment.
           Here we must take our guidance from  the  Court  of  Justice  in
           Tskouridis and the Court of Appeal in the present case remitting
           the matter to this Tribunal.  It is  in  the  interests  of  the
           citizen, the host state and the Union itself for an offender  to
           cease to offend.  This is most likely to be the case with  young
           offenders who commit a disproportionate number of offences,  but
           many  of  whom  will  stop  offending   as   they   mature   and
           comparatively few of whom go on to become hardened criminals and
           persistent recidivist offenders. We can exclude consideration of
           offenders beneath the age of 18 as EEA law  will  prevent  their
           deportation save in the unusual event that it is  in  their  own
           interest (Article 28 (3) (b) of the Citizens Directive).
           If the very factors that  contribute  to  his  integration  that
           assist in rehabilitation of  such  offenders  (family  ties  and
           responsibilities,    accommodation,     education,     training,
           employment, active membership of a community and the like)  will
           assist in the completion


           of a process of rehabilitation, then that can be  a  substantial
           factor in the balance.  If  the  claimant  cannot  constitute  a
           present threat  when  rehabilitated,  and  is  well-advanced  in
           rehabilitation in a host state  where  there  is  a  substantial
           degree of integration, it may well very well be disproportionate
           to proceed to deportation."
  32. This appellant has been, in the past, a prolific offender.  There  are
      two significant matters arising out of that. First,  although  he  has
      continued to offend in the United  Kingdom,  before  establishing  his
      relationship  with  Ms  Hill,  the  nature  of   his   offending   was
      significantly more serious in Lithuania than it has been in the United
      Kingdom. That is not to understate the seriousness of any  offence  of
      theft, even when  given  the  description  of  "shoplifting",  but  to
      recognise that the threat posed  by  this  individual  was  much  more
      serious in Lithuania than it has been in the United Kingdom  where  he
      has shown no propensity to commit offences of  violence  or  involving
      weapons or the threat of force. Secondly, the reason for  that  change
      in the pattern of offending is precisely  because  of  the  difference
      between the circumstance the appellant found himself in Lithuania  and
      in the United Kingdom.


  33.  When  one  adds  to  that  the  impact  upon  the  appellant  of  his
      relationship with Ms Hill and  the  evidence  that  indicated  a  real
      incentive for the appellant not to  reoffend  in  the  future,  it  is
      plain,  on  any  view,  that  the  prospects  of  rehabilitation   are
      significantly better if the applicant remains here than if he  returns
      to Lithuania.


  34. That is not a complete answer to the question of whether  the  removal
      decision is in accordance with the regulations. The next  step  is  to
      address the matters, identified above,  that  fall  to  be  considered
      under the provisions of regulations 21(5) and (6).


  35. As the removal decision cannot be founded upon a previous  history  of
      offending alone, and as the decision must be based exclusively on  the
      personal conduct of the person concerned, so that deterrence of others
      plays no part, for this appellant to represent a genuine, present  and
      sufficiently serious threat to public policy, there must be a real and
      sufficiently serious threat that he would re-offend.  It  is  apparent
      that the conclusion of the  panel  that  such  a  threat  existed  was
      founded entirely upon his history of  previous  offending,  the  panel
      observing that the appellants past record "must surely indicate a risk
      of future offending".


  36. We are reinforced in that conclusion by the requirement of  regulation
      21(6) that provides, in mandatory terms, that the decision maker  must
      take account, inter alia, of the person's family situation, which must
      include his relationship with the lady he  is  living  with,  and  his
      length of residence and level of integration into the  United  Kingdom
      as well as the extent of his links with his country of  origin  which,
      on the evidence, were not in any way significant.


  37. Drawing all of this together we reach the following  conclusions.  The
      First-tier Tribunal erred in law in failing to have proper  regard  to
      the considerations that they were  required  to  have  regard  to;  in
      founding  their  decision  upon  the  appellant's  previous   criminal
      convictions without balancing that against his  significantly  changed
      circumstances and in failing to carry out a comparative assessment  of
      the prospects of rehabilitation here as opposed to  in  Lithuania.  We
      therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  will
      re-make it.


  38. It is not necessary for us to review in detail all of the  matters  we
      have already set out. The appellant, as we have observed,  is  someone
      whose behaviour has been significantly affected by  the  circumstances
      in which he finds himself. In Lithuania he had little in  the  way  of
      sound family support and nor did he  have  available  to  him  a  law-
      abiding and respectable social  support  network.  Instead,  he  found
      himself in the company of persons disposed to commit serious crime and
      he became involved with that offending. His  circumstances  today  are
      wholly different. We are  satisfied  that  his  expressed  resolve  to
      continue to live a law-abiding, useful and productive  life  while  he
      develops further his family life with Ms Hill is sincere  and  genuine
      and, as time has gone on he has shown that this  is  something  he  is
      capable of achieving. He has every incentive to maintain that position
      and we see no reason at all why he  should  not  continue  to  do  so.
      Conversely, should he be removed to  Lithuania,  the  reality  of  the
      situation is that Ms Hill will be unable to move  there  with  him  so
      that all of the positive influences in his life will be lost.


  39. It follows from this that while the appellant remains  in  the  United
      Kingdom there is no reason at all to  doubt  that  the  position  will
      remain as it is at present.


  40. For all of the reasons we  have  given,  when  giving  effect  to  the
      principle of proportionality we conclude that  weighing  together  all
      relevant considerations the appellant does not  represent  a  genuine,
      present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
      fundamental interests of society and therefore substitute  a  decision
      to allow his appeal.


  41. There was a further ground raised by the appellant which was that  the
      appeal should have been allowed on the basis that  the  appellant  met
      the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.  As  we
      have allowed this appeal for other reasons it is necessary for  us  to
      say just that the ground as pleaded provides no basis  in  itself  for
      allowing the appeal. If  the  removal  decision  were  to  stand,  the
      private and family life asserted would  be  no  basis  upon  which  to
      displace it. As we have found  that  it  does  not,  the  question  of
      interference in any rights protected by Article 8 of the  ECHR  simply
      does not arise.


      Summary of decision


  42. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law material to  the  outcome
      of the appeal and the decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside.


  43. We substitute a fresh decision to allow the appeal.


                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    4 September 2015

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                                    ANNEX


      Regulation 21 provides as follows:

         (1) In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health.
         (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.
         (4) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
         (b) is under the  age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
         necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the  Convention
         on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly  of  the
         United Nations on 20th November 1989.
         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-
         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;


         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;
         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;
         (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;
         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.
         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.
      Regulation 21 of the EEA regulations gives effect to Article 28 of the
      Citizens Directive 2004/38:
           1.      Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds of public
           policy or public security, the  host  Member  State  shall  take
           account of  considerations  such  as  how  long  the  individual
           concerned has resided on its territory, his/her  age,  state  of
           health, family  and  economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
           integration into the host Member State and the extent of his/her
           links with the country of origin.
           2.      The host Member State may not take an expulsion decision
           against Union citizens or their family members, irrespective  of
           nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on  its
           territory, except on serious grounds of public policy or  public
           security.
           3.      An expulsion decision may not be  taken  against  Union
           citizens, except if the decision is based on imperative  grounds
           of public security, as defined by Member States, if they:
           (a)      have resided in the host Member State for the previous
           10 years; or
           (b)      are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary  for
           the best interests of the child, as provided for in  the  United
           Nations Convention on the Rights of the  Child  of  20 November
           1989.


      Regulation 15 of the EEA regulations, so far as is relevant,  provides
      as follows:


                15. -(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to
           reside in the United Kingdom permanently-

                 (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                 in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
                 period of five years;





