
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01906/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2014                                 |On 2 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                               MR TUNCAY KURT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Turkish citizen who was born on 5 October 1991.   He
    is therefore now 22 years of age.

 2. On 15 February 2010 the  appellant  then  aged  18,  was  convicted  of
    possession of an offensive weapon, robbery and breach of a  conditional
    discharge committed in  April  2009  when  he  was  aged  17.   He  was
    sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment at a Young Offenders  Institution.
    On 28 June 2010 he was served with notice of his liability to automatic
    deportation.   He  appealed  against  that  decision   reasoning   that
    automatic deportation should not apply to him because he  had  received
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  family  reunion  with  his
    father who was a recognised refugee.  The appellant was interviewed  in
    February 2011 in connection with his claim to be in continuing need  of
    international protection as a refugee.  Thereafter he was served with a
    notice of intention to cease his refugee status.  His asylum claim  was
    refused on 9 September 2013.

 3. In a letter dated 7 October 2011 the appellant was informed that due to
    his prison sentence of 30 months duration he was presumed to have  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community as per s.72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  He was informed also that the presumption was rebuttable.

 4. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appeal  came
    before a panel consisting of a First-tier  Tribunal  judge  and  a  lay
    member.  In a determination promulgated on 15 April 2014  the  Tribunal
    decided that the appellant had not rebutted the  s.72  presumption  and
    that he constitutes a danger to the community of the UK. The appeal was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and also under Articles 3  and  8
    of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision of the panel and
    permission  was  granted.   The  judge  granting  permission  found  it
    arguable that the panel erred in its approach both to the  rebuttal  of
    the s.72 presumption and in respect its assessment of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights it being  arguable  that  the  panel  failed  to  take
    account of the fact that the appellant was under 18 when  he  committed
    the index offences in the spring of 2009 - following the principles set
    out in Maslov v Austria (1683/03); [2008] ECHR 546.

 6. The judge granting permission wrote also  that  for  the  avoidance  of
    doubt all grounds may be argued but that some of the matters set out in
    the grounds are "thinner", for example, it being said  that  the  panel
    failed to take into account the  appellant's  ill-treatment  in  Turkey
    whereas all the panel found proved was that the  appellant  "may"  have
    been hit once by the Turkish police as he had claimed.

The Hearing Before Me

 7. Ms Peterson represented the appellant at the error of  law  hearing  as
    she had done before the First-tier Tribunal.  She made reference to the
    grounds seeking permission to appeal.  The submission was to the effect
    that the panel depended heavily on the  pre-sentence  probation  report
    that founded the panel's reasoning for concluding  that  the  appellant
    has not rebutted the presumption under s.72 of the 2002 Act.   However,
    the panel did not take into account the  passage  of  time  since  that
    report was prepared or that the appellant committed this offence when a
    minor.  The panel erred in giving the actual conduct of  the  appellant
    since his offending little weight preferring that he should  have  been
    enrolled in courses to address the "defects in his personality".  There
    was little evidence before the panel that such courses either exist  or
    were offered to the appellant. In the absence of the offer  of  or  the
    availability  of  such  transformative  tuition   the   appellant   had
    demonstrated that he had worked to address positively his  conduct  and
    his motivations.  Additionally Ms Peterson submitted that the panel was
    not qualified to conclude that the assessment of the writer of the pre-
    sentence report that the reasons for the appellant's offending were due
    to a lack of cognitive  skills,  poor  emotional  control,  failure  to
    consider the consequences of his behaviour, inability to problem solve,
    and inflexible  thinking  were  "personality  defects"  as  opposed  to
    immaturity.

 8. It was further submitted that  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  panel  to
    consider the seriousness of the appellant's offending in the context of
    all the circumstances set out above in  a  matter  which  involves  the
    revocation of refugee status and rebuttal of the presumption under s.72
    of the 2002 Act.  The submission is then made that  the  offending  and
    the pre-sentence report should not have been the  starting  point,  but
    instead should have been considered in the context of  the  appellant's
    circumstances, in particular in the context of his  immaturity  at  the
    time of the offence and of what he witnessed  as  a  child  in  Turkey,
    including  his  own  ill-treatment  at  the  hands   of   the   Turkish
    authorities.  The flawed assessment of the panel falls far short  of  a
    sustainable finding that he was "so dangerous" to the community that he
    failed to rebut the presumption under s.72 of the 2002 Act.

 9. A further ground of appeal relates to the panel's  findings  about  the
    appellant's private and family life in the United Kingdom.  What was at
    issue was the proportionality  of  the  interference  that  deportation
    represented when considering the totality of  the  private  and  family
    life of the appellant and his family.  It is clear from the decision of
    the  panel  that  its  flawed  analysis  under  s.72  prevails  in  the
    proportionality exercise.  The weight given to  the  4  year  old  pre-
    sentence report overrides all considerations and  again  no  weight  is
    given to the appellant's conduct since the offence, to  the  fact  that
    the offending occurred more that five years previously, and to the fact
    that the appellant has been law abiding in the UK for the vast majority
    of the time he has resided here.

10. In his response Mr Whitwell pointed to the consideration by  the  panel
    of  the  appellant's  argument  that  the  s.72  presumption  had  been
    rebutted.  The panel considered the  social  ties  that  the  appellant
    still has to Turkey, the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
    girlfriend and the appellant's relationship also with his family.

11. In her reply Ms Peterson submitted that the appellant has behaved in an
    exemplary fashion since his imprisonment.  There  was  nothing  bad  to
    record about him.  He complied with his licence  terms  and  missed  no
    appointments at the Probation Office as is shown in a letter  at  B-222
    of the bundle.  The appellant looks after his mother, has met a partner
    and he works in the community.  In essence the  panel  simply  did  not
    deal with setting the seriousness of the offence against the fact  that
    the appellant was aged  17  at  the  time  of  the  commission  of  the
    offences.

My Deliberations

12. It is apparent to me upon reading the determination  that  this  was  a
    carefully considered decision by the panel  who  went  to  considerable
    lengths to take into account  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  issues
    before it.  The panel directed itself correctly  on  the  law  and  the
    burden and standard of  proof.   The  panel  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant, his father, and others and gave sound  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellant and his father lacked  credibility.   In  particular
    the appellant stated that he  has  no  relatives  in  Turkey  but  that
    information conflicted with his father's evidence in  cross-examination
    at the hearing that he has  relations  living  there  namely  "nephews,
    brother, paternal uncle  and  a  niece".   The  panel  found  that  the
    appellant's family visit  Turkey  for  holidays  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant would not be in danger if  he  is  returned
    there.

13. As to the appellant's relationship with his  girlfriend  the  appellant
    took part in a religious service at a mosque to mark an engagement with
    a British citizen in  January  2014  but  the  panel  was  entitled  to
    conclude on the evidence before it  that  this  did  not  equate  to  a
    marriage. The panel found that there is nothing  of  substance  in  the
    relationship to elevate it to anything more than that  of  a  boyfriend
    and a girlfriend.  Giving reasons  that  were  open  to  it  the  panel
    concluded that the appellant's claim that he is closely  involved  with
    the care of his mother and of his siblings is grossly  exaggerated  and
    there is no satisfactory evidence that he  contributes  financially  to
    the  family  income.   His  claim  to  be  employed  as  a  barber   is
    questionable.

14. In Part III of the determination (paras 96 onwards) the  panel  directs
    itself correctly in stating that the appellant is subject to  automatic
    deportation as a foreign criminal.  It is conducive to the public  good
    that he be deported because he is not a British citizen, he is Turkish,
    and he has been sentenced to imprisonment for a  period  in  excess  of
    twelve months - in his  case  30  months.   That  brings  with  it  the
    presumption that the crime the  appellant  committed  was  particularly
    serious and his continued presence in the United Kingdom constitutes  a
    danger to the community.  Consequently he is  therefore  excluded  from
    the protection of the Refugee Convention.  Although the  appellant  can
    rebut  the  presumption  and  regain  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention the burden is upon him to make that rebuttal.  At  paragraph
    100 the panel set out the appellant's arguments  that  the  presumption
    has been rebutted.  The arguments are that there have been no  criminal
    convictions  since  February  2010,  the  appellant  has  complied   in
    reporting regularly to a Probation Officer, he has  expressed  remorse,
    time  has  passed,  and  he  has  matured.  There  are   also   various
    testimonials from friends  and  the  Chair  of  the  Kurdish  Community
    Centre.

15. It is apparent from paragraph 100 and from paragraph 104 that the panel
    was wholly aware of the background circumstances  and  took  them  into
    account.  There is reference twice to the passage of time  (100(d)  and
    104) and to the lack of further  convictions,  etc.   The  "personality
    defects" of the appellant to which the panel refers may or may  not  be
    an entirely apposite description of him but is clearly meant to  engage
    with matters that the panel found important in the pre-sentence  report
    as summarised by the panel at paragraphs 65 onwards.

16. Although Ms Peterson refers to the fact that, at 2.5 of  the  probation
    report, the appellant expresses remorse and sorrow the panel took  into
    account that this was mainly in respect to the negative effect  it  has
    had upon his family. As recorded in the report the appellant's lack  of
    empathy towards the victim was "notable".

17. The panel did not go on to say anything about the fact that Mr Kurt had
    informed the Probation Officer that he has verbally apologised  to  the
    victim and offered to make financial reparation to him.  He could  have
    done so but the officer also  said  that  she  had  not  been  able  to
    validate the statement and it has not been proven that he did.  I  note
    that the paragraph goes on to state that the  appellant  said  that  he
    intended to live a "pro-social life" hereon in but that he has  limited
    understanding about his motivation for offending  and  could  offer  no
    explanation of the  practical  steps  he  would  take  to  address  his
    behaviour.

18. The description of the appellant as set out in the report and indeed in
    the determination does not show the appellant in a good light  at  all.
    Given  the  other  findings  of  fact  by  the  panel  later   in   the
    determination it is difficult to see how the mere passage of  time  and
    what is said to have occurred during that period is able to  rebut  the
    presumption that he remains a serious criminal which is the  conclusion
    reached in paragraph 104 of the determination.

19. The panel noted at paragraph 103 that none of  the  courses  which  the
    appellant attended in prison  have  addressed  his  lack  of  cognitive
    skills, his poor emotional control, his lack of  thinking  through  the
    consequences of his behaviour, his  inability  to  problem  solve  save
    through aggression and his inflexible and dogmatic thought pattern.

20. In essence the appellant has  simply  not  done  enough  to  rebut  the
    presumption that he remains a danger to the community.  It is true that
    the panel did not expressly refer to Maslov but the facts in that  case
    were not similar to those in this appeal other than that both committed
    their offences at the age of 17.  It  has  not  been  shown  that  this
    appellant has reached a more mature understanding of his offending  nor
    is there any evidence that he has begun to understand and  address  the
    emotional motivation which may have contributed to  the  commission  of
    the offence. Although he expressed remorse and sorrow this  was  mainly
    in respect to the negative effect it has had upon his family but  there
    was found to be a lack of empathy towards his victim.   The  panel  did
    not find that he has shown that he has matured and unlike in Maslov  he
    is not a married man  with  family  and  nor  does  he  have  financial
    responsibilities for the family that he has here.  It will be  recalled
    also that the appellant in Maslov entered Austria at the age of  6  and
    he was unable to speak Bulgarian (the country  to  which  he  would  be
    returned) and had no relatives or other social contacts there.

21. My conclusion therefore  is  that  there  has  been  no  error  of  law
    displayed by the panel, let alone a material error.





Decision

22. It follows therefore that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    upheld.  An anonymity direction is not made as on the particular  facts
    of this appeal none would seem to be required.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

