

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01396/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 29th January 2014                          |on 5th February 2014         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   M E L N
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Muzira of The First Law Partnership.
For the Respondent: Mr Richard - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel for the First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and  Mrs
        R M Bray (non  legal  member),  hereinafter  referred  to  as  'the
        Panel', who in a determination promulgated on the 16th October 2013
        dismissed the appeal against the decision to deport  the  Appellant
        from the UK made by virtue of Section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration
        Act 1971.


     2. The determination was challenged on four grounds, a failure to take
        into account the Appellants ill health as requiring family  support
        as exceptional personal circumstances weighing against deportation,
        a failure to adequately assess Article 8 ECHR -  right  to  private
        and family life, an inadequate assessment of the  risk  on  return,
        and the making of factual errors in the determination leading to  a
        lack of confidence in the Tribunals assessment of the appeal.


     3. In granting permission to appeal, on the 4th November 2013,  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Gibb stated in paragraph 5 of the grant:


     "Overall, despite the length of the determination, it is  arguably  not
   clear  that the panel addressed  the  central  issues,  particularly  the
   nature of the  offending, immigration status, the best  interest  of  the
   children,            rehabilitation  and  treatment  prospects,  all  ill
   health in relation to family     support, rather than as  a  freestanding
   Article 3 claim."


     4. Judge Gibb concluded by  stating  that  all  grounds  are  arguable
        indicating that the grounds on which permission  had  been  granted
        are those pleaded on which Ms Muzira was asked to make submissions.


     5. A summary of the findings made by the Panel is as follows:


     i.   The Appellant was born in 1974 in Zimbabwe. He has used  a  number
     of aliases in the UK [42].


     ii.  The Appellant arrived in the UK  from  Zimbabwe  on  11th  January
     1999 as a visitor. His leave was extended until 31st December 1999.


      iii.  The  Appellant  was  referred  to  the  immigration  authorities
   following           his arrest on 10th February 2002 for  his  fourteenth
   motoring offence             when he was served with form  IA151A  as  an
   overstayer [44].


     iv.  His claim for asylum, made when arrested, was refused on 28th June
              2002.  His  appeal  against  the  refusal  was  dismissed  but
   permission to           challenge  the  first  judge's  decision  granted
   [44]. Following a further             hearing  on  29th  March  2004  the
   Appellant was found not to be                 credible and the appeal was
   dismissed on all grounds [46, 47].


     v.   The Appellant was granted ILR to remain outside the rules  on  2nd
     April 2009 [49].


     vi.  The Appellant was first convicted  on  18th  April  2000  and  has
   thirteen            convictions for twenty eight offences [50].


     vi.  When granted ILR  outside  the  Rules,  on  2nd  April  2009,  the
   Appellant           was warned  about  the  consequences  of  his  future
   conduct including            acts of criminality [51].


     vii. On 18th March 2011 the Appellant was convicted of a  breach  of  a
     non-molestation order. His  sentence  was  consecutive  to  an  earlier
   sentence imposed by the same court as  a  result  of  the  commission  of
   further  offences  during  the  operational   period   of   a   suspended
   sentence imposed on 16th March 2011 [52].


     viii.    The Appellant was also convicted of two  offences  of  driving
   with           excess alcohol on 6th May 2013, southbound on the M1,  and
   on 8th              May 2013, northbound, for which he was given  a  term
   of                      imprisonment of 18 weeks.


     ix.  The Appellant was convicted of breaching a  non-molestation  order
     on five separate occasions between February and March 2011 [54].


          x.  A restraining order was made against  the  Appellant  for  the
   period              16th March 2011 to 15th March 2013. The Panel note an
   entry in the            record of a named Magistrates Court dated 8th May
   2013 (in relation            to the excess alcohol offence) which states:
   "Offence so serious,                  because custody justified -  danger
   to yourself and others, have nine             previous  offences,  second
   committed only days after the first and            whilst on police bail.
    Were high readings and evidence of bad                driving." [55].


     xi.  The Respondent was correct to make a presumption in favour of  the
           deportation  of  the  Appellant.  The  reasons  set  out  in  the
   explanatory             letter are endorsed [56].


     xii. The Appellant remains a risk of further offending [58].

     6. In relation to the risk on return to Zimbabwe  the  Panel  set  out
        their findings at paragraphs 59 to 63 which can  be  summarised  as
        follows:




     i.   The Appellant has no MDC profile at all which would bring  him  to
     the notice of the authorities in Zimbabwe on return [60].


     ii.  The Appellant is from Harare and can return there.  He will not be
              required  to  demonstrate  a  ZANU-PF  profile.  There  is  no
   evidence he             will be required to relocate  to  an  area  where
   loyalty to ZANU-PF           might be expected [61].


     iii. The Appellant has no prior political profile. He has  not  engaged
   in             political activities. He holds  no  professional  position
   such as a               teacher which  will  bring  him  to  the  adverse
   attention  of  the                  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  [62].  The
   Appellant was not involved with           the MDC  as  he  left  Zimbabwe
   before that party was  formed.                  Previous  Tribunals  have
   found  his  account  to  be  lacking  in                  consistency  or
   credibility [63].


     7. In relation to the credibility of the Appellant:


     i.   The Appellant only made his asylum and human  rights  claim  after
     becoming subject to the deportation decision [65]. His failure to  have
          claimed on arrival or shortly  thereafter  casts  doubt  upon  the
          credibility of the claim. His actions are  more  indicative  of  a
   person              who came to the UK for economic ends rather than as a
   result of a             need for international protection [68].


     ii.  The Appellant was not found to be a credible witness and the Panel
              had doubts about his  truthfulness  of  many  details  of  his
   account [66].


     iii. The  Appellant  is  lacking  in  credibility  and  has  failed  to
   establish that               he will be targeted on return [69].


     iv.  The claims under Articles 2 and 3 are based upon the same facts as
              his asylum/humanitarian protection claim. The Appellant failed
   to             prove he will suffer a breach of a protected  right.   The
   refusal to              grant humanitarian protection is correct for  the
   reasons given by the             Respondent [71].


     8. In relation to the Appellants family life:


     i.   The Appellant's daughter is nearly 18 (born October  1995).  There
     was no credible evidence of recent contact between them [74].


     ii.  There is no  credible  evidence  the  Appellant  or  his  daughter
   adhered             to an order dated 1st December 2003 made by the Luton
   Country             Court for staying contact on every 4th weekend [75].


     iii. The Appellant was unable to provide details of his daughter,  such
   as             her full address [76].  The Appellant has  limited  family
   life with his           daughter and the  relationship  is  not  so  well
   established that it would             be disproportionate to  deport  him
   [80].


     iv.  There is no evidence of ongoing family life between the  Appellant
          and his previous wife from whom he is now divorced [81].


     v.   The Appellant has failed to establish that the relationship he has
   with           SS, who he married in 2003 and with whom he has a  son  KN
   aged 9,             has lasted. Family life with SS has not  been  proved
   [82-84].


     vi.  In relation to  KN,  an  application  for  contact  heard  by  the
          Nottingham Country Court resulted  in  an  order  for  fortnightly
          contact with a condition preventing the Appellant  from  consuming
     alcohol. A final order was made on 19th May 2011  but  the  application
      subsequently  dismissed  [86].  The  Appellant  did  not  provide  the
   correct address of KN [87] and the child was not  brought  to  visit  him
     whilst he was in prison [88]. The Respondent has  considered  the  best
     interests of the child which is to remain in the UK  with  his  mother.
      The  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  KN  is  not  so  well
   established that it would make it disproportionate to deport him [89].


     v.   The claim to be married to another woman, JN,  was  noted  but  it
     found the  Appellant  had  failed  to  prove  he  has  any  genuine  or
     subsisting family life with this person [90]


     vi.  A claim to share an address with VM was rejected  as  she  is  the
          beneficiary of  the  non-molestation  and  restraining  order  the
     Appellant was convicted of breaching [91].


     vii. The Appellant  has  stayed  at  times  with  his  sister  but  the
   relationship            is not one of significant dependency [92].


     viii.    The  Appellant's  family  life  has  been  restricted  by  his
   imprisonment.           Any family life he  has  established  is  not  so
   exceptional or dependant              that the family member needs him to
   remain in the UK [96] and, after              an analysis of case law and
   the Bouliff/Uner criteria, at paragraphs           102.


     9. In relation to the Appellant's medical conditions this  was  argued
        by reference to Article 3 in the skeleton argument, and before  the
        Panel, but it found  the  high  threshold  of  Article  3  was  not
        breached and that no separate issues arose under Article 8 (2) [103-
        109].


    10. The Panel found the Appellant is able to work and support  himself,
        that it would not be unduly harsh to return him to his  country  of
        origin, and that although it would not  be  easy  for  him  to  re-
        establish life in Zimbabwe, it had not been shown he  was  entitled
        to remain on this basis. A claim of destitution was rejected  [110-
        111].


    11. In relation to the proportionality of the decision and interests of
        the community; it was found the decision was proportionate  and  in
        the interests of the community [126-132] and that the Appellant  is
        liable to be deported [133-134].



Discussion



    12. As stated at the outset of the hearing I accept the  Panel  made  a
        number of errors in the determination but whether they are material
        was a matter upon which submissions were invited.


    13. This is a conducive deportation and not an automatic one.   Section
        3(5) of the 1971 Act gives the Secretary of State power to deport a
        non British Citizen (a) if he deems  it  to  be  conducive  to  the
        public good (b) if another member of the family is to  be  deported
        and (c) if a court recommends it after  conviction  of  an  offence
        punishable by  imprisonment.   (Section  3(5)(a)  is  reflected  in
        paragraph 363 of the Immigration Rules, which states that a  person
        is liable to deportation where the Secretary of  State  deems  that
        person's deportation to be conducive to the public good.)


    14. In Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012]  UKUT  00196(IAC)
        the Tribunal said that in a deportation appeal not  falling  within
        section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007,  the  sequence  of  decision
        making set out in  EO  (deportation  appeals:  scope  and  process)
        Turkey [2007] UKAIT 62 (see below) still applies but the first step
        is expanded as follows: (i) Consider whether the person  is  liable
        to be deported on the grounds set out by the  Secretary  of  State.
        This will normally involve the judge examining:-  (a)  Whether  the
        material facts alleged by the Secretary of State are  accepted  and
        if not whether they  are made out to the  civil  standard  flexibly
        applied; (b) Whether on the facts established viewed as a whole the
        conduct character or associations reach such a level of seriousness
        as to justify a decision to deport; (c) In considering b) the judge
        will take account of any lawful policy of the  Secretary  of  State
        relevant to the exercise of the discretion to  deport  and  whether
        the discretion has been exercised in accordance with  that  policy;
        (d) If the person is liable to deportation, then the next  question
        to consider is whether a human rights or protection claim precludes
        deportation. In cases of private or family life, this will  require
        an assessment of the proportionality of the  measures  against  the
        family or private life in question, and a weighing of all  relevant
        factors; (e) If the two previous  steps  are  decided  against  the
        appellant, then the question whether the discretion to  deport  has
        been exercised in accordance with the Immigration Rules  applicable
        is the third step in the process. The present wording of the  Rules
        assumes that a person  who  is  liable  to  deportation  and  whose
        deportation would not be contrary to the law and in breach of human
        rights   should   normally   be   deported,   absent    exceptional
        circumstances,  to  be  assessed  in  the  light  of  all  relevant
        information placed before the Tribunal.


    15. The conclusions by the Panel in relation to  the  liability  to  be
        deported, although appearing at the end of the  determination,  are
        lawfully correct and are not  challenged  in  the  grounds  seeking
        permission to appeal. No legal error is established.


    16. The second stage required the Panel to  consider  whether  a  human
        rights or protection claim precludes deportation which in  relation
        to the private and/or family life claim required an  assessment  of
        the proportionality of the measures against the family  or  private
        life in question, and a weighing of all relevant  factors.   It  is
        clear from a reading of the determination that  this  exercise  was
        conducted by the Panel and the challenge to the decision  is  based
        upon the way in which they undertook this exercise.


    17. Ground 1 alleges a failure to consider the Appellants health issues
        and  the  need  for  family  support  as  an  exceptional  personal
        circumstance weighing against deportation.


    18. I find no arguable merit in the claim the Panel failed to  consider
        all the relevant medical evidence. Ms Muzira's submission  to  this
        effect has not been  made  out.  A  reading  of  the  determination
        demonstrates that the Panel were aware of  the  Appellants  medical
        condition as an examination of the papers before the Panel  clearly
        shows.  The medical  report  dated  12th  September  2013  has  had
        relevant paragraphs of the same marked by a  Panel  member  and  is
        referred to in the determination [A's  appeal  bundle  pages  7-8].
        There is no formal requirement for the Panel to  give  reasons  for
        their findings on each and every issue provided  a  reader  of  the
        determination can understand the basis of the conclusions  reached.
        I find the  Panel  considered  the  material  they  were  asked  to
        consider with the degree of care required  in  an  appeal  of  this
        nature and gave reasons for their findings. As such the  weight  to
        be given to the material was a matter for the Panel.


    19. The claim the Appellant's circumstances are exceptional, such as to
        make deportation disproportionate as he had no family support,  has
        no merit. The 12th September 2013 letter, written by a Cardiologist
        with the Gateshead NHS Trust,  refers  to  the  Appellants  alcohol
        issues and his heart defect and states that  provided  he  abstains
        from  alcohol  and  remains  compliant  with  medication  he  might
        experience a reasonable recovery.  It  is  recommended  he  sees  a
        specialist two to three times a year but it was not proved  to  the
        Panel, nor before  me,  that  suitable  medical  treatment  is  not
        available and accessible in Zimbabwe. The medical evidence fails to
        support the claim that the lack of family support means  he  cannot
        be deported, especially in  light  of  the  factual  findings  made
        regarding the limited extent of his family life in the UK. No legal
        error is proved in relation to the  proportionality  assessment  on
        this basis and nor  is  it  shown  that  exceptional  circumstances
        exist. The Panel recognised that re-adjusting will be difficult but
        did  not  find  it  proved  that  it   will   make   the   decision
        disproportionate. This ground  is  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
        weight given by the Panel to the evidence and the outcome of  their
        consideration of that evidence.   No legal error  material  to  the
        decision is proved.


    20. It is also relevant to note in relation to the claim the  Appellant
        needs family, as they will have a positive impact  upon  him,  that
        their presence in the UK prevented neither  his  drinking  nor  his
        offending in the past. This is relevant to the  proportionality  of
        the decision too.


    21. Ground 2 alleges a failure to adequately consider  Article  8  ECHR
        and the right to private and family life. It is alleged the finding
        in relation to his daughter are flawed as they failed  to  consider
        the evidence of the  child's  mother  that  the  Appellant  enjoyed
        contact prior to his being imprisoned. The relationship between the
        Appellant and his daughter LN was considered at paragraphs 73 to 80
        of the determination, where it  was  found  there  is  no  credible
        evidence of recent contact  which  is  supported  by  the  material
        referred to in the grounds; as there  is  no  evidence  of  contact
        since the Appellant was imprisoned. This is  factually  correct.  I
        note that in paragraph 19 of the determination  a  reference  to  a
        submission made by Mr Azmi at the hearing that such contact had not
        occurred as LN's mother had decided that it was not appropriate.  I
        have already found the Panel considered all the evidence they  were
        asked to consider and the relationship between  the  Appellant  and
        his daughter was considered with the degree of care  required.  The
        key finding that the family life they have is limited and does  not
        make the decision disproportionate is within the range of  findings
        the Panel were entitled to make on the evidence. No legal error  is
        proved.


    22. The challenge to the finding in relation  to  the  Appellants  son,
        based upon an allegation the Panel failed  to  appreciate  that  if
        deported it was highly unlikely they will see each other again, was
        clearly a factor known to the Panel as evidenced by paragraph 94 of
        the determination in which they find:


              94. To echo what was said by Sedley LJ in AD Lee v SSHD [2011]
   EWCA                Civ 348 and the effect of deportation  in  this  case
   will be most likely                   to break up this family because  of
   the effects of the appellant's  bad                  behavior.   This  is
   what deportation does.  The appellant did not have                    the
   best  interests  of  his  family   at   heart   when   he   embarked   on
   committing these very  serious  offences.   The  appellant  has,  by  his
          own serious criminal actions has become physically separated  from
              his family and friends.


    23. Even if family become separated and relationships lost or unable to
        develop, this is only one element of the balancing exercise. It has
        not been shown before either the Panel or the Upper  Tribunal  that
        any effect  of  such  separation  is  sufficient  to  make  this  a
        determinative factor or one that should  have  been  given  greater
        weight by the Panel.


    24. Ground 3 challenges the assessment of risk on return. The Appellant
        claimed in his evidence to be at risk  as  he  will  be  unable  to
        demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF but  the  Panel  found  he  had  not
        established he will be required to do so.  It  is  not  a  time  of
        elections in Zimbabwe and the Appellant  was  not  found  to  be  a
        credible witness, which  is  an  unchallenged  finding.  The  Panel
        applied the relevant case law, CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)
        Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC) and, in relation to risk at  the
        airport, HS (returning asylum seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
        00094. The findings  made  are  within  the  range  of  permissible
        findings on the  evidence  and  no  legal  error  is  proved.  Mere
        disagreement with those findings does not  establish  legal  error.
        The case law does not establish a risk per se for someone  who  has
        been out of the country for 14 years.


    25. I do not find it proved the Panel failed to consider these elements
        of the claim appropriately or that they failed  to  understand  the
        evidence or the country conditions. No legal error material to  the
        decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on  protection  or  human  rights
        grounds has been made out.


    26. As the Appellant was unable to  succeed  under  the  above  it  was
        necessary for the Panel to go on to consider the Immigration Rules.
        The Rules relating to deportation are to  be  found  in  paragraphs
        398, 399 and 399A.


    27. In MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  the  Master  of  the  Rolls
        indicated that where the "new rules" (in force from  9  July  2012)
        apply (in a deportation case), the  "first  step  that  has  to  be
        undertaken is to decide whether deportation would be contrary to an
        individual's article 8 rights on the  grounds  that  (i)  the  case
        falls within para 398 (b) or (c)  and  (ii)  one  or  more  of  the
        conditions set out in para 399 (a) or (b) or para 399A (a)  or  (b)
        applies.  If the case falls within para 398 (b) or (c) and  one  or
        more of those conditions applies, then  the  new  rules  implicitly
        provide that deportation would be contrary to article 8" (paragraph
        35, underlining added).  Paragraphs 399 and 399A can be thought  of
        as setting out the exceptions to deportation (see paragraph 14).


    28. The order in which the Panel considered the issues is  not  as  per
        the guidance provided in Bah but no material legal error is proved.
         There is an overlap in relation to Ground 1 which  is  drafted  by
        specific reference to 398 and the fact that  if  an  individual  is
        unable to succeed under 399 or 399A it will only be in  exceptional
        circumstances that the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  be
        outweighed by other factors. I have commented upon the  claim  that
        this test is met by the lack of family members in  Zimbabwe  above,
        which is reinforced when  considering  that  the  term  exceptional
        circumstances.   "Exceptional"   means   circumstances   in   which
        deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
        the individual or their family such that a deportation would not be
        proportionate"  -  see  Kabia  (MF:   para   298   -   "exceptional
        circumstances") 2013 UKUT 00569 (IAC). Such a  test  has  not  been
        shown to be met on the evidence.


    29. I find it has not been shown the Appellant is able to succeed under
        the Immigration Rules.


    30. Ground 4 refers to procedural issues and to errors of fact  in  the
        determination.  I indicated at the outset that I accept  there  are
        such errors as  reference  to  Jamaica  and  Nigeria  is  factually
        incorrect. I  do  not  find  they  are  indicative  of  a  lack  of
        understanding as a reading of the  determination  demonstrates  the
        Panel was clearly aware of the correct country of  nationality  and
        return and of the fact the Appellant entered the UK on 11th January
        1999 [43].  These errors arise as a result of  a  'cut  and  paste'
        style for standard paragraphs and a lack of care in  proof  reading
        the determination, but no more. No procedural  issues  material  to
        the decision are made out.


     31. The Appellant has been shown to be a habitual offender.  The  Panel
         carefully considered the competing interests and the case he relied
         upon and it has not been shown the decision, in relation  to  those
         parts  of the determination that  are  challenged,  is  tainted  by
         legal error, such that the determination must be set aside and  re-
         made.


Decision

    32. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make that order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) to protect the  identity  of
        the minor child.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30th January 2013












