
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: DA/01746/2014



                            the immigration Acts



|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2019                  |On 3 April 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                A R (Jamaica)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For  the  respondent:     Ms  H  Brown,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Virgo
                    Consultancy Services Ltd.


                           Decision and Directions

 1. By an Order sealed on 18 December 2017, the Court of Appeal allowed the
    Secretary of State's appeal  and  remitted  the  matter  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for reconsideration of the appeal of A R (Jamaica)  (hereafter
    the "claimant").

 2. The appeal was listed for  a  case  management  review  hearing  on  25
    February 2019. At the hearing,  the  parties  agreed  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues.

 3. At the hearing on 25 February 2019, I raised the question whether Judge
    Holder had incorrectly applied the version  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    that was in force immediately prior to 28 February 2014 (the  "Previous
    Rules")  and  whether  he  should  have  applied  the  version  of  the
    Immigration Rules that was brought into force on 28 July  2014  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (the "Current Rules").

 4. Ms Pal informed me that this was  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal but she was unable to  produce
    a copy of the  Statement  of  Reasons.  Ms  Brown  submitted  that  the
    applicable rules were the Previous Rules. I issued directions for  both
    parties to submit skeleton arguments.

 5. Subsequently, the following came to my attention:

    (i)  Para A362 of the Immigration Rules which states:

         "A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation
         under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only
         succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014
         are met, regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or
         the deportation order, as appropriate, was served."

    (ii) Para 9 of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 662 which, insofar as relevant, reads:

         "On 28 July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014  ("the  2014  Act")  came
         into force.  That  Act  applies  to  all  decisions  taken  by  the
         Secretary of State or a tribunal on or  after  that  date:  see  YM
         (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA
         Civ 1292 at [12]."

 6. I therefore issued further Directions dated 27 February 2019 by which I
    drew the parties attention to (i) and (ii) above,  informed  them  that
    the Upper Tribunal was bound by the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
    therefore that I had taken the view that the applicable rules were  the
    Current Rules. In  such  circumstances,  the  Direction  given  at  the
    hearing on 25 February 2019 for the  Secretary  of  State  to  serve  a
    skeleton argument was withdrawn and a new direction given that, if  the
    claimant still contended that the Rules applicable to his case were the
    Previous Rules, he was to serve a skeleton argument by 11 March 2019.

 7. The claimant has not filed any skeleton argument to date.

 8. In view of the provisions of para A362 of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    para 9 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in NA  (Pakistan),  which
    judgment is binding on the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal,
    I have concluded that  the  Current  Rules  apply  in  determining  the
    claimant's Article 8 claim, and not the Previous Rules.

 9. I agree with the parties that this appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on the merits. My  reasons  are
    as follows:

    (i)  Given that the claimant's appeal was allowed by  Judge  Holder,  a
         remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the right course  of  action
         having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  JD  (Congo)  &
         Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327;

    (ii) In any event, Judge Holder  incorrectly  considered  the  Previous
         Rules  in  his  assessment  of  the  claimant's  Article  8  claim.
         Accordingly, there has been no assessment of the claimant's Article
         8 under the Current Rules.

10. The decision of Judge Holder is set aside in its entirety,  if  it  has
    not already been set aside by the order of the  Court  of  Appeal.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues by a judge other than Judge Holder. The Rules to be  applied
    in determining the claimant's Article 8 claim are the Current Rules.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  on
all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holder.




[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill           Date: 1 April 2019
