
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01129/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd March 2016                             |On 17th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     ms
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born  on  12  April  1975.   She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order, the  decision  having
    been made on 10 June 2014.  Her appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Omotosho ("the FtJ") on 30 and 31 July 2015  whereby  the  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

 2. The further background to the appeal is best illustrated with reference
    to the decision of the FtT.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The FtJ set out the appellant's immigration history, circumstances  and
    background.  The appellant arrived in the UK on 15  December  2001  and
    was granted leave to enter  for  six  months.   She  has  a  number  of
    criminal convictions starting in February 2002, mostly for offences  of
    dishonesty, in particular theft.  Sentences have varied from  community
    punishments to fines and imprisonment.

 4. Following a conviction on 16 February 2009 for  what  appears  to  have
    been an offence of conspiracy to steal, she was sentenced in the  Crown
    Court sitting at Lewes to two years' imprisonment.  She was served with
    notice of liability to deportation in March 2009 and a decision to make
    a deportation order was made on 4 June 2009. Her  appeal  against  that
    decision  was  dismissed  on  24  August  2009.   An  application   for
    reconsideration was successful but her appeal before the Upper Tribunal
    was dismissed on 17 April 2012.

 5. In between times, the appellant was convicted of  further  offences  of
    dishonesty, and in 2011 appeared at court for failure  to  comply  with
    the requirements of a community order.  On 18 July 2013 for offences of
    theft and failing to comply with requirements of a  suspended  sentence
    order, she  was  ordered  to  pay  compensation  and  costs,  with  the
    suspended sentence order to continue.  On 22 May  2013  she  was  again
    convicted  of  theft  and  ultimately  sentenced   to   three   months'
    imprisonment.  She was  sentenced  on  4  December  2013  to  14  days'
    imprisonment for going equipped for theft.

 6. In relation to her two children, on  18  March  2014  in  Family  Court
    proceedings it was ordered that she should have contact  with  her  two
    children  face-to-face  on  at  least  six  occasions  per  year.   The
    appellant's two daughters, KS and  ZS,  born  on  30  May  2003  and  3
    February 2007 respectively, are in the care of Social Services.

 7. The FtJ summarised the  respondent's  decision,  and  referred  to  the
    documentary evidence that she  had  before  her.   The  FtJ's  decision
    contains a detailed account  of  the  evidence  and  submissions.   Her
    findings are to be found from [130] onwards.

 8. At [130] she referred to the findings made by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
    in a decision promulgated in 2012 in relation to a previous  appeal  by
    the appellant.  She noted that the  appellant's  age,  nationality  and
    criminal record are not in dispute.  The appellant is  a  40  year  old
    woman originally from Jamaica, who left there aged 14  years,  went  to
    live in America and arrived in the  UK  at  the  age  of  26  years  in
    December 2001.  Accordingly, she  had  been  absent  from  Jamaica  for
    approximately 26 years at the date of the decision before the FtJ.

 9. At [134] it is recorded that the appellant had visited  Jamaica  twice,
    the FtJ noting that it had previously been accepted that she  does  not
    have any relatives in Jamaica apart from her son.   The  FtJ  concluded
    that if the appellant is deported to Jamaica she would  have  to  start
    "from scratch" having to find a job and accommodation and that that  is
    likely to pose difficulties for her which the FtJ stated that  she  did
    not underestimate.

10. At [135] she referred to the appellant having used numerous aliases and
    two dates of birth, and noted that the appellant  had  admitted  having
    criminal convictions in the USA which resulted in her deportation  from
    there.

11.  Referring  to  PNC  records,  she  said  that  the  appellant  has  24
    convictions for 32 offences, 22 of them relating to theft  and  kindred
    offences.  The FtJ said that the appellant  could  be  described  as  a
    prolific shoplifter and an experienced  and  professional  thief.   She
    stated that shoplifting on that scale is very serious as it  undermines
    the organisation of commerce, a matter on which the FtJ said she placed
    great weight.  She found that her persistent  offending  increases  the
    seriousness of the offences that  she  has  been  convicted  of.   With
    reference to the conviction for conspiracy to steal, she noted that the
    appellant was one of an organised gang of five and that  the  appellant
    and one other person received the heavier sentences because  they  were
    "in it from the beginning".

12. At [137] she referred to the offences in July 2011 which  involved  the
    appellant having with her a magnetic security tag remover  for  use  in
    the course of or in connection with theft, which demonstrated that  the
    appellant was not a novice.  Her subsequent convictions in October 2011
    for theft were indications of the persistent nature  of  her  offending
    and the likelihood of her re-offending  "as  determined  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in 2012 in dismissing her appeal".

13. With reference to convictions in July 2013 for  theft  and  failing  to
    comply with the community requirement of the suspended sentence  order,
    the sentences in November 2013 and December 2013 for further  offences,
    justified the findings by UTJ Gill in 2012 that there was a  high  risk
    of re-offending.  She found that the appellant  had  continued  to  re-
    offend despite the threat of deportation.

14. Noting that the appellant has again expressed remorse for her offending
    and maintaining that she has changed,  the  FtJ  found  that  her  past
    actions and conduct instilled very little confidence in her  sincerity.
    She noted that the  appellant  had  previously  admitted  to  lying  in
    support of an application for ILR,  concealing  her  convictions.   The
    appellant had also admitted  lying  to  previous  Tribunals  about  her
    relationship with her estranged  husband.   She  also  found  that  her
    numerous convictions for deception-related offences confirmed that  she
    is a "serial liar" who is unable to tell the truth if  required  to  do
    so.  She concluded that the appellant is a "master  of  deception"  and
    that she had continued to commit offences even with the clear threat of
    deportation hanging over her.

15. At [140] she stated  that  although  the  appellant  had  not  had  any
    convictions since 2013, it was clear from the evidence presented by  DC
    Kalam that the appellant was arrested twice in  2015  in  circumstances
    very similar to her  previous  conduct  of  being  found  in  shops  in
    suspicious circumstances when items had been  stolen  but  the  matters
    were not proceeded with by the  prosecution.   Whilst  noting  that  DC
    Kalam confirmed that it was not the appellant seen taking clothes  from
    the store, nor was  she  found  with  any  stolen  items  on  her,  she
    concluded on a balance of probabilities that  the  appellant  had  been
    involved  in  further  offences  despite  the  lack  of  a   successful
    prosecution.  She  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  was
    deliberately targeted by store detectives  and  the  police  simply  on
    account of her previous criminal history.  The FtJ therefore  concluded
    that the risk of re-offending remained high despite the last conviction
    being in 2013.

16. At [141] she said that in coming to her conclusions she  had  borne  in
    mind the psychological report, and that while it was suggested that the
    risk of re-offending was now medium rather  than  high,  she  concluded
    that she was not persuaded that that was so in the  light  of  all  the
    evidence before her.

17. At [145] she noted that the appellant does not live with either of  her
    children, both of whom are in care.  The appellant has a minimum of six
    hours face-to-face contact with the children per year and is in regular
    contact by phone, although the children are not dependent  on  her  for
    the exercise of their Treaty rights.  She found  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would not require the children to follow  her  to  Jamaica.
    In any event, the appellant's father, a British citizen, is in  the  UK
    which means  that  they  are  able  to  exercise  their  Treaty  rights
    independently of the appellant.   Their  father  had  previously  given
    evidence to the effect that he would not allow the  appellant  to  take
    his children to Jamaica.

18. The FtJ therefore concluded that whilst the appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with two British citizen children,  both  under
    the age of 18 years, and that it would be unduly harsh for the children
    to live in Jamaica, she found  that  there  was  no  credible  evidence
    before her that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain  in
    the UK without the appellant, the children both being well  taken  care
    of by their foster carer.  In coming to those  conclusions  she  stated
    that she had borne in mind the independent social worker's report.

19. She further found that the appellant can be regarded  as  socially  and
    culturally integrated into life in the UK, although she had  not  lived
    in the UK for most of her life.  She had spent her youth and  formative
    years in Jamaica and had arrived in the UK in 2001, with her  leave  to
    remain being curtailed in April 2012.  She found that there  would  not
    be very significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  into  Jamaica  if
    deported.  She found that it is likely that the appellant has  extended
    family members and/or friends who reside in Jamaica who can provide her
    with initial support on return.  She found that there was no reason why
    they would not provide that support to enable her to  reintegrate  back
    into Jamaica.

20. She concluded at [149] that the appellant had not established that  any
    of the Exceptions to the automatic deportation  provisions  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applied, or that the appellant  had  established  that
    paragraphs 399 or 399A applied.

21.  Considering  whether  there  were  'exceptional  circumstances'  which
    outweighed the public interest in her deportation, she noted  that  the
    appellant is no longer in a subsisting relationship with the father  of
    her British citizen children.  She is  the  mother  of  five  children,
    three of whom live in Canada and in the USA.

22. So far as proportionality under Article 8 of the ECHR is concerned, she
    found at [160] that the appellant continues to show  disregard  for  UK
    law due to the persistence of the offending.  At  [162]  she  concluded
    that the evidence did not necessarily suggest that the appellant  is  a
    wholly reformed character as claimed, notwithstanding the assessment of
    the appellant as a medium  risk  of  re-offending  in  a  psychological
    report. The FtJ said that the  appellant  had  in  her  view  exhibited
    little or no insight into her re-offending and had continued to deflect
    responsibility for her crimes by blaming her  upbringing  and  personal
    circumstances.

23. At [167] the conclusion was  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would
    clearly interfere with her relationship with  her  children,  with  her
    losing the direct, frequent and regular  contact  that  they  currently
    enjoy.  She found however, that there was the possibility of visits  to
    Jamaica subject to local authority or  court  agreement,  finances  and
    someone available to accompany the children.

24. The FtJ concluded that it  was  in  the  children's  best  interest  to
    maintain face-to-face contact with the appellant, albeit that that  was
    not sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation.   She
    noted at [172] that the reports indicated that one of  the  appellant's
    daughters suffered some emotional problems whilst the other appeared to
    have coped well when they were separated from the appellant during  her
    prison sentences.  She noted that the  children  having  re-established
    contact with the appellant, it may well have a greater impact on  their
    emotional wellbeing were they to be separated again.  She  referred  to
    the children being "innocents" in the matter and that  the  appellant's
    deportation would mean that both children will not have a  normal  life
    with either of  their  biological  parents,  they  having  very  little
    contact with their father.  At [173]  she  found  that  the  effect  of
    separation from the children may well be traumatic for the appellant in
    the light of their renewed relationship.  Unlike the children  however,
    the FtJ expressed the view that it was the appellant's own actions that
    had brought her to that point.

25. She concluded that it would be unreasonable to expect the  children  to
    leave the UK in order to enjoy family life with the  appellant.   There
    is reference to the period of separation  following  deportation  being
    likely to be for a substantial period; a minimum of ten years, by which
    time the children would be adults or  nearly  adults.   She  recognised
    that that period of separation could never be replaced although stating
    there was nothing preventing the children, once they achieved  the  age
    of maturity, visiting the appellant in Jamaica.

26. At [178] she noted that the appellant had spent  the  majority  of  her
    life outside the UK but that she had visited Jamaica in 2013.  She  did
    not accept the appellant's evidence that she has no ties  or  links  to
    Jamaica.  She concluded that it was unlikely  that  the  appellant  was
    telling the truth so far as her  family  circumstances  in  Jamaica  or
    elsewhere are concerned.  She found that it would not  be  unreasonable
    to expect her to be able to readjust to life  in  Jamaica  despite  the
    initial difficulties that would be expected.  The appellant  had  shown
    herself to be resilient and very resourceful and she had found a way of
    maintaining long distance contact with her three children  outside  the
    UK, on a regular basis.

27. She concluded therefore, that there were not  the  very  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances necessary to outweigh the public interest  in
    deportation.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions before the Upper Tribunal

28. On behalf of the appellant four grounds are  advanced.   The  first  is
    that the FtJ failed to have regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note and the Practice Direction in relation to vulnerable witnesses,  a
    matter raised in the appellant's skeleton argument.  The  FtJ  did  not
    make any finding on that issue which was relevant in the assessment  of
    the evidence.

29. The second ground argues that the FtJ failed to have regard  to  expert
    evidence from two clinical psychologists, Dr Katherine Boucher  and  Dr
    Ann Lewis, dealing with the risk of re-offending.  Within  this  ground
    it is also argued that it was irrational for the FtJ to  conclude  that
    the appellant's current risk of re-offending was  high,  based  on  her
    previous convictions.

30. Ground 3 concerns the conclusion that the appellant had  been  involved
    in further offending since 2013, notwithstanding that she had not  been
    convicted of any  offence.   Reference  is  made  to  the  decision  in
    Farquharson (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146  (IAC).   It
    is argued that the FtJ was not entitled to conclude that the  appellant
    had re-offended, based  solely  on  her  previous  convictions  and  DC
    Kalam's evidence.

31. The fourth ground contends that  the  FtJ  failed  to  have  regard  to
    relevant evidence in an independent  social  worker's  report  from  Ms
    Dymphna Pearce in relation to the effect of the appellant's deportation
    on one of the appellant's children in particular.

32. In submissions Ms Loughran relied on the grounds.  So far as  ground  1
    is concerned (vulnerable witness) it was accepted that it had not  been
    suggested to the FtJ that any special arrangements  were  necessary  in
    relation to the hearing itself.  As  to  whether,  aside  from  in  the
    skeleton argument, the issue was raised at the hearing, Ms Loughran was
    unable to assist with reference to any notes of the hearing.

33. So far as vulnerability is concerned, it was submitted  with  reference
    to the report of Dr Ann Lewis dated  14  July  2015  (page  44  of  the
    appellant's bundle) that the appellant is a person receiving a form  of
    healthcare and is therefore a vulnerable witness, as set out at [3]  of
    the skeleton argument that was before the FtT.  I was also referred  to
    [6.1] of Dr Boucher's report which states that the  appellant  presents
    with symptoms of depression and anxiety.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    question of whether the appellant is a vulnerable witness was  relevant
    to her credibility as a witness, and  bearing  in  mind  that  the  FtJ
    concluded that she was a  serial  liar.   Had  her  vulnerability  been
    considered it could have affected  the  FtJ's  assessment  of  what  Dr
    Boucher considered to be a moderate risk of re-offending.  Furthermore,
    there was evidence from Dr Lewis to the effect that the  appellant  had
    been receiving therapy, a matter also  relevant  to  the  risk  of  re-
    offending.

34. Although at [141] there is reference to the psychological report (of Dr
    Boucher), there is no detailed assessment of that report or reasons for
    it having been rejected.  There  is  no  consideration  of  Dr  Lewis's
    report in terms of  the  appellant's  engagement  with  therapy,  which
    therapy Dr Boucher said was essential.  It  was  insufficient  for  the
    judge to say she had considered the evidence.  It was submitted that it
    was clear from the  structure  of  the  determination  that  the  FtJ's
    conclusions were arrived at without reference to Dr  Boucher's  and  Dr
    Lewis's evidence.

35. It appears that her conclusions as to  the  risk  of  re-offending  are
    based on the appellant's previous convictions and the  evidence  of  DC
    Kalam, bearing in mind the reference at [160] to her previous offences.



36. With reference to the decision in Farquharson, it  was  submitted  that
    there was insufficient evidence for the judge to have concluded on  the
    balance of probabilities  that  the  appellant  had  committed  further
    offences.  There was nothing in the crime reports to suggest  that  the
    stores had been asked to provide CCTV evidence or  witness  statements.
    The appellant was bailed but no CCTV was viewed.

37. It appears from [147] that the conclusion that it would not  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant's children to remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant was arrived at before consideration  of  Ms  Pearce's  social
    work report (page 272).  It is not clear, it was submitted, whether the
    FtJ accepted Ms Pearce's written evidence about the impact on KS of the
    appellant's removal.

38. Again, on the question of the risk of re-offending, it was accepted  by
    Ms Loughran that the best that could be argued for  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant was that there was a moderate risk of re-offending.   In  any
    event, even if there is a high risk of re-offending, the  offending  is
    likely to be shoplifting, which  is  not  at  the  higher  end  of  the
    offending scale, leading to a risk  to  individuals.   Furthermore,  DC
    Kalam's evidence was that the shops did not seem to  take  the  matters
    very seriously.

39. Mr Kotas submitted that, aside from the question of whether  the  issue
    of the appellant as a vulnerable witness was pursued with any vigour at
    the hearing, the materiality of the point also arises.   It  is  to  be
    remembered that this was not  an  appeal  where  there  was  any  great
    factual dispute, in terms of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  her
    children, her ties  to  Jamaica  and  her  convictions.   All  that  is
    relevant to the materiality of any failure to consider the appellant as
    a potentially vulnerable witness.

40. In addition, the appellant represents either a high or a moderate  risk
    of re-offending, which again relates to the  materiality  aspect.   She
    has been sentenced to 24 months' imprisonment and accordingly there  is
    a strong public interest involved in her deportation.  She has a number
    of previous convictions.  The judge had referred to the  findings  made
    in her previous appeal before UTJ Gill.

41. The FtJ's decision is a lengthy one in which she gave  several  reasons
    for concluding that the  appellant  represented  a  high  risk  of  re-
    offending.  She referred at [135] to the numerous uses of  aliases  and
    two dates of birth.  She had offended even whilst  facing  deportation.
    She had lied to the Tribunal in the past as indicated at [139].

42. At [140] the FtJ had given reasons for concluding  that  the  appellant
    had been involved in offending in 2015 despite the fact that there  was
    no prosecution.  Furthermore, it was submitted  that  focusing  on  the
    last two matters in 2015 is to take a "myopic view" of the  appellant's
    offending.

43. At [172] the judge had said that she had been assisted by the  evidence
    of the social worker Ms Pearce.  At [168]-[176] the  FtJ  had  been  at
    pains to recognise the 'dilemma' of separation.  She  had  referred  to
    relevant authority.  It was relevant to note that at [121] she referred
    to the decision in AD Lee v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2011] EWCA Civ 348 which refers to the consequences of deportation for
    a family.

44. In reply, Ms Loughran submitted that the appellant had been  addressing
    her offending behaviour, which was a matter that the FtJ was obliged to
    consider.  Although the FtJ's decision was a lengthy one, there was  no
    indication of whether she accepted  the  evidence  of  the  independent
    social worker and one cannot tell what weight was given to it.  Stating
    that "appropriate  weight"  was  afforded  to  the  evidence  does  not
    suffice.  It was similarly unclear what the judge made of the  evidence
    from Dr Lewis in terms of the appellant's engagement with treatment.

    My assessment

45. The Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable
    adult and sensitive appellant guidance ("the Guidance Note"), states at
    [2] that although some individuals are by definition vulnerable, others
    are less easily identifiable.  A number of factors  to  be  taken  into
    account are set out;  the  list  is  not  exhaustive.   Those  that  by
    definition  are  "vulnerable",  as  described  in   s.59   Safeguarding
    Vulnerable Groups Act include a person who "receives any form of health
    care".  It is on that basis that it is  submitted  that  the  appellant
    is/was a vulnerable adult.

46. The evidence of health care being received by the appellant comes  from
    the letter or report of Dr Lewis dated 14 July 2015 at page 44  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  This refers to her receiving psychological therapy
    from November 2014.  It describes her as presenting with depressed mood
    and low self-confidence/self-esteem.  The appellant related to Dr Lewis
    that this was as a result of a  number  of  difficult  events  she  had
    experienced over the course of her  life,  including  bereavements  and
    losses in her childhood and teenage years.  The  report  describes  the
    appellant's views or attitudes  towards  herself  and  others  and  the
    consequences in terms of her offending and other coping strategies.  It
    describes the appellant as being a motivated and interested participant
    in therapy so far.  Her mood at that time is described as  having  been
    quite stable.  She was referred to a 12 week Compassion Focused Therapy
    group ("CFT") which is described as a "third-wave" cognitive  behaviour
    therapy treatment, starting in September 2015.  It states that "by  the
    time she finishes the 12-session CFT she will have  undergone  over  12
    months of therapy".

47. On the basis of that report, it could be said that as at  the  date  of
    the hearing before the FtT the appellant was undergoing  treatment.  On
    the other hand, it is recorded at [95] of the FtJ's decision  that  the
    appellant said that the therapy sessions which were once a week started
    in the first week of  December  2014  "but  have  now  finished".   The
    appellant stated that she  hoped  to  start  new  therapy  sessions  in
    September.  That is consistent with the evidence of Dr Lewis.  On  that
    basis, it could be said that the appellant was not, at the date of  the
    hearing before the FtT, receiving any sort of health care and  she  was
    not therefore by definition a  vulnerable  adult.   Her  treatment  had
    ceased at that stage and although the appellant said that she hoped  to
    start new sessions in September, they had not started.

48. In any event, it is not apparent that the  appellant's  representatives
    took any steps in  accordance  with  the  Guidance  Note  in  terms  of
    identifying potential issues  that  could  arise  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's vulnerability at the hearing.  Detailed guidance is set out
    in  the  Guidance  Note.   It  is  similarly  not  apparent  that   any
    submissions were made to the judge in  terms  of  the  conduct  of  the
    proceedings to accommodate any vulnerability that the  appellant  could
    be said to have.  Again, the Guidance Note has considerable guidance on
    that issue.  Furthermore, although in  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant before the FtT reliance was placed on the skeleton  argument,
    there is no indication that any submissions were made in terms  of  the
    appellant's vulnerability, in any respect, in particular  in  terms  of
    the assessment of her evidence.

49. In addition, the detailed narrative of the appellant's  evidence  given
    to the FtJ does not reveal that the appellant  had  any  difficulty  in
    giving her evidence.

50. Whilst I do consider that the  FtJ  should  have  addressed  the  issue
    raised as to the appellant being a vulnerable adult, I  cannot  see  in
    the circumstance of this appeal that it was an error of law for her not
    to have done so.  Even if it does amount to an error of law, I  am  not
    satisfied that it is an error of law that is material to the outcome in
    the light of the observations I have made about the lack of reliance on
    the Guidance Note in all its other manifestations, except on the  basis
    that the appellant is receiving some form of  health  care,  and  given
    that it is not apparent that the appellant's evidence was  affected  in
    any way by reason of any asserted vulnerability.

51. I do not accept that the FtJ erred in law in failing to have regard  to
    relevant expert evidence in terms of  the  risk  of  re-offending.   At
    [47(vi)] the FtJ identifies the expert evidence before her.   At  [107]
    the submissions made on behalf of the appellant in terms of the risk of
    re-offending with  reference  to  the  expert  evidence  are  recorded.
    Importantly, the FtJ recorded the submission that evidence  of  therapy
    and its significance are relevant factors in terms of the risk  of  re-
    offending, which on behalf of the appellant was said  to  be  'medium'.
    At [141] the FtJ said  that  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant is a high risk of offending, she had taken into  account  the
    psychological report.  Although not identified, this appears  to  be  a
    reference to the report of Dr Boucher at page 310  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.

52. At [131] it is stated that in coming to her conclusions the FtJ had had
    regard to the detailed submissions made by both parties, as well as the
    written and oral evidence.

53. At [139], the FtJ referred to the appellant  having  "again"  expressed
    remorse for her offending and that she maintained that she had changed,
    but the FtJ concluded that her past actions and conduct instilled  very
    little  confidence  in  her  sincerity.   Reference  is  made  to   the
    appellant's deception in an application for  ILR,  and  to  her  having
    admitted lying to previous  Tribunals.  Her  numerous  convictions  for
    deception-related offences are also referred to.

54. In the light of that evidence, I cannot see  that  a  lack  of  express
    reference in her reasons to the fact of the appellant  having  received
    psychological therapy, is an error of law, or if it is, that it  is  an
    error of law that is material.

55. In any event, it is to be borne in mind that the best that could be, or
    could have been, contended for on behalf of the appellant is  that  her
    risk of re-offending is medium rather than high.  As is well-known from
    authority, the risk of re-offending is only one factor to be taken into
    account in the assessment of proportionality and  the  suggestion  that
    the appellant's likely future offending would  relate  to  shoplifting,
    belies the fact that she has a conviction for conspiracy to steal which
    resulted in a sentence of two years' imprisonment.

56. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in the contention  that  the
    FtJ's assessment of the appellant's involvement in offences in 2015 was
    irrational, with reference to the evidence of DC Kalam.   The  FtJ  set
    out the evidence on that issue in detail, both from the appellant's and
    from the respondent's perspective.  The appellant's  evidence  on  this
    issue is recorded at [96].  There is a clear analysis of the  issue  at
    [140] whereby the appellant's  arrest  on  two  occasions  in  2015  in
    circumstances very similar to her previous conduct is referred to.  The
    FtJ was entitled to  reject  the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  was
    deliberately targeted by store detectives and police simply on  account
    of her previous criminal history.

57. The FtJ was aware of the relevance  of  the  decision  in  Farquharson,
    having referred to it at  [48]  and  stating  at  [140]  that  she  was
    satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the appellant  had  been
    involved in those  offences  in  2015  despite  there  having  been  no
    prosecution.  Notwithstanding what is in the grounds before me,  it  is
    readily apparent that the FtJ was aware of and took into  account  that
    the appellant was not seen taking clothes from the store and was not in
    possession of any stolen items, having referred to  that  evidence  and
    assessed it.

58. Likewise, I do not consider that there is any merit in  the  contention
    that the FtJ failed to take into account the  evidence  of  the  social
    worker, Ms Pearce.   As  already  indicated,  she  identified  this  as
    amongst the reports that she had  before  her.   She  referred  to  the
    submissions on that evidence at [105] and [107].  At [147]  she  stated
    that in coming to her conclusions in relation to the question of  undue
    harshness, she had had regard to the report of Ms  Pearce.   She  again
    made reference to it at [172] stating that she had been assisted by the
    family court order and the report by the independent social worker  (Ms
    Pearce).

59. It is clear from [172] that the judge was aware of what was said  about
    the emotional problems suffered by KS in separation from the  appellant
    and the  potential  emotional  impact  on  them  if  there  is  another
    separation.  She referred to the children being "innocents".  She  made
    a clear assessment of where the best interests of the children lie.

60. It was not encumbent on  the  FtJ  to  refer  to  every  facet  of  the
    evidence, or to extract passages from reports and comment on  them.   A
    holistic assessment of  the  FtJ's  decision  reveals  a  comprehensive
    consideration  of  the  evidence  within  a  structured  and   balanced
    decision.  I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law  in  her
    decision in any respect.  Even if it could be said  that  there  is  an
    error of law in terms of the 'vulnerability guidance'  issue,  for  the
    reasons I have given any error of law in that respect is not material.

    Decision

61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                                  25  April
    2016
