
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01295/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th September, 2015              |On 9th October, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of St. Lucia  where  he  was  born  on  28th
    October, 1994.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 25th June, 2005  at
    the age of 10 years and 7 months and  following  successive  grants  of
    leave has had discretionary leave to remain as  the  dependant  of  his
    mother until 13th August, 2013.

2.   The appellant was convicted of aggravated burglary following  a  guilty
    plea on 5th December, 2012 at Isleworth Crown Court.  On 5th  February,
    2013 His Honour, Judge Dugdale, sentenced the appellant to four  years'
    detention in a Young Offender's Institute.

3.   The appellant made application for indefinite leave to remain  on  12th
    August, 2013.  However, on  2nd  May,  2014  he  was  notified  by  the
    respondent of his liability to automatic deportation.

4.   On 19th June, 2014 the respondent made a deportation order  in  respect
    of the appellant as a foreign criminal defined by Section 32(1) of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007 having found his removal conducive  to  the  public
    good for the purposes of Section 3(5)((a) Immigration Act 1971.

5.   The appellant's application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom was refused  under  paragraph  322(5)  of  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules  HC  395,  as  amended  ("the  Immigration
    Rules").

6.   The appellant gave Notice of Appeal and his appeal was heard by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oscar Del Fabbro, sitting at Taylor  House  on  8th
    June, 2015.  The judge's determination was  promulgated  on  8th  July,
    2015.

7.    Dissatisfied  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Garrett  on  3rd  August,  2015.   In
    granting permission he said:

         "The grounds contend that the judge wrongly assessed the  appellant
         as an adult of 18 years of  age  at  the  date  of  committing  the
         offence which led to the deportation order when the appellant was a
         minor  at  that  time.   Issue  is  also  taken  with  the  judge's
         conclusion that the appellant would not have  a  family  life  with
         close relatives in the United Kingdom.

         The grounds are arguable.  Paragraph 31 of  the  decision  suggests
         that the judge thought the appellant was an adult at  the  time  of
         his offending.  Further, although less persuasive,  the  conclusion
         that the appellant's close relatives did not  have  a  family  life
         with him, particularly when the judge accepted that  the  appellant
         had been part  of  a  family  unit  when  not  an  adult,  is  also
         arguable."

8.   In addressing me, Mr Gilbert drew my attention to what  the  judge  had
    said at paragraph 32 of his determination.  For completeness I  set  it
    out in full:-

         "There is no dispute and on the evidence before me I find that  the
         Appellant committed a serious offence when he was 18 years old  for
         which he was sentenced to a term of four years detention in a Young
         Offenders Institution.  The Sentencing Remarks make plain the  role
         and involvement of this Appellant in a  joint  enterprise  burglary
         where the protagonists were armed with  weapons  when  entering  an
         occupied private residence.  The facts as found by  the  sentencing
         judge represented the top end of offending on a scale  of  offences
         of this type.  The sentence reflected the Appellant's plea, his age
         and previous limited offending but if he had been an adult  at  the
         time  he  would  have  faced  a  significantly   longer   term   of
         imprisonment.  Before me the Appellant confirmed that  although  he
         was thoroughly remorseful now he had not  assisted  the  police  in
         identifying his accomplices and had lent himself to  this  criminal
         enterprise in order to make a gain for himself."

9.   Mr Gilbert suggested that the  judge's  dealing  with  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights was also flawed.  At paragraph 36 of the determination
    the judge had found that there was no family life between the appellant
    and his sister, but the judge found that there was no more than  normal
    emotional ties expected  between  adults,  their  parents  and  younger
    siblings but the evidence before the judge set out at paragraphs 10 and
    11 of the determination is that he is one of three children, the  older
    brother is 7 years older than him and he has a younger sister,  F,  who
    has just turned 10.  She is the subject of  a  contact  order  and  the
    appellant assists his mother generally and also assists  with  F.   The
    appellant's aunt, JI, lives some 45 minutes away from  the  appellant's
    mother and is not able to help with  day  to  day  functions  that  the
    appellant can complete on behalf of his mother.  He drew  my  attention
    to an  unsigned  statement  of  JI  in  the  appellant's  bundle  which
    explained that because of the appellant's mother's health  difficulties
    JI and her husband had been able to assist her.   However,  having  now
    moved, they are not able to assist in the way that they had previously.
     To that extent, the appellant's mother was now even more dependent  on
    the appellant than she had been previously.  It was wrong of the  judge
    to find that there was no family life between  the  appellant  and  his
    mother.

10.  Mr Gilbert reminded me that at paragraph 22 of  the  determination  the
    judge appeared to accept the evidence she had given that JI had been  a
    considerable moral and emotional support  for  the  appellant  and  his
    family.  She had previously been involved in taking F to  school  on  a
    regular basis, but could no longer do that and that is something  which
    the appellant now helps his mother with.

11.  The judge also erred in suggesting that the appellant had family  links
    in St. Lucia.  He has social ties with St. Lucia, having in the  recent
    past travelled to St. Lucia with his family, but he  has  no  relatives
    there.  Counsel also drew my attention to the fact that  the  appellant
    had now been offered an electrical engineering apprenticeship which  he
    was anxious to take up.  There are no similar  apprenticeships  in  St.
    Lucia.

12.  Mr Norton suggested that Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 was clear.  It is for the appellant  to  show  very
    compelling circumstances over and above  the  exceptions  1  and  2  at
    Section 117C(iv) and (v).  The exceptions clearly  do  not  apply.   At
    paragraphs 31 to 41 the judge made findings supported by the  evidence.
    He came to a fair and rational conclusion and the  decision  should  be
    upheld.

13.  Responding briefly, Mr Gilbert suggested that in the  appellant's  case
    the compelling circumstances were the dependency by his  mother  and  F
    and the dependency by PJ on the appellant to facilitate F seeing him.

14.  I reserved my determination.

15.  The first challenge suggests that the judge had made a mistake of  fact
    in finding the appellant to be an adult at the age of 18 years  at  the
    time of the offence.  They suggest also that the  judge  further  erred
    when he held that the appellant's age was irrelevant  to  his  criminal
    culpability.

16.  I have set out above paragraph 32 of the judge's determination.   There
    is a contradiction in paragraph 32, in that the  judge  refers  to  the
    appellant having committed a serious offence when he was  18  years  of
    age but, when making reference to the sentencing  remarks,  noted  that
    the sentence reflected the  appellant's  plea,  his  age  and  previous
    limited offending.  I am satisfied that the judge was very  well  aware
    of the appellant's age at the time he committed the offence.  The judge
    pointed out that at the date of the hearing the appellant was 20  years
    7 months old, having been born on  28th  October,  1994.   However,  at
    paragraph 24, the judge had referred to Maslov v Austria  [2008]  which
    stressed  the  importance  of  considering  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's young age at the time of his offence.  At paragraph 29  the
    judge reminds himself again that the appellant was a minor at the  time
    of the offence, lawfully settled in the United Kingdom  and  had  spent
    the majority of his time in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 35 of the
    determination the judge recorded that it had been urged  on  behalf  of
    the appellant that he was only 18 when he committed the  offences,  but
    the judge makes it perfectly clear that  he  has  read  the  sentencing
    remarks of His Honour, Judge Dugdale, who also makes it clear that  one
    month before the appellant's 18th  birthday,  on  19th  September,  the
    appellant and another unknown individual committed a burglary at a home
    where a man was living with his wife, his mother and 13 year  old  son.
    The appellant was armed  with  a  cosh  and  his  co-defendant  was  in
    possession of a knife.  The householder was stabbed in the back and  in
    the wrist.

17.  Having read the determination as a whole, I am left in  no  doubt  that
    the judge was well aware of the fact that at the time  of  the  offence
    the appellant was a minor.

18.  The second challenge is that the judge erred  when  he  held  that  the
    appellant's age was irrelevant to his criminal culpability.  Mr Gilbert
    did not address me on this challenge.  What the judge actually said  at
    paragraph 36 was this:-

         "When committing the index offence I find he  was  not  of  an  age
         which might excuse his conduct or behaviour.  He was fully aware of
         the nature of the criminal enterprise, entered  into  it  willingly
         and for personal gain."

19.  With respect, this again emphasises the fact that the  judge  was  well
    aware of the fact that he was dealing with somebody who was a minor  at
    the time of the  offence,  but  the  judge  makes  it  clear  that  the
    appellant was above the age of criminal responsibility.

20.  The next challenge suggests  that  the  judge  failed  to  provide  any
    adequate reasons for finding that family life did not exist between the
    appellant and his mother Mrs J and his sister F.   However,  with  very
    great respect, the evidence simply did not show any  more  than  normal
    emotional ties expected between an adult, his parent  and  his  younger
    sibling.

21.  The appellant assists his mother from time  to  time  as  would  expect
    anybody in his position to do.  He also helps his mother look after his
    younger sister and takes her to  school,  but  any  responsible  caring
    adult would do the same.  The fact that the appellant is able  to  help
    his sister when his  mother  is  ill  and  assists  with  securing  his
    sister's contact with her father, does not  demonstrate  anything  more
    than normal emotional bonds.  The judge did not err.

22.  It is also asserted that the judge erred by making findings which  were
    unsupported by the evidence: first there was a strong support structure
    to ensure that F's wellbeing did not depend on A and secondly that  the
    assistance provided was not indispensible.   To  deal  first  with  the
    second point, the evidence provided to the judge  did  not  demonstrate
    that the assistance was indispensible.  Insofar as there being a strong
    support structure to ensure F's wellbeing, the evidence  was  that  the
    family members had coped during the appellant's detention, during which
    time the appellant's uncle and aunt assisted.  While they may not be so
    geographically close, but there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    uncle and aunt  will  not  assist  whenever  possible.   There  was  no
    evidence before the judge that the appellant's  brother  is  unable  to
    offer assistance to his mother.  F and her mother both have connections
    in the community, according  to  F's  headmistress  who  described  the
    appellant's mother as having, "a number  of  friends  who  can  support
    her".

23.  The head teacher's letter continues:-

         "Because of her health issues she often has to rely on this support
         in order to ensure that Ci-Ann can attend school and be picked  up.
         When Ms Jude is unable to bring or collect Ci-Ann her  friends  are
         able to step in and do this for her."

24.  That evidence certainly gives the impression that there  is  a  support
    structure in place which does not depend on the appellant.

25.  At paragraph 39 the judge said this:-

         "In coming to my conclusion I have given careful  consideration  to
         all the evidence before me and had particular regard to the  impact
         removal will have on the Appellant's younger sister's  welfare.   I
         find that there is a strong support structure and system  in  place
         to ensure her well-being which does not depend  on  the  Appellant.
         The education system and referral system to therapy and  course  is
         in evidence before me.  Whereas the Appellant was part of a  family
         unit in his teens he is now an adult and as such  his  relationship
         to his mother and sister will not amount to a family  life  without
         evidence of further elements of dependency beyond normal  emotional
         ties.  There was no such evidence of a level of dependency  between
         the Appellant and his mother and sister.  The Appellant provides  a
         degree of logistic support to his mother  and  sister  but  on  the
         evidence it is by no means indispensable.  I find that the claim of
         dependency on him by his family  is  not  exceptional  in  all  the
         circumstances.  He  is  not  in  full-time  employment  and  cannot
         provide for them financially.  Although he can fulfil some  support
         role for his sister it is not that of a  full-time  carer.   Indeed
         his sister was able to be supported by  other  family  members  and
         friends at a much younger age while the Appellant was in custody."

26.  In his  determination  the  judge  noted  the  recent  conduct  of  the
    appellant and aspects of his rehabilitation.

27.  In her statement, the appellant's mother refers to having relatives  in
    St. Lucia.  She refers to having, "some distant family" but they do not
    appear to be that distant that she does not occasionally talk  to  them
    on the telephone (see paragraph 19 of  her  determination).   I  accept
    that the appellant's mother may have little to do with her sister,  but
    there is no evidence to suggest that the appellant himself has  nothing
    to do with his aunt.  The appellant's uncle is  referred  to  as  being
    elderly and not working and relying on  the  support  of  other  family
    members for help but that does not mean that he would not be  available
    to emotionally support the appellant and offer him advice.   Similarly,
    the appellant's mother's cousin and family  friend  may  not  be  in  a
    position  to  provide  accommodation  and  financial  support  for  the
    appellant, but there is no reason  why  they  should  not  be  able  to
    provide him with emotional support and advice should he require it.  As
    the judge pointed out, the skills acquired  by  the  appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom will assist him and, given the very  serious  nature  of
    the offence to which  the  appellant  pleaded  guilty,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  was  not
    outweighed   such   as   to   render   the   order   unjustified    and
    disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

25.  The determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Del  Fabbro  does  not
    contain any material error on a point of law.  I uphold it.

26.  Anonymity direction is upheld.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
