

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01941/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|on 14 July 2015                       |                   On 20 July 2015    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ABDALLA ALI HEMED
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 26 February 1964.  On  3
    April 2002 he was recognised as a refugee in  the  United  Kingdom.   A
    letter dated  10  September  2013  notifies  him  of  the  respondent's
    intention to cease his refugee status.  The letter records  at  page  2
    that it was accepted at the time of his asylum claim  that  he  was  "a
    Somali national of Bajuni ethnicity ... born  and  raised  in  Kismayo,
    which holds a sizeable Bajuni community ... [who]  could  speak  broken
    Somali."

 3. The appellant was convicted on 20  June  2008  in  the  High  Court  of
    Justiciary at Glasgow.  The judge said:

      The jury found you guilty of 2  charges  of  rape  and  2  charges  of
      assault with intent to rape, and a charge of a  breach  of  the  peace
      involving a knife.  The knife also featured in certain  of  the  other
      charges.  You are said to be of a high risk of sexual re-offending, so
      you are clearly a danger to the public and to women in particular.

      I ... consider it appropriate to impose  an  extended  sentence.   The
      total ... will be a period of 12 years, the custodial part will  be  9
      years, the extended part 3 years, and I recommend at the end  of  your
      sentence you should be deported.

 4. On 14 July 2008 and again on 7 August 2013 the  respondent  served  the
    appellant with notice of liability to deportation and  with  notice  of
    his opportunity to rebut the presumption that he had been convicted  of
    a particularly serious crime and constituted a danger to the  community
    of the United Kingdom.

 5. The appellant does not appear to have sought to rebut the  presumption.
    He maintained that he ought not to be removed because  he  remained  at
    risk under  the  Refugee  Convention.    (He  relied  alternatively  on
    grounds under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, which effectively  coincide
    with the Refugee Convention  case,  and  on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Article 8 grounds are no longer maintained.)

 6. By letter dated 9 October 2014 the respondent told the  appellant  that
    his refugee status had  been  ceased,  on  the  view  that  the  Bajuni
    minority  in  Kismayo  and  the  adjacent  islands   no   longer   face
    persecution, and that alternatively the  appellant  could  relocate  to
    Mogadishu.  The decision is made (paragraph 56) because the  respondent
    is satisfied that  the  circumstances  in  connection  with  which  the
    appellant was recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist in  terms  of
    Article 1C(5) of  the  Refugee  Convention  as  mirrored  in  paragraph
    339A(v) of the Immigration Rules HC395.

 7. The letter advises the appellant that he  does  not  have  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision to cease his refugee status,  but  that  he
    does have an opportunity to appeal against the accompanying immigration
    decision.

 8. The appellant was served also with a  letter  and  a  notice  dated  14
    October 2014 setting out reasons for making  a  deportation  order  and
    advising him of his rights of appeal.

 9. (The respondent's decision is based on 339(a)(v) of the Rules  and  not
    on (x) which provides that a person's grant of asylum will  be  revoked
    or not renewed if the Secretary of State is satisfied that "having been
    convicted by a final  judgment  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  he
    constitutes a danger to the community of the United Kingdom".)

10. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Farrelly
    allowed his appeal by determination promulgated on  25  February  2015.
    The judge notes that removal of refugee status was solely on the  basis
    of the country situation and not of criminal conduct.  He concludes  at
    paragraph 38, having  regard  to  the  country  information,  that  the
    appellant remains at risk.  The appeal is therefore allowed  under  the
    Refugee Convention and under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

11. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on grounds which in summary  are
    as follows:

      Ground 1 - material misdirection in law - findings.

      Failure to make findings  on  credibility  of  appellant's  assertions
      about family and support in Somalia or elsewhere; findings should have
      been made on basis of appellant's evidence  and  not  just  his  clan;
      failure to follow country guidance case law on whether  minority  clan
      members might have protection  from  a  majority  clan;  treating  all
      ethnic  minorities  as  having  the  same  circumstances;  finding  it
      improbable that the appellant was from a prominent business family  as
      stated in a probation report, when he was the  source  of  the  claim;
      lack of findings on the appellant's evidence  that  he  had  tried  to
      locate his family in Kismayo by way of a friend who knew indirectly of
      his family.

      Ground 2 - material misdirection in law - burden of proof.

      The judge founded on lack of indications of family support  or  anyone
      in the UK who might send remittances, which  switched  the  burden  of
      proof to the respondent, and was contrary to case law on the burden on
      an appellant to show why he might not sustain himself or be  sustained
      on return; failure to have regard to  the  cost  of  entering  the  UK
      irregularly, being $15,000-25,000.

      Ground 3 - material misdirection in law - approach to minority status.

      The judge's finding of residual risk  to  ethnic  minority  clans  was
      contrary to country guidance that clan identity did not  bar  working;
      the clan was not relevant to protection but  to  social  support;  and
      that Mogadishu  is  a  multi-clan  environment.   Failure  to  provide
      findings on how the appellant would not be able to work  in  Mogadishu
      and failure to make findings on the appellant's oral evidence that  he
      worked as a mechanic in Somalia.

12. The country guidance cases principally relied upon in the  grounds  are
    KS [2004] UKIAT 00271, HH [2008] UKAIT 00022 and MOJ and Others (return
    to Mogadishu) [2014] UKUT 442.

13. The grounds rely at paragraphs 10 and 16 on a witness statement by  the
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   The  statement
    records that the appellant gave evidence that  he  tried  to  find  out
    about his family through a friend, and that  he  was  a  fisherman  and
    helper/mechanic in Somalia at a subsistence level.

14. Mrs O'Brien submitted as follows.  The judge failed to particularise or
    make  clear  findings  on  the  appellant's  circumstances  or  on  any
    difficulties he might face if returned to Somalia.  The  revocation  of
    refugee status was plainly on the basis that conditions in  and  around
    Kismayo were no longer as at the time of the grant of asylum or  as  at
    the date of country guidance.  The determination lacked findings on the
    appellant's circumstances  on  return.   The  respondent  continues  to
    accept that the appellant is a Bajuni from Somalia, but  does  not  now
    acknowledge that as a basis for a grant of  protection.   Any  residual
    risk to minority clans or groups did  not  by  itself  justify  refugee
    status.  The determination should be set  aside  and  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

15. In a Rule 24 response  and  in  submissions  the  appellant  argued  as
    follows.  The central issue was whether the respondent showed a  change
    of circumstances which were "significant and of a non-temporary  nature
    in order to justify the decision to cease refugee status."   The  judge
    found that the respondent had  not  met  that  burden.   There  was  no
    challenge to those findings.  The grounds were therefore irrelevant.

    As to the specific grounds, the judge did made  findings  about  family
    and support in Somalia, namely that those  were  lacking.   Those  were
    findings he was entitled to make.  They corresponded with the  original
    grant of status.  The respondent had  not  previously  taken  issue  on
    those points.  The cases relied upon related to various minority  clans
    and to minorities  marrying  into  majority  clans,  circumstances  not
    relevant to the present case.  The judge also had  the  benefit  of  an
    expert report.  He did not treat all ethnic minorities as the same  but
    had in mind that this claimant was Bajuni.  On ground 2, the judge  did
    not  switch  the  burden  of  proof,  but  accepted   the   appellant's
    explanation of his  position,  which  again  had  not  previously  been
    disputed by the respondent.   The  judge  effectively  found  that  the
    appellant did fall into a category  within  MOJ  requiring  protection.
    The issue of expense of travel to the UK dated back a  very  long  time
    and had not been raised prior to these grounds.  On ground 3,  MOJ  did
    not expressly overturn any previous case law  relating  to  the  Bajuni
    minority.  The expert report showed them to be  a  marginalised  group.
    No error was shown in terms of country guidance.

    The judge refers at paragraphs 27 and 28 to an expert report  by  Dr  M
    Hoehne, of the University of Leipzig, dated 18 December 2004.  He  does
    not mention it again in reaching his conclusions but it plainly  played
    a part in his  decision.   Mr  Winter  referred  me  in  particular  to
    paragraph 41 of that report,  where  it  is  noted  that  MOJ  was  not
    concerned with the situation in Kismayo; 42, membership of  the  Bajuni
    might not expose him to systematic persecution but "did not put him  in
    a very strong position"; the Bajuni were still a marginalised group who
    could not expect any kind of stable  clan  protection,  rather  it  was
    probable that they were looted and/or forced to join various sides; 43,
    return to Mogadishu would involve "massive structural marginalisation";
    the Bajuni had no substantial presence there; in Kismayo he would  face
    "not only structural marginalisation but even more immediate  risks  to
    his life.  Al Shabaab  still  operates  in  and  around  the  city  and
    majority clan militias are in conflict over power there.  This provides
    for massive instability in and around Kismayo which  affects  a  person
    belonging to a minority group without active family  relations  on  the
    ground extremely negatively, and certainly much worse than a member  of
    a majority group with recent  experience  in  the  area  and/or  active
    family support".

16. I reserved my determination.

17. The grounds of appeal put the  cart  before  the  horse  regarding  (a)
    general country findings and (b) findings on the appellant's particular
    circumstances.  As Mr Winter submitted, they do not attack the  judge's
    essential finding that country conditions had not changed to the extent
    of removing the risk previously recognised.

18. The grounds fail to recognise that the appellant is acknowledged to  be
    a member of the Somali Bajuni, who form a small  and  unusual  minority
    confined to a restricted area.  The background evidence  and  case  law
    over the years have made it clear that they are not a minority clan  or
    any part of the  general  Somali  clan  structure.   They  are  closely
    associated with (if not part of the same group as) the Bajuni who  live
    across the border in Kenya.   They  have  no  significant  presence  in
    Mogadishu.  Somali is not their  principal  language.   The  respondent
    recorded the appellant originally as speaking broken  Somali.   In  the
    statement he provided for these proceedings  he  says  that  he  speaks
    English, Kibajuni and Swahili.  Kibajuni (in which  he  seems  to  have
    given evidence) is closely related to  or  a  dialect  of  Swahili  (or
    Kiswahili).  Being a Bajuni and not  a  fluent  Somali  speaker,  there
    would be no realistic prospect of his  relocation  to  Mogadishu.   The
    case turned on whether the judge was correct in holding at paragraph 38
    that there had been no such change in the country (he might have  said,
    in the appellant's particular area of the country) such that  he  could
    be returned.

19. I find the particular points in the  grounds  weak  and  diffuse.   The
    judge said that there was no evidence of family support in  Somalia  or
    of possible sources of remittances from the UK.  That was accurate, and
    did not reverse the burden of proof.  It is too late now to  raise  the
    question of the cost of travel in 2001, which was not put to the judge.
     It is far from clear why the statement from the Presenting Officer  is
    produced.  The judge made  no  findings  which  were  contrary  to  the
    appellant's oral evidence that he tried to locate his family by way  of
    "a friend who knew people who knew  people  who  were  friends  of  his
    family".  If paragraph 10 of  the  grounds  seeks  to  show  that  such
    evidence should have led to the conclusion that the appellant must have
    support in Kismayo, that is absurd.  The grounds at paragraph 16 do not
    say what finding the judge "impermissibly failed to make" on the  basis
    of the appellant's evidence that he worked as a mechanic in Somalia, or
    what bearing any such finding might have had on the outcome.

20. The respondent's grounds do not show that the determination  makes  any
    error on a point of law  which  requires  it  to  be  set  aside.   The
    determination shall stand.

21.  No anonymity order has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman                     17 July 2015





