
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01030/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th January 2014                            |On 20th February 2014      |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 Penny Keza
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Uganda  born  on  27th  September
    1974.  She entered the UK on 29th July 2003 using a forged passport and
    as a consequence on 19th January 2005 she was convicted of the  offence
    of using a false instrument at Manchester Crown Court and  subsequently
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.  In the meantime and on  18th
    January 2005 she claimed asylum.  That application was refused on  21st
    November 2005 when the Appellant was  also  served  with  a  Notice  of
    Intention to Deport.  The Appellant appealed those decisions,  but  her
    appeal was dismissed on 2nd February 2006.   A  deportation  order  was
    made against her on 31st March 2006, but that was revoked on 23rd  July
    2010.  The Appellant then claimed to be a victim of trafficking,  which
    was eventually accepted by the Respondent, but on  15th  May  2013  the
    Respondent decided to make a  further  deportation  order  against  the
    Appellant on the basis that it would be conducive to the public good to
    do so.

 2. The Appellant appealed that decision, and her appeal  was  heard  by  a
    Panel chaired by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Talbot  (the  Panel)
    sitting at Taylor House on 7th October  2013.   The  Panel  decided  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds for the reasons given in its
    Determination dated 21st October 2013.  The Respondent sought leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 6th  December  2013  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 3. It is first necessary for me to decide if the  decision  of  the  Panel
    contained an error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The Panel found that the Appellant had a private life in the  UK  which
    would be interfered with by the Respondent's decision to such a  degree
    of gravity as to engage the Appellant's Article 8  rights.   The  Panel
    then carried out the balancing exercise necessary for any assessment of
    proportionality,  and  decided  that  the  Respondent's  decision   was
    disproportionate.  The Panel's reasons for that decision are summarised
    at paragraph 42  of  the  Determination.   There  the  Panel  wrote  as
    follows:

         "42. In making our overall assessment, we highlight  the  following
             factors.  The criminal offence, whilst  serious,  incorporated
             strong mitigating factors associated with her experience as  a
             trafficking victim  to  the  UK.   We  accept  that  both  her
             physical and psychological health are  fragile  and  would  be
             seriously jeopardised by  her  removal  to  Uganda.   She  has
             remained in the UK for over  ten  years  and  has  established
             strong ties.  There is no evidence of her having retained  any
             significant ties in Uganda or potential sources of support  on
             her return.  After taking into account all  relevant  factors,
             we are satisfied that there  are  'exceptional  circumstances'
             under the Immigration Rules that  would  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deportation.  We  also  conclude  that  after  due
             consideration of the relevant Article  8  jurisprudence,  that
             the interference with the Appellant's right to respect for her
             private life in the UK outweighs the  legitimate  aim  of  the
             Secretary of State in the prevention of crime and disorder."

 5. At the hearing, Mr Tufan argued that the Panel  had  erred  in  law  in
    reaching its decision.  He referred to the grounds of  application  and
    argued  that  the  Panel  had  given  a  wrong  interpretation  to  the
    exceptional  circumstance  test.   There  would  only  be   exceptional
    circumstances  where  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  result   in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.  Having found  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would not be in breach of her  Article  3  ECHR  rights  on
    medical grounds, the Panel should have followed the decision in GS  and
    EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT  00397  (IAC)  that  it
    would be only in very rare cases that where the  Appellant  had  failed
    under Article 3, he could succeed under Article  8.   Further,  it  was
    decided in MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 that the absence of
    medical care is  only  relevant  to  Article  8  where  an  Appellant's
    personal ties to the UK have  a  direct  bearing  on  their  prognosis.
    Finally, Mr Tufan argued that the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked was not relevant to proportionality.

 6. In response, Mr Loughran submitted that there  was  no  error  of  law.
    This was not a case  where  the  Appellant  relied  upon  only  medical
    grounds to establish a breach of her Article 8  rights.   The  Tribunal
    had carried out a proper balancing exercise to assess  proportionality,
    giving  due  weight  to  the  public  interest.   The  Panel  had  then
    considered the counterbalancing factors of which the Appellant's health
    was only one.  The Panel had taken into account all  relevant  factors.
    The Panel had been entitled to take into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been trafficked.  The Panel had  taken  account  of  that
    factor when assessing the serious nature of the Appellant's  offending.
    The Panel referred to the decision in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  550
    and gave due weight to the public interest.

 7. I am in agreement with the submissions of Ms Loughran and find no error
    of law in the decision of the Panel.  The Panel carried  out  a  proper
    and thorough balancing exercise in  order  to  assess  proportionality,
    taking into account all the relevant factors and attaching to  each  of
    them the weight it thought appropriate.  The Panel came to a conclusion
    which was open to it upon the evidence before it and  which  cannot  be
    described as perverse.  The Panel took into account the public interest
    in deportation  cases  and  attached  to  it  the  appropriate  weight.
    However, the Panel, at paragraph 42 of the  Determination,  found  that
    the  factors  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  amounted  to  exceptional
    circumstances which  outweighed  that  public  interest.   Taking  into
    account the fact that the Appellant had suffered trafficking,  and  her
    medical condition as set out in the reports of Dr Pozniak and Ms Kraij,
    I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the Panel's  conclusion
    that the factors in favour of the  Appellant  amounted  to  exceptional
    circumstances.  The Appellant's history of being trafficked to  the  UK
    is a relevant factor.

 8. The Appellant did not rely solely upon medical reasons for her  Article
    8 claim, and consequently there was no finding by the  Panel  that  the
    Respondent's decision amounted to  a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8  rights  merely  on  that  basis.   The  Tribunal
    considered all the relevant factors only one of which was the state  of
    the Appellant's health.  Therefore there is no merit  in  the  argument
    that the Panel failed to apply the tests given in MM (Zimbabwe); GS and
    EO (Article 3 - health cases) India; and N v UK.







Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
