
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01875/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated     |
|on 17th February 2015                         |on 18th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MARCIN KARWOWSKI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K McGuire, Advocate, instructed by McGill & Co.,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Scobbie, promulgated on 19th December 2014,  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against  deportation  in  terms  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The grounds are as follows:

         Ground 1:     Failing to give adequate reasons for a finding  on  a
                  material matter.

         3.   The judge erred in the consideration of present threat for the
                  purposes of Regulation 21(5)(c) ...

         4.   ... the judge fails to engage adequately with the  appellant's
                  criminal [record] and instead places much emphasis on  the
                  fact that the appellant 'has merely been found  guilty  of
                  cultivating cannabis'.

         5.   ... the judge minimises the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
                  offence and significance of the criminal sentence ... when
                  assessing risk.

         6.   There was no report from probation assessing  the  appellant's
                  risk  of  reoffending.   He  has  a  previous  record   of
                  supplying drugs in Poland.

         7.   The judge makes no finding whether the appellant has sought to
                  address his offending attitudes or substance  misuse.   It
                  is clear he has  not  undertaken  rehabilitation  courses.
                  The appellant's justification is 'because he took no drugs
                  in prison' but the judge concludes he cannot determine the
                  veracity of this statement.

         8.   ... The judge has failed to undertake  a  holistic  assessment
                  ... when determining whether the appellant  is  a  genuine
                  present and sufficiently serious threat in accordance with
                  the Regulations.

         Ground 2:     Material misdirection in law.

         9.    ...  the  judge  erred  ...  by  considering  the  issue   of
                  rehabilitation ... the Upper Tribunal in Essa [2013]  UKUT
                  00316  establishes   clearly   the   parameters   of   the
                  rehabilitation principle [paragraph 30 of Essa is  quoted]
                  ...

         10.  Since the appellant cannot be said to be integrated in the  UK
                  and   has   not   acquired   permanent    residence    ...
                  rehabilitation is an irrelevant consideration.

 3. In a Rule 24 response the appellant cites authority on  the  extent  of
    the requirement to give  reasons;  on  disagreements  with  weight  not
    amounting to error of law; and on the  presumption  that  a  specialist
    Tribunal understands its  area  of  law.   On  the  second  ground  the
    response says that given the finding that the appellant's  conduct  did
    not  represent  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society,  proportionality
    was not crucial.  Further, the judge's  approach  was  consistent  with
    that of the Court of Appeal in Essa [2013] Imm AR 644, and  the  SSHD's
    decision under appeal also considered the issue of rehabilitation.  The
    judge was correct to find that this counted in favour of the appellant.



 4.  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted  that  the  first  ground   was   not   simply
    disagreement, but disclosed irrationality, verging even on  perversity,
    in the determination.  The appellant  had  followed  a  clear  line  of
    criminal offending not of a varied but all of a  drugs-related  nature.
    He offended significantly in Poland and continued such  criminality  in
    the UK very soon after arrival.  Although the judge set out the correct
    holistic approach at paragraph 25, at paragraphs 26 to 31  he  gave  no
    proper reasons for finding in  favour  of  the  appellant  despite  his
    criminal history.  The statement at paragraph 27 that the appellant had
    "merely been  found  guilty  of  cultivating  cannabis"  minimised  his
    offending in the context of the whole  facts.   It  was  irrational  at
    paragraph 28 to formulate an outcome based on "looking solely  at  this
    conviction in itself".  The comment at  paragraph  29  that  there  was
    "little  else"  to  take  into  account  against  the  appellant  again
    minimised his criminality.  In dealing with rehabilitation at paragraph
    33 the judge should have noted that there was nothing to show that  the
    appellant had any wish to change his  behaviour.   Ground  1  disclosed
    material error.

 5. Mrs O'Brien acknowledged that Ground 2 might be more problematic.   The
    SSHD's  decision  letter   specifically   treats   the   prospects   of
    rehabilitation in the host country as relevant.  Although the judge had
    fallen into error he might have been led to do so by the  reference  to
    Essa in the decision letter.  However, she said  that  the  ground  did
    demonstrate that the judge placed too much reliance  on  rehabilitation
    prospects.  The appellant has not integrated into  UK  society,  having
    spent only a relatively short  period  here  before  his  arrest.   The
    aspect of rehabilitation should have been no more  than  neutral.   The
    judge went wrong by finding it to favour the appellant.

 6. Mr McGuire relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He further submitted that
    the first ground was no more than a  classic  example  of  disagreement
    with findings properly reached.  The factual background had been before
    the judge in the form of a statement from the appellant and  statements
    from three family witnesses who also attended to  give  oral  evidence.
    The discussion in the determination at  paragraphs  26  to  31  and  at
    paragraph 33 showed that the judge kept the convictions in the  UK  and
    in Poland clearly in mind throughout.  It  was  accurate  to  say  that
    these were the  only  matters  counting  against  the  appellant.   The
    respondent had not submitted that  there  were  any  other  significant
    factors against him.  The judge was not only entitled but bound to note
    the difference between drugs convictions for possession and for supply.
     The use of the word "merely"  at  paragraph  27  had  to  be  read  in
    context.  It did not minimise the offending itself but drew the  proper
    distinction.  At paragraphs 26 and 27 the judge was simply setting  out
    the correct factual position.  The  judgment  which  he  reached  after
    hearing the evidence and considering the submissions was properly  open
    to him and reflected no error of law.

 7. On Ground 2, Mr McGuire  said  that  the  SSHD's  decision  letter  and
    submissions in the First-tier Tribunal treated the  relative  prospects
    of rehabilitation in the UK and in Poland as an issue.  It was  not  an
    error to adopt a legal approach on which the SSHD relied. Even if  some
    error could be found in paragraph 33, it was immaterial.  To find  that
    the appellant had a better chance  of  rehabilitation  in  the  UK  was
    simply a factual matter.  It was  a  valid  factor  in  favour  of  his
    remaining in the UK.  In any event, Essa was  a  problematic  authority
    because the prospects of rehabilitation could not be distinguished from
    the risk of reoffending and the  evaluation  of  whether  an  appellant
    posed a present threat.  Even if not in the language of rehabilitation,
    such an evaluation had in effect to be carried out by the judge.

 8. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal would be dismissed.

 9. Although the Presenting Officer did her best to  put  the  argument  in
    terms of lack of reasoning and failure to adopt  a  holistic  approach,
    Ground 1 discloses no  more  than  disagreement.   The  judge  said  at
    paragraph 26 that this was not the easiest of cases, and I think it was
    a finely balanced one.  Another judge might not  have  given  the  same
    answer on whether the appellant poses a present threat, but this  judge
    gives adequate reasons at paragraphs 27 to 33 for coming  down  on  the
    side which he did.

10. I do not think the argument in Ground 2 is properly open  to  the  SSHD
    when it follows upon a decision which cites Essa and  states  that  the
    relative prospects of  rehabilitation  had  to  be  considered  in  the
    proportionality exercise.  That is  sufficient  for  present  purposes,
    although there may also have been something in  Mr  McGuire's  argument
    that in any event the relevant considerations had to come into play  in
    the assessment of a present threat.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           17 February 2015
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
