
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01954/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             NASIH FAITH SHAWKAT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Collins of counsel


                                  DECISION

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  who  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal. The respondent is  represented  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal  by  Mr  Collins  who  appeared  also  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. He has,  quite  properly,  taken  a  realistic  view  of  the
    decision and does not seek to defend  it  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    recognising  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  set  out  an  unanswerable
    challenge to the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Moore  and
    that the Upper Tribunal has  no  alternative  but  to  set  aside  that
    decision and to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    appeal to be determined afresh by a different judge of that Tribunal.

 2. As it is common ground and agreed between the parties that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal judge discloses a number of  errors  of  law
    that are material to the outcome of this appeal, it is necessary for me
    only to record my agreement and to explain briefly the nature of  those
    errors.

 3. In a number of respects, as  identified  by  the  grounds  for  seeking
    permission to appeal and reiterated in the  grant  of  permission,  the
    judge failed to provide any reasoned basis to support his  conclusions.
    His findings in respect of the respondent's state of  health  and  need
    for treatment, in the absence of any sufficient or sustainable analysis
    of the evidence before him, were not reasonably open to him. The  judge
    failed adequately to resolve conflicts in the evidence where they  were
    relevant to his conclusions and key aspects  of  his  conclusions  were
    based upon speculation rather than a reasoned analysis of the evidence.
    Drawing all this together, the position is that  the  decision  of  the
    judge is replete with legal error and cannot stand.

    Summary of Decision

 4. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore discloses error of  law
    such as to require that his decision be set aside in its entirety.

 5. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.


    Signed [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date:    8 February 2016
