
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01910/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Crown Court          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 July 2014                           |On 2 June 2015                      |
|And at Field House on 26 March 2015      |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                IBRAHIM KARA
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr Anisuddin, Legal Representative Mr T Melvin
For the Respondent:    Mr Mc Veety, Presenting Office (4 July 2014)
     Mr T Melvin, Presenting Officer (26 March 2015)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (a panel comprising First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A D Smith MBE, TD and Mrs S Hussain) promulgated on  6th
    January 2014 in which they allowed the claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to deport him pursuant to Section 3(5)(a) of
    the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The claimant is a British Overseas Citizen.  He was born  in  Tanzania.
    His father was registered as a British citizen pursuant to Section 6(1)
    of the British Nationality Act 1948 and subsequently became  a  British
    citizen under Section 11(1) of the British Nationality Act  1981.   The
    claimant first visited the United Kingdom in 1996 with his  father  and
    brother to visit grandparents;  he  alone  returned  to  Tanzania.   In
    November 1999 the claimant was issued with a  British  passport  giving
    his status as a British citizen and he returned to the  United  Kingdom
    to join his father, brothers and sisters in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    subsequently lost his passport and, after applying  to  renew  it,  was
    told in 2003 by the British Passport Agency that the  British  passport
    issued to him had been issued in error and that he is in fact a British
    overseas citizen, the basis of that being that  his  father  could  not
    pass on the right of abode and as the son was born abroad  he  obtained
    only British overseas citizenship by descent.

 3. On 6  October  2004  the  claimant  was  convicted  of  driving  whilst
    disqualified and driving with no  insurance  and  was  sentenced  to  a
    community punishment order for 100 hours, disqualification from driving
    and costs.  On 16 December 2005 he was  convicted  at  Isleworth  Crown
    Court  of  threats  to  kill  and  was  sentenced  to  twelve   months'
    imprisonment.  He was released on 6 February 2006.

 4. On 12 November 2012 the respondent served a liability  for  deportation
    notice and questionnaire on the claimant.  He later contacted the  Home
    Office claiming that he was a British citizen and was advised to submit
    proof of this.  No satisfactory evidence to that effect was,  according
    to the respondent, received, and a decision was taken  to  deport  him.
    The respondent considered that  this  was  a  case  which  fell  to  be
    considered pursuant to paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules but  that
    neither paragraph 399 nor 399A applied to the facts of this case  given
    that he was not in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  spouse
    or  partner;  had  no  children  here;  and,  he  had  not  lived  here
    continuously for twenty years preceding the  date  of  the  immigration
    decision.   She  considered  also  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances in this case.  She also considered that the delay in this
    case was not exceptional given the nature of the offence of violence.

 5. On appeal the Tribunal found that the appellant had committed a serious
    criminal offence [16, 17]; that neither  paragraph  399  nor  399A  was
    engaged [18]; and, that it would only be in  exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest in deportation would be  outweighed  by  other
    factors [19].

 6. The Tribunal concluded that there were in this case exceptional factors
    such that the public interest was outweighed.  Those  factors  are  set
    out in paragraph [20] of the determination, the panel finding,  amongst
    other matters, that:-

      i) the claimant had lived in the United  Kingdom  almost  continuously
         since 2000 apart from a short trip to Tanzania when he got married,
         his wife continuing to reside in Indonesia;

     ii) the claimant has a close relationship  with  his  brother  although
         there is no dependency; that he has a good work  record  and  since
         release from custody has worked more or less  continuously  and  is
         currently in employment;

    iii) the claimant's brother is a full British citizen and he  has  other
         close family ties to the United  Kingdom  having  stepbrothers  and
         sisters who all live in Greater London;

     iv) that he has few remaining ties to Tanzania, his  father  living  in
         Uganda part of the year and that he is much more familiar now  with
         the customs and cultures of the United Kingdom;

      v) significant weight was to be attached  to  the  fact  that  between
         November 1999 and 2003 he had good reason to believe that he was  a
         British citizen but the fact of his mistake was not something  that
         they should ignore.

 7. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal had:-

      1) failed to give adequate consideration to the  public  interest,  in
         failing to provide any reason for finding that he had  no  risk  of
         reoffending;

      2) failed to carry out a thorough assessment in considering taking off
         proportionality taking into consideration the  public  interest  in
         deporting foreign criminals which includes not  only  the  risk  of
         reoffending but deterring others and preserving  public  confidence
         in the system of control;

      3) failed to provide adequate reasons for the  findings  he  would  be
         unable to continue his family and private  life  in  Tanzania,  the
         claimant and his brother living independent lives;

      4) failed to provide reasons for the conclusion that he has no ties to
         Tanzania; that the finding the  appellant  would  have  pursued  an
         application in 2002 to register as a British citizen is speculative
         and that he had had every opportunity to apply  to  register  as  a
         British citizen but had not done so;

      5) failed to find  adequate  reasons  for  the  period  in  which  the
         claimant was issued with a British  passport,  that  error  was  an
         exceptional circumstance.

 8. I heard submissions from both representatives.   Mr  McVeety  submitted
    that there were in reality no exceptional circumstances  in  this  case
    and that the panel had erred in taking into account the fact  that  the
    appellant had mistakenly been given British citizenship.  He  accepted,
    however, that the panel had not found that the appellant had no ties to
    Tanzania.

 9. Mr Anisuddin submitted that the Tribunal's conclusions had been open to
    them on the unusual facts of this case and that  it  was  evident  that
    they had properly taken into account the public interest.

10. The grounds of appeal at  [4]  and  [5]  appear  to  be  challenges  to
    findings which the Tribunal did not in fact make.  They  did  not  find
    that the claimant had no ties to the United Kingdom nor did  they  find
    that he had established a family life in the United  Kingdom.   It  was
    open to them to find he had a close relationship with his brother, and,
    that he had stronger ties with the United Kingdom than with Tanzania.

11. That said it is not at all clear from the determination what weight the
    Tribunal gave to the public interest.  Whilst they do  state  that  the
    claimant's deportation is conducive to the public good [17] there is no
    indication that they have  taken  into  account  the  very  significant
    weight  to  be  attached  to  the  deportation  of  foreign   criminals
    particularly those who, like this claimant,  do  not  fall  within  the
    terms of paragraph 399 or 399A.  Even allowing for the fact  that  this
    is not a case in which paragraph 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    applies, nonetheless the public interest in the deportation of  foreign
    criminals is significant.

12. Further, I do not consider that the fact  that  somebody  had,  as  the
    Tribunal found, been mistakenly issued with a British passport, is  any
    mitigation for his criminal behaviour. The  reality  is  that,  on  the
    facts as found by the Tribunal, the claimant was not a British Citizen;
    had he been, the situation would be entirely different.

13. If, as the Tribunal found,  the  claimant  had  never  been  a  British
    Citizen, it is not apparent why this was a  factor  in  the  claimant's
    favour; the reference to Liew v SSHD [1989] Imm AR 62 does not  assist,
    as the facts of that case are entirely different; there was no passport
    issued in error in that case and as the decision of the Tribunal  makes
    clear [page 65], "a British Passport is the evidence of citizenship but
    is not its root.  Citizenship is a statutory  right  and  depends  upon
    whether a person qualifies according to  statutory  provisions."  Here,
    the claimant could not  legitimately  have  concluded  that  he  was  a
    British Citizen, nor

14. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

15. Both representatives agreed that, in the circumstances of this case, it
    was of fundamental importance to settle whether or  not  the  issue  of
    whether or not the claimant is, as he claims, a  British  citizen.  The
    appeal was adjourned to allow the proper enquiries to be made.

16. At the reconvened hearing Mr Anisuddin explained that it was no  longer
    being argued that the claimant is a British citizen and on that  basis,
    the submissions in this case would be made solely in respect of whether
    the decision to deport the claimant was in accordance  with  the  Rules
    and/or would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations  pursuant
    to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

17. Although initially unaware of the decision in YM (Uganda)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1292 or the provisions of section s 117A - 117D of the 2002  Act  ,
    Mr Anisuddin submitted that the applicant fell within the exceptions to
    the Immigration Rules such that he should not  be  removed  given  that
    there were significant obstacles to his reintegration into Tanzania and
    the length of time he had spent in the United  Kingdom.   He  submitted
    also, having had regard to Section  117C  of  the  2002  Act  that  the
    claimant fell within the exceptions and having had regard to the  other
    factors set out in Sections 117B and C, it would not  be  proportionate
    to remove him.  He added that there was in any event no indication that
    he would be admitted to Tanzania, a  country  of  which  he  is  not  a
    citizen.

18. Mr Melvin submitted that the claimant did not come within  any  of  the
    exceptions set out in paragraphs 399 or 399A of the  Immigration  Rules
    and that accordingly he would need to show that the public interest  in
    deportation would only be outweighed by other factors  when  there  are
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A.

19. Mr Melvin submitted also that the applicant did  not  fall  within  the
    exception set out in Section 117C at all circumstances  of  this  case,
    notwithstanding the delay between the applicant's  conviction  and  the
    decision to deport him that the public interest was not  in  this  case
    outweighed and that he should be deported to Tanzania.

20. Following the decision  in  YM  (Uganda)  I  must  consider  first  the
    position under the Immigration Rules as in force as at  28  June  2014.
    The relevant provisions are as  follows,  the  previous  version  being
    struckthrough:


        A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
        Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
        where the requirements of these rules as at [28 July 2014] are met,
        regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
        deportation order, as appropriate, was served.'
        ...
        397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
        pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
        under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention . Where
        deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
        only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
        deportation is outweighed.


        [A.398. These rules apply where:
        (a) a foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
        deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
        under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
        (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
        him to be revoked.]


        398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
        to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
        Convention, and (a) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is
        conducive to the public good [and in the public  interest]  because
        they have been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four  years;  (b)
        the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
        public good [and in the public interest]  because  they  have  been
        convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
        period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
        or (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
        the public good [and in the public interest] because, in  the  view
        of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious  harm
        or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard
        for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will
        consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
        it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
        interest in deportation will be outweighed by  other  factors  [the
        public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
        factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
        above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.]


        399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
        if  -  (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in  the
        UK and (i) the child is a British citizen; or (ii)  the  child  has
        lived  in  the  UK  continuously  for  at  least  the  seven  years
        immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision; and  in
        either case (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to
        leave the UK [it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
        country to which the person is to be deported]; and (b) there is no
        other family member who is able to care for the child in the UK [it
        would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
        person who is to be deported]; or (b) the person has a genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
        British citizen, [or] settled in the UK, or in the UK with  refugee
        leave or humanitarian protection, and (i) the person has  lived  in
        the UK with valid leave continuously for  at  least  the  15  years
        immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the   immigration   decision
        (discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment)  and  (ii)  there  are
        insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
        continuing outside the UK [(i) the relationship  was  formed  at  a
        time when the person (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and  their
        immigration status was not precarious; and (ii) it would be  unduly
        harsh for that partner to live in the country to which  the  person
        is to be deported because  of  compelling  circumstances  over  and
        above those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM;  and  (iii)
        it would be unduly harsh for that  partner  to  remain  in  the  UK
        without the person who is to be deported].


        399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
        if - (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
        20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
        (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties
        (including social, cultural or family ) with the country  to  which
        he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or (b) the  person
        is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least  half  of  his  life
        living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the date of the
        immigration decision (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and
        he has no ties (including social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
        country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
        [(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
        his life; and (b) he is socially and culturally integrated  in  the
        UK; and (c) there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
        integration into  the  country  to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
        deported].

21. I bear in mind that the claimant was convicted and sentenced to a  term
    of imprisonment of twelve months' duration on 3 February 2006.  If,  as
    the respondent claims, he was notified of liability to  deportation  on
    12 June 2007, he is not a "foreign criminal" as defined in  Section  32
    of the UK  Borders  Act  2009  as  he  falls  within  the  transitional
    provisions set out in the UK Borders Act 2007 (Commencement No.  3  and
    Transitional Provisions) Order 2008 (SI 2008/1818). But that is not his
    case; he claims to have been notified in 2012. In any event,  he  is  a
    foreign criminal as defined in section 117D of the 2002 Act.

22. Although the point was not the matter of submissions, and  although  it
    may be argued that by virtue of paragraph A398 as the applicant is  not
    a foreign criminal this point makes  no  material  difference  for  the
    reasons set out below.

23. If paragraph 398 does apply then the applicant does not fall within the
    exceptions set out in paragraph 399A.  Although he  has  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for some fifteen years  and  is  clearly
    socially and culturally integrated here, he was born on 5 June 1976 and
    is thus 39 years of age.  He came to the United Kingdom on 13  February
    2000, as was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  13.   He
    is thus, by a narrow margin therefore, in a position  of  having  spent
    slightly more than half of his life here.  It was accepted  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the applicant's presence here was  lawful  and
    there has been no submission to the contrary  by  the  respondent.   He
    cannot, however, show that there are serious  obstacles  to  him  being
    able to integrate into life in Tanzania. Whilst it is asserted that  he
    would not be admitted to Tanzania given that he is  not  a  citizen  of
    that country, no evidence of this has been  produced.   Whilst  it  may
    well be the case  that  being  denied  entry  would  be  a  significant
    obstacle, evidence to that effect has not been produced. Given that the
    applicant  retains  some  connections  with   Tanzania,   has   visited
    relatively recently, and has shown he is capable of earning  a  living,
    he cannot show that he meets the requirements of paragraph 399A.

24. For these reasons, either because the current (or  former)  Immigration
    Rules do  not  apply  to  the  claimant  or  he  does  not  meet  their
    requirements, it is  necessary  then  to  consider  the  provisions  of
    Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act which provide as follows:-
       117A Application of this Part
       (1)  This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
       determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
       life under Article 8, and

         (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
       Rights Act 1998.

       (2)  In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
       tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and



         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
       the considerations listed in section 117C.
       (3)  In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
       question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect
       for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
       117B Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
       cases
       (1)The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
       public interest.
       (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who
       seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
       English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

       (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who
       seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
       independent, because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

       (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.


       (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
       person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

       (6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
       public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom.


       117C Article 8 additional considerations in cases involving  foreign
       criminals.


       (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

       (2) The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
       the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

       (3) In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four  years  or  more,  the
       public interest requires  C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
       Exception 2 applies.

       (4) Exception 1 applies where-
         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
       C's life,
         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
       and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

       (5) Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and  subsisting
       parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's
       deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

       (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced  to  a
       period of imprisonment of at least four years, the  public  interest
       requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances,
       over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

       (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
       into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision  to
       deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the
       decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been
       convicted.
       117D Interpretation of this Part
       (1)  In this Part-
       "Article 8" means Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights;

       "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-


         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
       seven years or more;

       "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

         (a) is a British citizen, or

         (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the


         Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
       (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a) who is not a British citizen,

         (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and


         (c) who -
             (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
           12 months,
             (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused  serious
          harm, or
             (iii) is a persistent offender.
       (3) ...
       (5) If any question arises for the  purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
       whether a person  is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
       asserting that fact to prove it.

25. Irrespective of whether the claimant is a "foreign  criminal"  for  the
    purposes of the 2007 Act, he is clearly  a  foreign  criminal  for  the
    purposes of the 2002 Act given the provisions of Section 117D  set  out
    above.

26. The provisions of  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  mirror
    paragraph 117C(4) and for the same reasons I am not satisfied that  the
    appellant meets Exception 1 within Section 117C.  Further,  it  is  not
    submitted that he is in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying partner or has a child here and accordingly Exception 2 does
    not apply.  I accept that the deportation of the appellant  is  clearly
    in the public interest and the offence, one  of  violence,  is  clearly
    serious.  I accept having had regard to Section 117B that the applicant
    speaks English and  has  worked  for  the  entirety  of  his  life  and
    therefore is not likely to be a burden on taxpayers.  It is clear  that
    he is integrated  into  society  and  that  the  private  life  he  has
    developed here has been whilst he was here lawfully.  It should also be
    borne in mind that when he first  came  to  this  country  he  honestly
    believed (and had good reason to do so) that he was a British  citizen.
    I accept that he was not notified of the  decision  to  deport  him  in
    2007; that much is clear.  It is not clear that this  was  through  any
    fault of his and I note that he was subsequently allowed to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and return without any difficulty and it is  also  borne
    in mind that he knew from at least  2004  that  he  had  no  rights  to
    British  citizenship.   I  accept  that  his  private  life  has   been
    precarious since 2012 when he was informed of the  decision  to  deport
    him but of necessity his private life was not established here when his
    status was precarious; that occurred only later.

27. The public interest in deportation is only outweighed by other  factors
    when there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

28. There has I accept been significant delay  in  this  case  between  the
    notification which was attempted to be sent by the Secretary  of  State
    and any action being  taken.   Why  that  is  is  unclear.   I  attach,
    however, limited weight to this.  Whilst  it  does  weigh  against  the
    Secretary of State, equally there is a strong presumption in favour  of
    deportation.  I consider that the length of the time the applicant  has
    stayed here, the fact that he is a British overseas citizen,  the  fact
    that most of his family are settled  here  are  not  either  singly  or
    cumulatively of sufficiently  compelling  nature  as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deporting the claimant.  He  was  24  when  he  left
    Tanzania and there appears to be no good reason why he could  not  live
    there again.  The assertion that he would not be able to live there  if
    he is not a  Tanzanian  citizen  is  simply  that;  an  assertion.   No
    evidence has been adduced to support that  contention.   Had  it  been,
    then my decision may well have been otherwise but given the  fact  that
    the appellant's wife lives in Indonesia  and  he  has  family  ties  in
    Tanzania, albeit somewhat attenuated, and given that he is a fit  adult
    single man with no apparent health problems  I  consider  that  on  the
    facts of this case the strong public interest in  deporting  him  as  a
    foreign criminal is not outweighed by the interference  caused  to  his
    private life.

29. I therefore dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making
       of an error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



Signed                                  Date  21 May 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






