
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01808/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th February, 2014                        |On 14th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BOTULI SOMBO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Halligan, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department who  in
    this determination I shall refer to as the claimant.

2.   The respondent is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  the  Congo,
    who was born on 3rd June, 1960.  He has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since November, 1990.  He applied for asylum on  21st  November,  1990,
    and for some reason that application was not refused until 17th  April,
    1998, but he was granted exceptional leave to remain until  3rd  April,
    1999.  The respondent was then granted leave to remain until 3rd April,
    2002, following which he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

3.   In April 2002, he made an application for naturalisation as  a  British
    citizen which was refused on character grounds.  On 16th July, 2004, he
    was convicted of two counts  of  conspiracy  to  defraud  and  on  22nd
    September, 2004, he was sentenced to a  term  of  imprisonment  of  two
    years.

4.   The respondent  had  a  prior  conviction  for  obtaining  property  by
    deception when he was ordered to do 200  hours  of  community  service.
    That was in 1997, and he has also some motoring convictions.

5.   On 2nd February, 2005, the respondent was given notice by the  claimant
    of her intention  to  make  a  deportation  order.   He  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was dismissed on 26th May, 2005.

6.   In April 2008, he made a further application for  naturalisation  which
    was again refused on the grounds of his criminal  convictions  on  11th
    October, 2008.  Further representations were made to the  Secretary  of
    State in June 2009, and in October  2009,  he  lodged  a  fresh  appeal
    against the deportation order which was also dismissed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 11th March, 2010.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  on  that
    occasion comprised First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharpe and Mr Innes, a Non-
    Legal Member.

7.   On 18th May, 2010, the respondent's appeal rights  were  exhausted  and
    so on 2nd June, 2010 the claimant made a deportation order against  him
    under Section 51 of the Immigration Act 1971.

8.   The respondent made  further  submissions  seeking  revocation  of  the
    order  and  that  application  was  refused.   He  then  made   further
    representations in respect of an application for asylum  and  that  was
    treated by the claimant as an application  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order and the refusal of that application was certified  under  Section
    94 of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.  The effect  of
    that of course was to give him an out of country right of appeal  only.



9.   He sought judicial review of those proceedings.   On  27th  July,  2010
    further representations made on his behalf were refused by the claimant
    with no right of appeal and further representations were made  on  that
    day resulting in that being treated as a further application to  revoke
    the deportation order.  The claimant refused to revoke the order on 6th
    September, 2010 and again certified that application under  Section  94
    of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.

10.    On   13th   September,   2010,   the   respondent   again   submitted
    representations which were refused the following day with no  right  of
    appeal and his removal was scheduled for  14th  September,  2010.   His
    removal failed because it is said he became disruptive on the flight.

11.  On 7th March, 2011 further representations were considered and  treated
    as an application to revoke the deportation  order.   This  application
    was refused which resulted in an in-country right of  appeal.   On  8th
    March, 2011 he lodged his appeal against this decision  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

12.  On 16th  March,  2011  a  consent  order  was  signed  withdrawing  the
    claimant's decision of 27th  July,  2010.   On  13th  April,  2011  the
    respondent's appeal was withdrawn and the claimant agreed  to  consider
    the matter further.

13.  On 26th February, 2013 the appellant  was  issued  with  a  deportation
    questionnaire and representatives acting on his behalf wrote  a  letter
    to the claimant.  They had made further submissions in July 2012 and on
    16th August, 2013 the claimant  treated  these  as  an  application  to
    revoke the deportation order which was refused in  a  decision  of  the
    claimant on 16th August, 2013.

14.  In a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 16th August, 2013,  the  claimant
    noted that the respondent had been  convicted  in  July  2004,  on  two
    counts  of  conspiracy  and  noticed  his  sentence   to   two   years'
    imprisonment.  The respondent's application for asylum was refused  and
    the claimant certified the  presumption  under  Section  72(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in respect of  his  asylum
    claim.

15.  The Tribunal hearing the appeal  comprised  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mailer sitting with Mrs R M Bray.  The panel made  clear  findings  and
    although some concern was expressed in respect of comments made at  the
    top  of  page  14  of  the  determination,  the  Tribunal  allowed  the
    respondent's claim and no challenge was made by the claimant in respect
    of those comments.  The claimant did  however  challenge  the  decision
    suggesting that in allowing the appeal against deportation on the basis
    that the respondent's Article 8 family and private life rights would be
    infringed, had failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the  public
    interest   in   removing   the   respondent   when   undertaking    the
    proportionality  assessment  and  thereby  misdirect  itself  in   law.
    Reliance was placed on SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy said
    this:

         "There is some merit in the respondent's argument.  At para 165 the
         panel identified that the deportation decision would result in  the
         separation of the appellant from his partner and  children  and  at
         paragraphs 173 and 174 it identified  the  impact  such  separation
         would have on the appellant's  partner  and  children.   The  panel
         appears to have  reached  its  decision  on  the  basis  that  such
         separation trumps other considerations.  That  is  not  the  proper
         legal approach and it  is  arguable  that  the  panel  should  have
         considered in more detail how the appellant's partner and  children
         would be affected by the enforced separation  and  whether  it  was
         proportionate."


He went on to say this:
         "In addition, although not raised in the grounds of application,  I
         have concern that the determination contains at the top of page  14
         an exchange between the panel members, which suggests that they had
         yet to reach agreement as to the  factual  matrix.   Such  comments
         suggest that the panel had not yet completed its deliberations  and
         concern that this might be the situation undermines  the  remainder
         of the determination."


16.  In respect of that last point, it was not something  that  should  have
    troubled the Designated Immigration Judge, because of course it was not
    something that had been raised by the claimant.  The respondent was not
    concerned because his appeal had been allowed and, given the  resources
    of the claimant, it really was not for the Designated Immigration Judge
    to take points that had not been taken by the claimant.

17.  At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds and relied  on
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS.   He  particularly  drew  my
    attention to the fact that the respondent and his partner  were  living
    some distance apart with one in  Cheltenham  and  one  in  London.   He
    relied particularly on paragraph 58 of SS.

18.  I noted in particular what the Tribunal  said  at  paragraphs  132  and
    133.  At paragraph 132 they said:

         "We have also had regard to the summary conviction relating to  the
         appellant.   He  has  been  convicted  of  obtaining  property   by
         deception, going  equipped  to  cheat,  for  which  he  received  a
         community sentence order in 1997.  There are also several  motoring
         offences committed in 1999, 2000,  2002  and  2004.   He  was  also
         cautioned for assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm  in  January
         2009.  The details of that caution, however,  have  not  been  made
         available."

19.  Arguably those are matters which the panel of the Tribunal  should  not
    have  taken  into  consideration.   The  1997  conviction  was  not   a
    conviction which prompted the claimant to  make  a  deportation  order.
    Nor  were  the  motoring  offences  in  relation  to  the  caution  for
    occasioning actual bodily harm.  That is something which occurred after
    the deportation order, but again is not relied on by the  claimant  and
    so the Tribunal could be said to have erred by taking account of  those
    matters.  Nonetheless they did take account of those matters  and  they
    went on at paragraph 133 to say this:

         "We  have  particularly  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the
         appellant has  been  convicted  of  a  serious  offence  which  has
         resulted in imprisonment for two years.  He  was  however  released
         from imprisonment on 20th December, 2004.  We have also had  regard
         to the significant role that the appellant played in the commission
         of the well organised conspiracy to  defraud.   We  have  had  full
         regard to the sentencing remarks."

     In respect of the sentencing remarks the Tribunal referred to  them  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8 of its determination and demonstrates  that  it  was
    mindful of the remarks made by His Honour, Judge Pitman.



20.  At paragraph 164 the Tribunal said this:

         "We have had regard to the sense  to  be  given  to  the  adjective
         'primary' as discussed by Laws L.J. in  the  consideration  of  the
         children's best interests.  Their interests are not only 'the'  but
         also 'a' primary consideration  -  paragraph  44  of  SS  (Nigeria)
         [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  It was accepted that  the  phrase  should  be
         taken to mean a consideration of substantial importance."

     The Tribunal demonstrate that it has given consideration to SS  and  at
    paragraph 155 they say that the public policy considerations  operating
    in such cases are substantial.  They say at paragraph 156:

         "We bear in mind that the authorities do stress the significance of
         basic principles relating to the strong public interest in removing
         those convicted of serious offences.  That interest lies  not  only
         in the prevention of further offences on the part of the individual
         concerned, but on deterring others  from  committing  them  in  the
         first place."


     In my view the Tribunal had demonstrated that it has fully  taken  into
    consideration the public interest into account.

21.  They say again at paragraph 176  that  they  have  had  regard  to  the
    child's best interests and  at  177  they  reach  the  conclusion  that
    affording, as they put it, "substantial weight to the  public  interest
    policy relating to deportation in a case such as  the  appellant's,  we
    nevertheless find that those interests are outweighed by the  interests
    of the appellant, Mrs Ewange and, in particular, their children in  the
    enjoyment of their family life in the United Kingdom".

22.  I have concluded therefore that the challenge by the claimant does  not
    identify any error on a point of law in the  Tribunal's  determination.
    I uphold the determination.  This appeal by the respondent is allowed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
