


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01251/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 15 July 2013                             |On : 18 July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                      bernard ekubolajeh leonard davies
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Mak of MKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, born on 18 May  1973.  Following
a grant of permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  that
section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied, we found, at an  error  of
law hearing on 10 June 2013, that the Tribunal had made  errors  of  law  in
their decision. We directed that the decision be set aside  and  re-made  by
the Upper Tribunal.

The appellant arrived in the UK  on  29  July  1978,  aged  five,  with  his
adoptive mother Dorothy Ashley and her biological son Reginald  Ashley,  and
was granted two months leave to  enter.  The  family  were  granted  further
leave and on 24 April  1990  they  were  all  granted  indefinite  leave  to
remain.

On 1 April 1999 the appellant was convicted of harassment and  sentenced  to
four months' imprisonment, varied to two months at appeal.  On  23  December
2005 he was convicted of failing to surrender to custody  at  the  appointed
time and received a fine. On 2 April 2009  he  was  convicted  of  wounding/
inflicting grievous bodily harm, doing an act of  cruelty  to  a  child  and
assault occasioning actual bodily harm, for which he was sentenced  to  four
years' imprisonment with a licence extended by twelve months.

On  28  April  2009  the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability   for
deportation, but on 16 June 2011 the UKBA Strategic Director agreed  not  to
pursue deportation at that time, given his length of residence  in  the  UK.
He was issued with a warning letter along with an intention  to  revoke  his
indefinite leave. However, action was placed on hold  whilst  a  prosecution
for further charges was dealt with.

On 31 October 2011 the appellant was convicted of  two  counts  of  doing  a
series of acts intended to pervert the course of justice and  was  sentenced
to three years' imprisonment with three years to run  concurrently,  plus  a
restraining order was made against  him.  On  13  December  2011  a  further
notification of liability for deportation  was  served  and  representations
were made in response.

A deportation order was signed against the appellant  on  30  November  2012
and a decision was made the same day that section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders
Act 2007 applied.

Basis of deportation decision

In her decision, the respondent considered Article 8 of the ECHR  and,  with
regard to the appellant's family life, noted that he had four children  from
three different mothers, all of whom were British citizens,  but  with  none
of whom he had any contact. His  offence  of  cruelty  to  a  child  was  in
relation to his son to whom he had no current  access  and  his  offence  of
intimidating a witness was with regard to the intimidation of the mother  of
his son, his ex-wife. His eldest child was over  18  years  of  age.  Social
services had had involvement with his two other children as a result of  the
risk he posed to them, but their mother had confirmed that she did not  want
him to have any contact with them. The respondent  noted  that,  whilst  the
appellant claimed to be a British citizen, it was  not  accepted  that  that
was the case. It was considered that the best interests of the children  lay
with them remaining with their mothers and with no physical  access  to  the
appellant. The appellant had no subsisting relationships and  there  was  no
proof of subsisting contact with his adoptive mother and her son.

The respondent accepted that the appellant had formed a private life in  the
United Kingdom, noting that he had been legally resident here for 34  years,
of which approximately three years  and  seven  months  had  been  spent  in
prison. Consideration  was  given  to  the  immigration  rules  relevant  to
Article 8 and deportation. It was noted that, whilst  the  appellant  became
liable for deportation in the light of his further conviction for  which  he
received three years' imprisonment, he had previously  received  a  sentence
of four years' imprisonment and was thus deemed  to  fall  within  paragraph
398(a) of the immigration rules. As such, paragraphs 399 and  399A  did  not
apply and he had to demonstrate that exceptional  circumstances  existed  to
outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The  respondent  went  on,
nevertheless, to consider paragraphs 399(a), 399(b) and  339A.  With  regard
to paragraphs 399(a) and (b) it was considered that  he  did  not  have  any
genuine and subsisting relationships with his children or  a  partner.  With
regard to paragraph 399A, the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  had
lived continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least  20  years  but
considered that he retained ties to Sierra Leone and thus could not  benefit
from that paragraph. The respondent concluded that, even if the category  of
less  serious  criminality  were  considered,   the   appellant's   personal
circumstances would  not  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  pursuing  his
deportation. In any event, his level of criminality  was  deemed  to  exempt
him from consideration under paragraphs 399  and  399A  and  there  were  no
exceptional circumstances outweighing the public interest in deporting  him.
Any  interference  with  his  and  his  relatives'  rights  caused  by   his
deportation would therefore not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  on  8
March 2013 before the First-tier Tribunal, by a panel consisting  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Devittie and Dr T Okitikpi. The Tribunal heard from  the
appellant and his adoptive mother. They found  that  paragraphs  399(a)  and
(b) did not apply since the appellant did not have a genuine and  subsisting
relationship with his children or any partner and that  paragraph  399A  did
not apply to him either, since he had retained social, cultural  and  family
ties to Sierra Leone. They went on to consider Article 8 on the wider  basis
and recorded the sentencing  remarks  of  the  judges  in  relation  to  his
conviction and four year sentence in  April  2009  and  his  conviction  and
three year sentence in October 2011. They noted that the sentencing  remarks
showed him to be a dangerous person who continued to pose  a  high  risk  to
known adults, that he was lacking in remorse and  unwilling  to  accept  any
responsibility for his actions, that he had  refused  to  cooperate  with  a
psychiatric assessment and that  he  had  a  propensity  to  manipulate  his
victims in order to escape justice for his conduct. The  Tribunal  concluded
that very serious reasons existed to  justify  the  appellant's  deportation
and that his deportation would accordingly  not  breach  Article  8  of  the
ECHR. They dismissed the appeal under the immigration  rules  and  on  human
rights grounds.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  behalf  of  the
appellant on the grounds that the Tribunal had failed to refer to, or  place
any reliance upon, the decision in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria
[2013] UKUT  00060;  that  the  Tribunal's  reasons  for  finding  that  the
appellant had retained  social  and  cultural  ties  to  Sierra  Leone  were
perverse;  and  that  the  Tribunal   had   erred   in   their   Article   8
proportionality assessment.

Permission to appeal was granted on 18 April 2013,  primarily  with  respect
to the application of the principles in Ogundimu.

Error of Law

At the error of law hearing on 10 June 2013 we sought clarification from  Ms
Holmes as to whether the respondent was pursuing the argument  at  paragraph
37 of the deportation decision letter that, as  a  result  of  his  previous
conviction and four year sentence in April 2009, the appellant  fell  within
the  higher  category  of  criminality  under  paragraph   398(a)   of   the
immigration rules and that paragraphs  399  and  399A  accordingly  did  not
apply to him. That did not appear to have been a matter  raised  before  the
First-tier Tribunal or  recorded  in  their  determination  and  indeed  the
appeal appeared to have proceeded on  the  basis  that  paragraph  399A  was
potentially applicable to the appellant. It was not clear whether  that  was
because the respondent was no longer pursuing the matter. Mr  Mak  submitted
that as it was not the  index  offence,  the  respondent  ought  not  to  be
relying upon the four year sentence as  that  had  been  "condoned"  by  the
respondent. Ms Holmes asked for  time  to  consider  that  matter  and  then
advised us that she was not relying upon paragraph 398(a) and  we  therefore
proceeded on that basis.

We found the Tribunal's determination  to  be  materially  flawed,  for  the
following reasons:

    "We find particular merit in Mr Mak's first  ground  of  appeal,  which
    relies upon the Tribunal's failure to refer to the  case  of  Ogundimu.
    Whilst we do not consider that any such error  would  necessarily  have
    been a material one had the Tribunal clearly applied the principles  in
    that case or  demonstrated  that  they  had  assessed  the  appellant's
    circumstances  with  those  principles  in  mind,  we  cannot  see  any
    indication in their decision that that was what they in fact did. It is
    clearly the case that Mr Mak relied upon that case  in  presenting  the
    appellant's appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  his  skeleton
    argument refers to it in some detail and the decision was  included  in
    the  appeal  bundle.  However,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Tribunal's
    determination to indicate that they had regard to the skeleton argument
    or to the case  law  in  the  appellant's  appeal  bundle:  neither  is
    referred to at paragraph 13, where the documentary evidence is  listed.
    Thus, whilst the Tribunal made findings at paragraph 17 with respect to
    the appellant's ties to Sierra Leone, there is no indication that those
    findings were made with any regard to the principles  and  guidance  in
    Ogundimu, in particular the guidance at paragraphs 123 to  125  of  the
    decision in that case. We consider such a failure to be material, given
    that we are  unable  to  ascertain  from  those  findings  whether  the
    Tribunal's conclusion was that the appellant's ties, albeit remote  and
    tenuous, were sufficient to meet the requirements of paragraph 399A(a),
    or that his ties were not remote and  tenuous  and  that  there  was  a
    continued connection to Sierra Leone.

    Indeed, we find  the  Tribunal's  findings  in  that  paragraph  to  be
    somewhat unclear in several respects. At paragraph 17(ii) the  Tribunal
    found that the appellant had sought to understate the number of  visits
    he had made to Sierra Leone. It is not clear whether the  Tribunal,  in
    so doing, thereby considered that he was being  untruthful  as  to  the
    ties he currently maintained with that country, or merely that  he  had
    been untruthful about the number of visits he had  made  in  the  past.
    Furthermore, whilst the  Tribunal  noted  inconsistencies  between  the
    evidence of the appellant and his mother  in  regard  to  his  previous
    visits to Sierra Leone, they did not make  any  clear  findings  as  to
    whether or not they found his mother's evidence to be  reliable.  Since
    she stated in her evidence that neither she nor the appellant  had  any
    family left in Sierra Leone, it was important for the Tribunal to  make
    clear findings as to whether or not that evidence was  accepted,  which
    they failed to do.

    As such, we consider that the Tribunal's decision has to be set  aside,
    with a view to fresh findings being  made  with  respect  to  paragraph
    399A(b) of the immigration rules.

    Whilst both parties were content for us to re-make the decision on  the
    evidence already before us and we did not indicate any other intention,
    we have now reached the view, having fully considered the nature of the
    error of law, that we would be in some difficulty in so  doing.  As  we
    have stated above, we do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal made
    clear findings on the evidence of the appellant  and  his  mother  with
    regard to the family and other  ties  to  Sierra  Leone  and  we  would
    therefore need to hear further evidence ourselves in order to make  our
    own  findings.  Furthermore,  the  issue  of  the  whereabouts  of  the
    appellant's passport was not resolved at the hearing before us and is a
    potentially significant matter, given the inconsistent  evidence  about
    the appellant's visits to Sierra Leone. The appellant  claims  to  have
    handed his  passport  to  the  UKBA  in  April  2009  when  deportation
    proceedings were considered at that time  and  to  have  never  had  it
    returned to him. However, paragraph  48  of  the  deportation  decision
    letter suggests that the UKBA had only been given a copy  of  the  bio-
    data page of his passport and had never been provided with the original
    document or a complete copy of  it.  We  would  therefore  need  to  be
    provided with further evidence in that regard."

We accordingly set aside the decision and made the following directions  for
the resumed hearing:

    "(No later than ten days before the date of the next hearing:


    (a)  the  appellant  and  the  respondent  are   to   provide   written
    confirmation, where possible, as to the whereabouts of the  appellant's
    passport;


    (b) any additional documentary evidence relied upon  by  either  party,
    including as to the whereabouts of the appellant's passport, is  to  be
    filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party."

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before us for the resumed hearing on 15 July 2013, by  which
time both parties had responded  to  the  directions  with  respect  to  the
whereabouts of the appellant's passport. The respondent,  in  her  response,
was unable to comment on the whereabouts of  the  passport,  other  than  to
state that only a copy of the bio-data page of  the  passport  was  held  on
file and had been provided by the appellant's girlfriend. The appellant,  by
way of a supplementary statement, explained that his  former  girlfriend  Ms
Bovell had provided a copy of the passport to the UKBA in  April  2009  when
the document was requested by immigration officials, and that  the  original
document was taken from Ms Bovell by his former  partner  Miss  Williams  in
order to support her application for their son's British passport, and  that
she had refused to give it back.

We confirmed that the relevant issue before us was the appellant's  ties  to
Sierra Leone, pursuant to paragraph 399A. In the event that we found he  was
unable to meet the requirements of paragraph 399A we would  then  go  on  to
consider Article 8 in the wider context.

The appellant appeared before us, but his adoptive mother,  Dorothy  Ashley,
was not present due, according  to  the  appellant,  to  the  same  mobility
problems that had prevented her from attending his bail hearing. His  surety
Susan Sesay, his biological mother's sister, was in attendance but  we  were
advised that she was not intending to give oral evidence.

The appellant adopted his supplementary statement  by  way  of  evidence  in
chief and was cross-examined by Ms Holmes. With respect to paragraph  17(ii)
of the First-tier Tribunal's determination, he denied that  the  purpose  of
his second visit to Sierra Leone was  to  make  contact  with  his  maternal
family and said that the purpose was a holiday and that he had  stayed  with
his grandmother, Ms Ashley's mother. He met two uncles there,  one  of  whom
had since passed away and the other  had  emigrated  to  the  USA  with  his
family but had also since died. He had stayed in Freetown  and  had  visited
sites and gone to the beach. As regards his birth mother, as far as he  knew
she was in Gambia. He had had no contact with her whilst in custody but  had
been in contact with her since his release, to tell her about  his  proposed
deportation to Sierra Leone. The reference in his previous evidence  to  her
having  visited  him  in  prison  was  during   his   previous   period   of
imprisonment, in 2008, when she came to the United  Kingdom  to  visit  him.
They currently maintained communication but she was not  willing  to  return
to Sierra Leone if he was deported and he did not have the funds  to  travel
to Gambia from Sierra Leone. She had left Sierra Leone during the civil  war
and had lived in Liberia for over 20 years before moving to Gambia  and  had
no ties remaining in Sierra Leone. He did not  know  his  adoptive  mother's
friend and would not be able  to  go  to  her  for  assistance.  He  had  no
connections or ties to Sierra Leone other than the fact of having been  born
there. His family members in the United Kingdom, all of  whom  were  British
citizens, were fully anglicised and did not speak Krio.

In response to our further enquiries, the appellant said that he  had  never
been formally adopted by Mrs Ashley. She left Sierra Leone with him when  he
was four. His father came to the United  Kingdom  and  was  given  political
asylum but he did not have contact with him. He had never  had  anything  to
do with his adoptive father's family. His biological mother had two  sisters
who lived in the United Kingdom, Gladys and Susan, and a brother  who  lived
in the USA. The sisters had left Sierra Leone many years ago.  His  adoptive
mother had two sisters here, Gloria  Williams  and  Pearl  Scott,  who  were
British citizens. He had never returned to Sierra Leone after 1990  and  had
renewed his Sierra  Leonean  passport  in  2005  solely  for  identification
purposes. He did not have his indefinite leave to remain  stamp  transferred
into his  Sierra  Leonean  passport  because  he  believed  that  he  was  a
naturalised British citizen (Ms Holmes confirmed that  she  could  not  find
any evidence of an application to transfer the stamp to  another  passport).
He did not apply for a British passport as he thought it would be easier  to
get his Sierra Leonean passport renewed. He had not seen his passport  since
his former partner Wilhelmena Williams got hold of it.

Both parties made submissions  before  us.  Ms  Holmes  submitted  that  the
appellant had not given credible evidence about his  ties  to  Sierra  Leone
for the purposes of paragraph 399A. His mother's evidence was  very  skimpy.
He could not succeed under the immigration rules and he  could  not  succeed
under the wider Article 8. There were very  serious  reasons  for  deporting
him, pursuant to the principles in Maslov v. Austria - 1638/03  [2008]  ECHR
546.

Mr Mak referred to the  UKBA  proposal  not  to  pursue  deportation  action
against the appellant, which referred to him as a "home-grown criminal"  and
submitted that the current proposal to deport was political. He had no  ties
to Sierra Leone and had been residing in the United  Kingdom  lawfully.  The
immigration rules applied to him and he could not be deported.

Consideration and findings

We commence by setting out the relevant provisions of the Immigration  Rules
relating to deportation and Article 8, as introduced  by  the  Statement  of
Changes in HC194 on 9  July  2102,  at  paragraphs  396  to  399B.  We  have
highlighted the significant section for the purposes of this appeal:
    396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall be
    that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the public
    interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make a deportation
    order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.
    397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
    pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations under
    the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention. Where
    deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will only be
    in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation is
    outweighed.

    Deportation and Article 8

    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,
    and
    (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good because they have been convicted of an offence for which
    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
    years;
    (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good because they have been convicted of an offence for which
    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
    years but at least 12
    months; or
    (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State, their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law,
    the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
    be outweighed by other factors.
    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -
    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
    (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
    (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
    years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision; and
    in either case
    (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK; and
    (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for the child
    in the UK; or

    (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
    who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK, or in the
    UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
    (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously for at
    least the 15 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
    decision (discounting any period of imprisonment); and
    (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
    partner continuing outside the UK.
    399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -
    (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
    immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting
    any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties (including social,
    cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to go if
    required to leave the UK; or
    (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half of
    his life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the date
    of the immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)
    and he has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the
    country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
    399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be granted
    for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be given subject
    to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems appropriate. Where a
    person who has previously been granted a period of leave under
    paragraph 399B would not fall for refusal under paragraph 322(1C),
    indefinite leave to remain may be granted.
As we have stated above, the respondent is no longer relying upon  paragraph
398(a) of the immigration rules and thus  accepts  that  paragraph  399A  is
potentially applicable to the appellant on the basis of  the  index  offence
for which he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Whilst  we  do  not
necessarily share the respondent's view in that regard, given  the  previous
four year sentence, we proceed on the basis that that  is  the  case  before
us, given the  clear  concession  made  by  Ms  Holmes,  and  we  have  thus
considered the appellant's ability  otherwise  to  meet  the  provisions  of
paragraph 399A, there being no challenge to the findings of  the  First-tier
Tribunal's findings that  he  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
399(a) and (b).

Accordingly,  the  issue  before  us,  in  re-making  the  decision  in  the
appellant's appeal, is whether or not he has retained  social,  cultural  or
family ties to Sierra Leone, the country which he left at the  age  of  four
or five years. In considering that issue, we turn to  the  guidance  offered
in Ogundimu, which the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  do.  We  note  in
particular the following extracts from the decision:

    "123.    The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,
    we think, a concept involving something more  than  merely  remote  and
    abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.  It
    involves there being a continued connection to life  in  that  country;
    something that ties a claimant to his or her country of origin. If this
    were not the case then it would appear that a person's  nationality  of
    the country of proposed deportation could of itself lead to  a  failure
    to meet the requirements of the rule. This would render the application
    of the rule, given the  context  within  which  it  operates,  entirely
    meaningless.

    124.    We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting  one.
    Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to  such  country  must
    involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances  and  is
    not to be limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances...

    125.    Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant
    to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to  which
    they would have to go if they were required to leave the United Kingdom
    must include, but are not limited to: the length of time a  person  has
    spent in the country to which he would have to go if he  were  required
    to leave the United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country,
    the exposure that person has had to the cultural norms of that country,
    whether that person speaks the language of the country, the  extent  of
    the  family and friends that person has in the country to which  he  is
    being deported or removed and the quality  of  the  relationships  that
    person has with those friends and family members. "


It is the appellant's claim that he retains no ties to  Sierra  Leone:  that
he has not returned there since his last visit in 1990 when he attended  his
grandmother's funeral, that he has no family or friends there,  that  he  is
completely anglicised and has no cultural links to the country and  that  he
does not even speak the language there. On the  basis  of  the  guidance  in
Ogundimu we consider that if we were to accept  that  claim,  the  appellant
would be able to meet the requirements of paragraph 399A(a) and  his  appeal
would stand to be allowed on that basis alone, irrespective of any views  we
may hold on his case within the context of the  previous,  wider  Article  8
principles. However, unlike the case of the appellant in Ogundimu,  we  have
considerable concerns about the credibility of the  appellant's  claim  with
respect to his ties to his country of birth and we do  not  accept  that  we
have been provided with a genuine and honest account of those ties.

We reach the same conclusion as the First-tier Tribunal with regard  to  the
appellant's attempt to understate the number of his visits to Sierra  Leone.
We note that his initial claim, to have never returned there  following  his
arrival in the United Kingdom, as confirmed in the letter  of  4  June  2010
Andrew Rankine, the Foreign Nationals Co-ordinator at HMP Brixton,  at  page
O1 of the respondent's bundle,  has  since  been  contradicted  by  evidence
produced by the respondent. That evidence was referred to  at  paragraph  48
of the  deportation  decision  and  appeared  in  the  appellant's  adoptive
mother's file in a letter dated 28 March 1990 in  which  she  mentioned  his
trips abroad in 1985, 1987, 1988 and 1989-1990, when he was aged 11, 14,  15
and 16 years. As a result of that evidence the appellant  has  now  admitted
to having visited Sierra Leone as a child. It is of note, however, that  the
evidence of those visits is not consistent  and  that  his  adoptive  mother
gave various different accounts which in turn differed from his account.

In her statement at pages 13 to 15 of the appeal bundle  Mrs  Ashley  stated
that the appellant had been back to Sierra Leone once  or  twice,  that  she
had taken him only once and that he may have returned a second time but  she
could not be sure. In another statement dated 8 March 2013 she  stated  that
he had been back three times, for a holiday when he was  twelve  years,  and
for her mother's funeral, followed by a third trip when he had left  school.
The Tribunal's determination, at paragraph 11, records  another  version  in
which she stated that he returned for a second time on his own in  order  to
visit his biological  mother's  relatives.  The  appellant,  for  his  part,
denied having undertaken a trip to visit his biological mother's  relatives,
claiming before us that he simply went there on holiday and stayed with  his
grandmother. However, that in turn is somewhat contradicted by his  mother's
evidence that that trip was subsequent to the one that he took with  her  to
attend his grandmother's funeral.

Aside from the inconsistencies in the accounts of those earlier  visits,  it
is of note that the appellant has failed to provide any explanation for  the
significant change in his evidence and his previous denial  of  having  ever
returned to his home country. Such matters are of  relevance  in  that  they
clearly serve to cast doubt on his current claim to  have  made  no  further
visits  to  Sierra  Leone  since  1990,  when  he  returned  to  attend  his
grandmother's funeral. We note that the only evidence to support that  claim
is the appellant's own evidence and that of his  adoptive  mother.  However,
as we have stated above, the evidence provided  by  Mrs  Ashley  before  the
First-tier Tribunal was far from consistent and we do not consider  that  we
can  place  any  particular  weight  upon  her  claim  in  that  regard,  in
particular given the limited contact she has herself had with the  appellant
over the past years, as referred to in her statement before  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  Mrs Ashley did not appear  before  us  in  order  to  respond  to
further examination and there was no medical evidence before us  to  support
the claim as to her inability to attend. Although, as Mr  Mak  pointed  out,
bail had been granted to the appellant in her absence, we  do  not  consider
that alone as sufficient reason to  accept  her  written  evidence  at  face
value and note that there was in any event no medical  evidence  before  the
Tribunal when granting bail. We do not consider that we are  able  to  place
any weight upon the appellant's own evidence, given his previous  denial  of
having ever returned to Sierra Leone.

We also find it of significance that there is evidence  that  the  appellant
could reasonably have been expected to produce  to  support  his  claim  and
which has not been produced. The relevance of his passport  as  evidence  in
support of his claim was raised by the respondent in the deportation  letter
of 30 November 2012, at paragraph  48.  The  appellant's  response  to  that
matter has been notably inconsistent, both with regard  to  the  whereabouts
of the document and his reasons for having obtained it.

As to the whereabouts of the passport, his evidence, at  the  error  of  law
hearing before us on 10 June 2013, was that it was in the possession of  the
UKBA: that he had personally handed it in, in 2009, during  the  deportation
proceedings, when he was in prison, and that he had not had it  returned  to
him  since  that  time.  However  his  evidence  now  before  us,   in   his
supplementary statement, is that he had last  seen  his  passport  in  2008,
that his former girlfriend Ms Bovell had sent a  copy  of  it  to  the  Home
Office at his request in early 2009 and that  she  had  given  the  original
document to Ms Williams  in  May  2009,  as  confirmed  to  him  during  his
telephone conversation with Ms Williams in May 2009.   He  claims  that  the
passport remains with Ms Williams, that he believes she used it  to  support
her application for their son's British passport and that  she  has  refused
to return it to him. There is nothing  in  his  supplementary  statement  to
explain the significant change in his  evidence.  Moreover,  his  claim,  at
paragraph 11 of that  statement,  to  have  never  given  permission  to  Ms
Williams to use his details and documents for their son's  British  passport
application form appears to be somewhat contradicted by  his  correspondence
with the UKBA, at pages X1 to AA1 of  the  respondent's  appeal  bundle,  in
which he relies upon his son's British citizenship as evidence  of  his  own
naturalisation as a British national.

We do not find that the appellant has provided  an  honest  account  of  the
whereabouts of his passport. We consider his attempt to  blame  Ms  Williams
for his inability to produce the document to be  remarkably  reminiscent  of
his  previous  behaviour  in  seeking  to  attribute  blame  to  his  former
partners, as referred to in detail in  the  pre-sentence  report  and  OASyS
report at Annex E and N of the respondent's appeal bundle. We do not  accept
his account of the passport being held and withheld by her. We note, in  any
event, and even if it were the case  that  the  passport  was  held  by  her
(which we do not accept), that there is no evidence of any attempts made  by
the appellant, through his legal  representatives  or  through  other  means
permitted under the terms of his licence,  to  request  the  return  of  the
document. We conclude that the appellant has failed to  provide  a  credible
explanation as to his inability to produce his passport.

Likewise, we do not accept the reasons given by  the  appellant  for  having
obtained the passport in 2005. He  claims  to  have  obtained  it  only  for
identification purposes, and that it was easier and  quicker  to  renew  his
Sierra Leonean passport rather than apply for a British passport,  to  which
he claims that he believed he was entitled. However he was  unable,  at  the
error of law hearing, to explain what prompted him to apply for it,  whether
it was for identification for work purposes or for banking  purposes  or  to
explain why he was unable to use his driving licence for such  purposes.  We
do not consider that he has provided a credible account in that  regard  and
consider it more likely than not that he obtained the passport in  order  to
be able to travel and that, in view of  the  date  of  expiry  in  2010,  it
afforded him the opportunity to travel up until his incarceration. As  such,
and in the light of our concerns as to his failure to produce the  passport,
or indeed his previous passport, we are not prepared  to  accept  his  claim
not to have travelled outside the United Kingdom since 1990. We do not  find
the absence of evidence to confirm the  transfer  of  his  indefinite  leave
stamp to his new passport to be evidence of an inability  to  travel.  There
is no evidence before us to suggest that he would  not  have  been  able  to
travel with a valid national passport together with  the  letter  confirming
the grant of indefinite leave to remain. In the circumstances we  find  that
the appellant has failed to demonstrate  that  he  has  not  visited  Sierra
Leone since 1990.

In any event, and aside from the matter of trips to Sierra  Leone,  we  find
that the appellant has failed to provide a credible account of his  lack  of
ties to that country. Much  has  been  made  of  the  respondent's  previous
decision not to pursue deportation action against him on the  basis  of  him
being a "home grown criminal". However, it seems to us  that  that  decision
was made in the absence of information now available to  us.  Of  particular
relevance is the letter at page O1 of the respondent's bundle,  referred  to
above, in which Andrew Rankine, the Foreign Nationals  Co-ordinator  at  HMP
Brixton confirmed the appellant's response to  his  enquiry  in  June  2010,
that he had never left the United Kingdom since first arriving here.  It  is
apparent, from the date of that letter and  the  timing  of  the  subsequent
correspondence at pages 27 to 31 of the appellant's appeal bundle, that  the
decision taken by the UKBA not to pursue deportation  action  following  his
conviction and four year sentence was made on the basis of that  information
and on the understanding  that  the  appellant  had,  as  a  result  of  his
adoption as a baby, ceased links to his biological family. Yet there is  now
evidence that he has visited Sierra Leone since his arrival  in  the  United
Kingdom, that he is in contact with his biological mother and  that  he  has
retained ties to his biological family.

Although the appellant has been at pains to produce  a  statement  from  his
adoptive mother as to her lack of contacts in Sierra Leone,  he  has  failed
to provide any evidence from other relatives here,  namely  his  two  aunts,
the sisters of his biological mother, with whom he claims  to  have  current
and direct contact and of whom one is acting  as  a  surety  for  his  bail.
Indeed whilst in his letter at L4 in response to  the  proposed  deportation
action, he referred to his aunts Gladys and Susan, there was  no  indication
in that letter nor in any of the other information provided that  they  were
his biological mother's sisters,  and  that  emerged  only  in  the  current
proceedings before the Tribunal. Recognising, as we do, that they  have  now
established their own family lives in the United  Kingdom,  we  nevertheless
find it of significance that no attempt has been made to  present  them,  or
to produce statements from  them,  providing  support  for  the  appellant's
account of the absence of any of their family members  remaining  in  Sierra
Leone. We find that particularly significant in view of his denial,  in  his
evidence before us, of having returned to Sierra Leone as an  adolescent  to
make contact with his biological mother's family, as had been  his  adoptive
mother's evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Further  concerns  also
arise from the lack of consistency in the appellant's evidence about  family
members in the United Kingdom,  with  his  evidence  at  the  error  of  law
hearing being that his adoptive mother  had  three  sisters  in  the  United
Kingdom, but at the resumed hearing that there  were  two  sisters.  All  of
these matters lead us to conclude that he has not been honest  in  providing
the full details of his extended family, both in the United Kingdom  and  in
Sierra Leone.

In all of these circumstances, considering  in  particular  the  appellant's
initial denial of any connections to Sierra Leone since  his  departure  and
the  absence  of  any  credible  explanation  for  his  failure  to  produce
available evidence that he could reasonably be expected to have produced  to
support his claim, we do not accept that he has presented a genuine  account
of his  ties  to  Sierra  Leone.  We  find  that  our  concerns  as  to  his
credibility as a witness of  truth  are  reinforced  by  the  views  of  the
probation  services  in  their  earlier  pre-sentencing   report,   and   as
subsequently adopted in the OASyS report, in which they refer to his  denial
of responsibility  and  to  his  manipulative  character,  leading  them  to
disbelieve his account of his personal circumstances and  his  history,  for
reasons set out particularly at page 7 of the report.

We do, of course, accept the early age at which the  appellant  left  Sierra
Leone, the considerable length of time  in  which  he  has  resided  in  the
United Kingdom and the fact that the vast majority  of  his  life  has  been
spent in this country and we take  account  of  the  significance  of  those
factors. We accept that, in such circumstances,  it  is  entirely  plausible
that a person may have severed all links  to  their  country  of  birth  and
indeed  that  was  the  case  in  Ogundimu.  We  are  also  mindful  of  the
difficulties that can arise in demonstrating the absence of  any  continuing
ties and that we must not impose too high  a  standard  of  proof  upon  the
appellant to demonstrate such circumstances,  particularly  given  that  the
consequences could serve to deprive him of  the  protection  provided  under
the immigration  rules.  Nevertheless,  we  find  the  lack  of  detail  and
evidence he has provided to be significant, when put in the overall  context
of his circumstances, and we conclude that he  has  deliberately  sought  to
conceal the extent of his connections to  Sierra  Leone  in  an  attempt  to
avoid deportation.

Accordingly, we do not accept the appellant's claim not to have returned  to
Sierra Leone since 1990 and neither do we  accept  that  he  has  no  family
members remaining  in  that  country.  We  consider  that  he  has  retained
considerably more than remote and abstract links to the country. We note  in
addition that he has been brought up in the United Kingdom by  his  adoptive
mother and amongst extended family members, all of whom came here as  Sierra
Leonean nationals, and would thus have a knowledge of the customs,  cultures
and traditions of his country of birth on that  basis.  Whilst  he  may  not
speak Krio, the official language of Sierra Leone is English  and  he  would
therefore have no problems in communication. We consider, on  the  basis  of
such ties, and despite the length of his residence in  the  United  Kingdom,
that there remains the continued connection envisaged by the Upper  Tribunal
in their findings in Ogundimu and that,  accordingly,  paragraph  399A  does
not apply to him.

Having concluded as such, the appellant has  to  demonstrate  that  it  will
only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
deportation will be outweighed by other factors, which we find  that  he  is
unable to do. There is nothing in the grounds  of  appeal  to  suggest  that
such circumstances exist and the grounds are all predicated upon his  length
of residence combined with the alleged lack of ties to Sierra  Leone,  which
matters we have already dealt with. As such, the  appellant  has  failed  to
demonstrate that he is able to meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
rules.

With regard to Article 8 in its wider context, Mr Mak  acknowledged  at  the
error of law hearing that the grounds of appeal, other than with respect  to
paragraph 399A, were simply a disagreement with the Tribunal's decision.  We
consider that that is  indeed  the  case.  The  relevant  issue  before  the
Tribunal  was  proportionality  and,  in  that  regard,  they  gave  careful
consideration, at paragraphs  23  and  30,  to  the  appellant's  length  of
residence in the United Kingdom and the age at which he  left  Sierra  Leone
as well as the consequences of his  deportation  on  all  relevant  parties.
They balanced this against his criminal offending,  taking  account  of  the
serious nature of the offences and the judge's sentencing remarks,  at  both
trials. They took account of the pre-sentencing report  and  the  subsequent
reports concluding that he remained a high risk of  serious  harm  to  known
adults and was a dangerous person.

The Tribunal also took account of the internal memorandum upon which Mr  Mak
relied before us, in which the appellant  was  described  as  a  "home-grown
criminal" and they made findings in that regard, noting the warning  he  was
given in the event of re-offending. Mr Mak's submission before us  was  that
the subsequent deportation decision was no more than a  political  decision,
given the previous decision not to pursue  deportation  action.  However  we
have set out  reasons  above  for  concluding  that  the  circumstances  had
substantially changed since that time, with the result that  the  basis  for
the decision was no longer a reliable one. It was also Mr  Mak's  submission
before us that allegations made against the appellant should  not  be  taken
into account, given that they had not resulted in any  convictions.  However
we consider that, in particular in  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's
case and noting the comments made by His Honour Judge Karu at  paragraph  B,
page 10 of the transcript of his sentence, such  matters  are  of  relevance
and carry some weight.

The Tribunal concluded, at paragraph 31,  by  giving  consideration  to  the
principles in Maslov, finding, for reasons properly given, that  there  were
very serious reasons to justify the appellant's  deportation  and  that  the
interference caused to his private life in the United Kingdom, as  a  result
of his deportation, was not disproportionate. That  was  a  conclusion  they
were entitled to reach and that we find is the right decision in this  case.
We  note  further  that  of  particular  relevance,  given  the  appellant's
inability to meet the requirements of the immigration rules, is  the  recent
decision in SS (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2013] EWCA Civ 550, in which the Court of Appeal emphasised  the  Secretary
of State's margin of discretion and the weight to be attached to the  public
interest in deporting foreign criminals.  We  find,  accordingly,  that  the
appellant has failed to establish that he falls within  the  exceptions  set
out at section 33 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and  his  appeal  must  be
dismissed under the immigration rules and on human rights grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law and the decision has accordingly been set aside.  We  re-make
the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.





                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
