
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01882/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates'    |                      Decision & Reasons|
|Court                               |Promulgated                             |
|On 17th November 2015               |                      On 4th February   |
|                                    |2016                                    |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Sajjad AHMEDZAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               TEH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hussain, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sajjad Ahmedzai, was born on 1 May 1973 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Afghanistan.  The appellant appealed against a  decision  of
    the respondent to make an automatic deportation order in respect of him
    as a result of convictions in 2012 for  a  number  of  sexual  offences
    relating to minors for which he received  (following  an  appeal)  five
    years' imprisonment.  The deportation order was signed as long ago as 6
    September 2013; there have been  a  number  of  adjournments  in  these
    proceedings to allow the appellant time  to  submit  further  evidence.
    His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Shanahan  /
    Mrs Bray JP) in a decision promulgated on 8 April 2015.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds may be summarised by reference to the grant  of  permission
    (Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley) at [3]:

         The grounds contend that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in
         their  failure  to  treat  the  expert   evidence   of   Dr   Fatah
         appropriately, given  he  is  accepted  as  an  appropriate  expert
         witness and provides an opinion that the  arrest  warrant  for  the
         appellant on terrorist charges is genuine.  It is argued that there
         is  a  failure  to  apply  the  correct  lower  standard  of  proof
         applicable in asylum claims in finding in  this  context  that  the
         warrant did not  show  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  treatment
         contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR  if  returned  to  Afghanistan,  see
         paragraphs 40 - 48 of the decision.

 3. The Tribunal indicated [40] that they would start  their  consideration
    of the  evidence  by  looking  at  Dr  Fatah's  report.   The  Tribunal
    acknowledged that he was "an expert in his field."  The Tribunal  noted
    that Dr Fatah's first report indicated that he had  seen  only  a  copy
    rather  than  an  original  arrest  warrant  document   that   he   had
    subsequently amended his report  having  examined  the  original.   The
    Tribunal quoted Dr Fatah's  comment  that,  "no  one  can  confirm  the
    authenticity of documents issued by an insurgent group or other  bodies
    in Afghanistan beyond doubt.  It should be clear that as an expert I do
    not pass judgments  only  give  opinions."   Dr Fatah  had  noted  "no
    discrepancies" which would lead him to conclude that the  document  was
    other than genuine.   The  Tribunal  noted  [42]  that  in  his  report
    Dr Fatah had been unable to explain "why on the back of  the  document
    there is an  English/European  script  visible  in  indentation."   The
    Tribunal then proceeded at [43 -  48]  to  give  detailed  reasons  for
    rejecting the authenticity of the arrest warrant.  The  Tribunal  noted
    that the appellant's friend, J, who had  obtained  the  arrest  warrant
    document had failed to attend the hearing despite being resident in the
    United Kingdom.  His evidence had not been tested by cross-examination.
     The Tribunal then set  out  in  some  detail  J's  account  of  having
    obtained the document through contacts in the Afghani  authorities  and
    with the assistance of J's wife who had  reportedly  visited  Islamabad
    for a tuberculosis test at the time of which he had handed the document
    to the appellant's friend.  The document had been obtained through  the
    agency of a relative of J.  The Tribunal noted [44] that there was very
    little specific evidence as regards dates and there  was  no  "rational
    explanation" for the fact that the appellant had  left  Afghanistan  in
    2007 and yet the document had been dated September  2013;  it  made  no
    sense that the appellant would have been the subject of such a  warrant
    so many years after he had left  Afghanistan.   Although  the  document
    refers to the appellant being a  member  of  the  Taliban  it  made  no
    reference to the appellant's claim that he had assisted the Taliban  in
    driving a suicide bomber.  The Tribunal recorded that the appellant was
    unable to "provide explanations for these concerns."

 4. It is clear that the Tribunal took pains  to  consider  in  detail  the
    appellant's account of how the document had come into  the  appellant's
    possession.  The Tribunal  properly  considered  that  account  in  the
    context of all the evidence (Tanveer Ahmed  (2002)  UKIAT  00439*)  The
    Tribunal also applied the principles of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702,
    having given their own anxious scrutiny to the appellant's account, and
    decided that the findings of the judge who  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in 2011 remained valid.  The Tribunal found "no basis upon which
    to depart from them." [51]

 5. I find that the grounds of appeal have no merit.  As I  have  explained
    above, the Tribunal reached an outcome which was plainly  available  to
    it on the evidence and it did so by rejecting the  appellant's  account
    of having obtained the document purporting to  be  an  arrest  warrant.
    The simple fact that the Tribunal  acknowledged  the  expertise  of  Dr
    Fatah did not mean that it had  to  accept  each  of  his  observations
    without further scrutiny.  As Dr Fatah  himself  acknowledged,  he  was
    only able to offer an opinion and not  provide  facts.   There  was  no
    suggestion in this case that the Tribunal  has  found  the  appellant's
    account to be incredible and only then turned to  consider  the  expert
    report.  On the contrary, they considered  the  expert  report  at  the
    outset of and as an integral part of its analysis (Mibanga (2005)  EWCA
    Civ 367) and not as some afterthought.  I can identify no errors of law
    in the Tribunal's thorough analysis either for the reasons asserted  in
    the grounds of appeal or at all.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 20 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

