


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01496/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 5 March 2014                             |On : 12 March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              yogaraja ponniah
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Maliks and Khan Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Ponniah's  appeal
against a decision to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  order  made  against
him. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
State as the respondent and Mr Ponniah as the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 7 July 1973. He arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 10 October 2000 and applied for asylum. His claim  was
refused on 17 February 2001. His appeal against that decision was  dismissed
on 22 April 2013, with adverse credibility findings made  against  him.  His
appeal rights were exhausted on 1 July 2003 and he was  subsequently  listed
as an absconder when he failed to report as required.

On 11 November 2008 the appellant was arrested by the  police  on  suspicion
of committing an offence under the  ID  Card  Act  when  a  forged  National
Insurance card and a forged passport  containing  his  name  and  photograph
were found during a search of his room. On 26 January 2009 he was  convicted
at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  for  possessing  improperly  obtained  identity
documents with intent and sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. On 17  April
2009 he was notified of his liability to automatic  deportation.  On  8  May
2009 he made further submissions on asylum  grounds.  On  13  May  2009  his
custodial sentence ended and on 3  August  2009  he  was  granted  bail  and
released from immigration detention.

On 16 November  2010  the  appellant  was  made  the  subject  of  a  signed
Deportation Order and a decision was made  that  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007 applied. In making that decision the respondent  considered
his asylum and human rights claims but concluded that he  would  not  be  at
risk on return to Sri Lanka and that his deportation would  not  breach  his
human rights. He appealed that decision and following the dismissal  of  his
appeal on 3 February 2011 and unsuccessful attempts to apply for  permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal he became appeal rights exhausted on 1  June
2011.  He  sought  unsuccessfully  to  judicially  review  the  refusal   of
permission to appeal. There then followed several unsuccessful  attempts  to
document and remove him.

Application to Revoke the Deportation Order

 On 29 May 2012 the  appellant's  solicitors  submitted  an  application  to
revoke the deportation order. The application  was  not  pursued  on  asylum
grounds but on Article 8 human rights grounds, with submissions  being  made
as to his good conduct since the previous unsuccessful  appeal  against  the
decision to deport him. It was submitted that the  appellant  had  only  one
conviction arising from his conduct in 2008 and since that  time  there  had
been no offending. He had undertaken voluntary work at a  Hindu  temple  and
attended a Catholic church and had strengthened his ties to the community.

On 27 September 2012 an application was made for  leave  to  remain  in  the
United Kingdom on the basis of the appellant's private life ties based  upon
his length of residence in the country. Further  representations  were  made
on 11 June 2013, notifying the respondent of his marriage on 6 June 2013  to
a British citizen.

On 4 July 2013 a decision was made  to  refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation
order. The respondent, in making that decision, gave  consideration  to  the
immigration rules with respect  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  It  was  not
accepted that paragraph 399(a) applied to the appellant  since  he  did  not
have children. Neither  was  it  accepted  that  paragraph  339(b)  applied.
Whilst it was accepted that he was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
with a British citizen, the respondent noted that he had not been living  in
the United Kingdom with valid leave for 15 years and considered  that  there
were no insurmountable obstacles  to  his  family  life  continuing  in  Sri
Lanka. It was not accepted that paragraph 399A applied as it was  considered
that he had retained ties to Sri Lanka. The respondent did not  accept  that
there were exceptional circumstances such  that  the  appellant's  right  to
family  and/or  private  life  outweighed  the  public   interest   in   his
deportation. It was accordingly concluded that  his  deportation  would  not
breach Article 8.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 10  January  2014,  before  a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Suchak and Mr G  F  Sandall.  The  Tribunal  heard  from  the
appellant and his wife, noting the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  no
contact with his family in Sri Lanka since  2008  and  his  wife's  evidence
that she was born in Sri Lanka but had lived in the United  Kingdom  for  14
years since 2000 and was established in this country. She was  in  full-time
employment and owned a property here and had no relatives in Sri Lanka.  Two
further witnesses gave evidence before the Tribunal. The  Tribunal  accepted
the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  wife  and   concluded   that   their
relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting  and   that   there   would   be
considerable insurmountable obstacles to their  family  life  continuing  in
Sri Lanka. The appellant's evidence, that he had had  no  contact  with  his
family in Sri Lanka since 2008, was also accepted. The Tribunal found  that,
whilst the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
rules, his removal would be disproportionate and in breach of Article  8  of
the ECHR. The appeal was accordingly allowed on human rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the following grounds: that the Tribunal had misinterpreted  the
term "insurmountable  obstacles";  and  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
identify   any   exceptional   circumstances   rendering   the   appellant's
deportation unjustifiably  harsh.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the  Court  of
Appeal's judgment in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

Permission to appeal was granted on 3 February 2014.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before me on 5 March 2014. The appellant and his wife  were
present at the hearing, but were not  required  to  give  oral  evidence.  I
heard submissions on the error of law.

Ms Isherwood relied on the cases of Nagre,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720  and  Kabia  (MF:
para  398  -  exceptional  circumstances)  (Gambia)  [2013]  UKUT   569   in
submitting  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  identify  any  exceptional
circumstances such as would make the appellant's  deportation  unjustifiably
harsh. There was a failure, in considering that  there  were  insurmountable
obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Sri Lanka, to take account of  the
fact that the appellant's wife was aware that he  had  no  status  here  and
that he had been found by a previous Tribunal to be lacking in  credibility.
No reasons had been given as to why  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles.
There had been no assessment of the Secretary of  State's  position  in  the
case of a person who had used false documentation. The rule 24 response,  in
setting out a chronology of events, failed to  acknowledge  the  appellant's
previous history of absconding.

Ms Iqbal relied on her rule 24 response and submitted that  the  grounds  of
appeal were misconceived and that the grant of permission was based  upon  a
factual error in that it referred to the appellant's wife having resided  in
the United Kingdom since 2010 rather than 2000. The Tribunal had given  full
reasons for finding that deportation was  disproportionate,  taking  account
of the public interest and assessing, in substance, whether there  would  be
"unjustifiably harsh" consequences. She submitted  that  the  appeal  should
have been allowed under the rules.

I heard submissions from both parties  on  the  re-making  of  the  decision
should an error of law be found. It was agreed that  there  was  no  further
evidence to be produced and that the findings of fact  made  by  the  First-
tier  Tribunal  were  not  challenged.  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that   the
appellant had shown a complete disregard for the laws of the United  Kingdom
and had not admitted to his use of false documents until a late  stage.  His
ties to the United Kingdom were all within the  Sri  Lankan  community.  His
appeal should not be  allowed.  Ms  Iqbal  submitted,  with  regard  to  the
question of absconding, that the appellant had  been  compliant  since  2009
and had complied with all the attempts to document him and yet  he  had  not
been removed.

I enquired of the parties as to any explanation for the  difficulties  faced
in documenting the appellant for removal but was advised that that had  also
been raised  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  there  was  no  information
available. Ms Isherwood had no instructions on the matter.

Error of Law

It is the appellant's case that the grounds of  appeal  amount  to  no  more
than a disagreement with the Tribunal's decision  and  that  the  Tribunal's
findings,  whilst  not  specifically  referring   to   unjustifiably   harsh
consequences, adequately dealt with the matter in substance. Indeed,  it  is
the case that the Tribunal, at paragraph 6 of  its  determination,  referred
to relevant case law and at paragraph 46 to the "exceptional  circumstances"
requirement arising when the first stage of the rules could not be met.

However in my view the Tribunal failed properly to engage with the  relevant
principles and to identify unjustifiably harsh consequences giving  rise  to
exceptional circumstances such as to meet the requirements of paragraph  398
of the rules. Indeed, if it were the case that  the  Tribunal  had  properly
identified such exceptional circumstances, it is not clear  why  the  appeal
was not allowed under the rules rather than  on  wider  Article  8  grounds.
Furthermore, it seems to me  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate
reasons for finding there to be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
being enjoyed in Sri Lanka.

Turning to the question of "insurmountable obstacles" the relevant  findings
are to be found at paragraph 49 of the Tribunal's decision and appear to  be
based simply upon an acceptance of the claims made by the appellant and  his
wife to that effect. There is some further, albeit limited, analysis in  the
following two paragraphs,  but  no  clear  findings  arising  out  of  that.
Drawing what is possible from those paragraphs it seems  that  the  Tribunal
relied upon an acceptance that the appellant had had  no  contact  with  his
family since 2008; that his wife had been in the United Kingdom  since  2000
and was working full-time and owned property here; that she  had  no  family
in Sri Lanka; and that she feared being a lone female if the  appellant  was
detained. That appears to be the sole basis for the  Tribunal's  conclusions
on "insurmountable obstacles". I do not consider  that  to  be  an  adequate
basis for such  a  conclusion,  particularly  considering  that  the  latter
reason was inconsistent with the findings of  previous  Tribunals  that  the
appellant had given an incredible account of his experiences  in  Sri  Lanka
and that there was no credible basis for believing  that  he  would  at  any
risk of arrest and detention on return.

No real consideration appears to have been given  by  the  Tribunal  to  the
fact that the appellant's wife was herself of  Sri  Lankan  origin  and  had
spent most of her life in that country, albeit  that  she  had  since  taken
British nationality. There was no evidence to suggest that she would  be  at
risk  in  that  country  herself.  The  Tribunal,  furthermore,  appears  at
paragraph 51 to have decided to attach little or no weight to the fact  that
the appellant's wife met and married him at a time when he  was  subject  to
deportation proceedings. Clearly it was not simply a matter of a  precarious
immigration status in the appellant's case, as the Tribunal put  it,  but  a
matter of impending deportation with the  most  recent  attempt  at  removal
having taken place only a matter of two months before they met  and  further
attempts made shortly after their relationship  began  and  prior  to  their
marriage. Her own evidence in her statement was that she knew of him  whilst
he was in immigration detention even before they met  and  she  plainly  had
some knowledge and awareness of his circumstances.

Ms  Isherwood  relied  upon  paragraph  42  of  the  Administrative  Court's
judgement in Nagre in submitting that the Tribunal had erred by  failing  to
make  findings  on  whether  the  consequences  of  deportation   would   be
unjustifiably harsh:


    "Nonetheless, I consider that the  Strasbourg  guidance  does  indicate
    that  in  a  precarious  family  life  case,  where  it  is   only   in
    "exceptional" or "the most exceptional" circumstances that  removal  of
    the non-national family member will constitute a violation  of  Article
    8, the absence of  insurmountable  obstacles  to  relocation  of  other
    family members to that member's own country of origin to continue their
    family life there is likely  to  indicate  that  the  removal  will  be
    proportionate for the purposes of Article 8. In  order  to  show  that,
    despite the practical possibility of relocation (i.e.  the  absence  of
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  it),  removal  in  such  a  case   would
    nonetheless be disproportionate, one would need to identify other  non-
    standard and particular features of the case of a compelling nature  to
    show that removal would be unjustifiably harsh."


Clearly regard was being made by Sales J to circumstances where  the  family
life was precarious, whilst the Tribunal in the  appellant's  case  made  no
findings on the strength of the appellant's  family  life  ties  other  than
concluding that his relationship with his wife was genuine  and  subsisting.
No consideration appears to have been given by  the  Tribunal  to  the  fact
that the marriage had been subsisting for a matter of  only  six  months  at
the time and, as stated above, that it took place  at  a  time  when  active
efforts were being made to deport the appellant. In  such  circumstances  it
was all the more necessary for the Tribunal to provide clear reasons  as  to
why it concluded that deportation  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh.  Yet  no
findings were made in that regard and certainly  not  explicitly.  The  only
findings of any substance made in that regard are to be found at  paragraphs
50, 51 and 53, but the Tribunal failed to  give  any  adequate  reasons  for
concluding  that  unjustifiably  harsh   consequences   had   thereby   been
established.

At paragraph 51 the Tribunal placed weight  on  the  appellant's  conviction
being at the lower end of the scale, which it was entitled to do,  but  also
relied on the fact that he had pleaded guilty at the  earliest  opportunity,
whilst the appellant's own evidence in his  statement  at  paragraph  6  was
that he did not plead guilty initially. At paragraph 53  the  Tribunal  took
account of the fact that the appellant had not  reoffended  since  2008  and
was unlikely to re-offend. Again it was entitled  to  do  so  and  to  place
weight upon that consideration. However,  I  do  not  consider  that  to  be
anywhere near an adequate basis for concluding  that  deportation  would  be
unjustifiably harsh and note that  the  Tribunal  did  not,  in  any  event,
properly address itself to that requirement.

In all of the circumstances I  find  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for   concluding   that   there   were
insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Sri  Lanka  and  by
failing to address the issue  of  "exceptional  circumstances"  and  "unduly
harsh consequences" either explicitly or on  the  basis  of  any  adequately
reasoned findings. Accordingly, I  consider  that  the  Tribunal's  decision
cannot stand and must be set aside and re-made.

Re-making the Decision

The Tribunal's decision, that paragraphs 399 and 399A do not  apply  to  the
appellant, has  not  been  challenged  and  is  clearly  correct.  The  only
consideration, therefore, is whether there are,  in  the  appellant's  case,
exceptional circumstances such that the public interest in deportation  will
be outweighed by other factors, pursuant to paragraph 398 of the rules.

In the head-note to Kabia, the Upper Tribunal held that:

    "The new rules speak of "exceptional circumstances" but,  as  has  been
    made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), exceptionality is  a
    likely characteristic of a claim that properly succeeds rather  than  a
    legal  test  to  be  met.  In   this   context,   "exceptional"   means
    circumstances in which deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the individual or their family such that a deportation
    would not be proportionate".


The relevant issue,  therefore,  is  whether  deportation  would  result  in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant and his  wife  such  that
deportation would not be proportionate. For the reasons given above and  set
out in more detail below, I do not consider that it would.

The main factor in the appellant's favour  is  his  marriage  to  a  British
citizen who has lived in the United Kingdom for 14 years and who has  become
established here in terms of employment, property and some  family  ties  (a
brother and his wife and children, an uncle and cousins). In  terms  of  the
strength of the appellant's family life with his wife  it  is  not  disputed
that their relationship and  marriage  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  one.
However it is not the case that the marriage followed  a  long-standing  and
established relationship. According to his wife's evidence the  decision  to
marry was made after the appellant was released from detention  in  December
2012, following a period of several months when they  met  on  occasions  at
church and spoke on the telephone.  It  seems  that  the  relationship  only
became  a  significant  factor  for  the  appellant  some  time  after   his
application to revoke the deportation order, with no reference  to  it  even
in the further representations of 27 September 2012 (the vague reference  to
family life appears to have been in relation  to  the  various  friends  who
were supporting his application). The appellant's wife was not aware of  his
criminal  convictions  until  shortly  before  the  decision  to  marry  and
evidently knew little of his history. It is, furthermore, her evidence  that
she would not follow him to Sri  Lanka  if  he  was  deported.  It  is  also
relevant to note that the couple have now been married  for  less  than  one
year (and at the time of the respondent's decision only one month).

Of particular relevance is the circumstances in which the appellant and  his
wife met and decided to  marry.  The  appellant's  wife's  evidence  in  her
statement was that she knew about him and his situation before she  met  him
and was aware that he was in  immigration  detention  centre.  It  was  only
shortly after the relationship commenced that further attempts were made  to
remove him, a previous attempt having failed only  two  months  before  they
met. Clearly,  she  embarked  on  the  relationship  and  entered  into  the
marriage in the full knowledge  that  active  efforts  were  being  made  to
deport him from the United Kingdom.

In such circumstances, whilst the appellant and his wife  state  that  there
are insurmountable obstacles to their family life continuing in  Sri  Lanka,
I do not consider that it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect
them to pursue their family life in that country. Although  the  appellant's
wife is now a British national with established  ties  to  this  country  in
terms of employment, property and some family, she  is  also  a  Sri  Lankan
national who spent the majority of her life  in  that  country.  Whilst  she
does not have close  remaining  family  ties  in  Sri  Lanka  she  would  be
returning with the appellant to a country with which  she  is  familiar  and
whose language and customs are  known  to  her.  There  is  no  evidence  to
suggest that either would be at any risk in that country. The appellant  has
never had any leave to remain in the United Kingdom and, whilst he has  been
here for a substantial number of years, he spent the majority  of  his  life
in Sri Lanka and would be able to re-establish  himself  there.  Other  than
his length of residence in the United Kingdom and his marriage to a  British
national, there is limited evidence of any significant private life ties  to
this country.

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the public interest  in  his
deportation  is  limited  by  reason  of  the  passage  of  time  since  the
deportation order was  made  and  the  absence,  in  the  meantime,  of  any
offending or risk of re-offending. However, it is clear that the  respondent
has, since that  time,  actively  pursued  the  documentation  and  removals
process, but has been hindered by an absence  of  adequate  information  and
evidence to enable the Sri Lankan  Embassy  to  document  him.  Indeed,  the
chronology set  out  in  the  appellant's  rule  24  response  indicates  an
inability by the Sri Lankan High  Commission  to  verify  his  identity  and
nationality. It is unfortunate that there is a lack  of  information  before
me from either party in  regard  to  the  difficulties  encountered  in  the
documentation process but such indications raise some  concerns  as  to  the
extent of the appellant's co-operation. Furthermore, whilst  the  chronology
provided by the appellant refers to his good  conduct  and  compliance  with
conditions imposed upon him, it is relevant that that has occurred during  a
period when there remained a threat of deportation  hanging  over  him.  His
earlier history, however, consisted of reliance upon an  asylum  claim  that
was found to be a fabrication, followed by a four to  five  year  period  of
non-compliance and absconding and conviction for the  possession  of  forged
documentation.

In all of these circumstances I do not consider  that  the  consequences  to
the appellant, or to his wife, of deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  and
conclude  that  the  appellant  has  failed   to   demonstrate   exceptional
circumstances outweighing the public interest in  his  deportation  for  the
purposes of  paragraph  398.  Having  reached  such  a  conclusion,  and  in
accordance  with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  approach  to  the  rules  in  MF
(Nigeria), I find that the decision to maintain the  deportation  order  and
to continue to seek the appellant's deportation was a proportionate one  and
was not in breach of his Article  8  human  rights.  There  being  no  other
relevant  considerations  or  compelling  circumstances,  I  find  that  the
respondent's decision was in accordance with the terms of paragraph  390  of
the rules.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Ponniah's appeal on all grounds.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I see no reason
    to continue that order and I accordingly lift the  order  (pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
