

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01992/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 19 October 2015                       |            On 7 December 2015       |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     RVC
                           (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr D. Balroop, Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves consideration of the welfare of young children.  I  find  that
it is appropriate to continue the order but make clear  that  anonymity  has
not been granted in order to protect the  appellant's  reputation  following
his conviction for a criminal offence. Unless and until a tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK  on  12
    July 2000 following his marriage to a British  citizen.  On  15  August
    2002 he was convicted of four counts of supplying  Class  A  controlled
    drugs (crack cocaine) and was sentenced to three years imprisonment for
    each count to run concurrently. On  02  February  2004  the  respondent
    served a decision to make a deportation order. The appellant lodged  an
    appeal against the decision but the appeal  was  dismissed  on  07  May
    2004. He was subsequently released on bail and absconded. On  11  March
    2005 a deportation order was signed. The appellant did not come to  the
    attention of the authorities until 19 October 2012 when he applied  for
    leave to remain. The application was treated as a request to revoke the
    deportation order.

3.    In a decision dated 10 October 2014 the respondent refused  to  revoke
    the deportation order.  The  appellant  appealed.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Monson ("the judge") allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated
    on 02 June 2015 because he was  satisfied  that  deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh on the appellant's children and  the  appellant  therefore
    met the requirements of  the  exception  to  deportation  contained  in
    paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules.

4.    The respondent's grounds of appeal seek to challenge the  decision  on
    the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
           concluding that deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  the
           appellant's children.
      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal failed to have  regard  to  the  factors
           contained  in  section  117B  and  117C  of   the   Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002").
      iii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to give wider consideration
           to the public interest, and the  relevant  authorities,  in  his
           assessment of whether deportation would be "unduly harsh" on the
           appellant's children.


Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.

6.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave a detailed  decision  in  which  he
    set  out  the  relevant  legal  framework,  including  the  deportation
    provisions  contained  in  the  immigration  rules   and   in   primary
    legislation (including section 117A-D of the NIAA 2002) [2-8]. He  went
    on to outline in  some  detail  the  factual  background  to  the  case
    including the appellant's  criminal  conduct,  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks,  the  appellant's   immigration   history   and   his   family
    circumstances [11-25]. The judge then considered the reasons  given  by
    the respondent for refusing to revoke the deportation order [26-32]. He
    set out the  evidence  given  by  the  witnesses  at  the  hearing  and
    summarised the submissions made by both parties [33-43]. The  appellant
    and the mothers of both of his children gave evidence. He then went  on
    to discuss the issues and made his findings over the next  seven  pages
    of the decision [44-66].

7.    The judge found that the appeal pivoted on whether the  appellant  met
    the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules [44].  He
    found that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's two children were British citizens  by  birth  despite  the
    concession made by the respondent in the decision letter  but  accepted
    that they were likely  to  be  qualifying  children  who  had  acquired
    British citizenship as a result of their length of residence in the UK.
    Copies of the British passports of the two children  were  in  evidence
    before the Tribunal so there was no dispute as  to  their  nationality.
    The children have different mothers. R is 14 year old and L is 13 years
    old.

8.     In  considering  the  requirements  of  paragraph   399(a)   of   the
    immigration rules the judge began by noting that  the  decision  letter
    conceded that it would be unduly harsh for the two children to live  in
    the appellant's country of origin [51].  He  nevertheless  went  on  to
    analyse whether on the underlying facts this concession  was  correctly
    made. He found that it would be unduly harsh to expect L to live in the
    country to which the appellant was to be deported because the appellant
    was not in a relationship with her mother. He concluded that given  her
    citizenship status, age and ties to the UK it would be unduly harsh and
    that the concession made in the decision letter was sustainable [52].

9.    The judge went on to consider whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant's younger child to live in the country to which he was to
    be deported [53]. He observed that if the appellant was  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with R's mother  as  claimed  then  it  was
    arguable that it would not be unduly harsh on R to relocate to  Jamaica
    with his parents. However, for the reasons given in paragraph 50 of the
    decision, which are unchallenged, the judge was not satisfied that  the
    appellant was still in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  R's
    mother. For similar reasons to the other child  he  concluded  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect R to live in the country to  which  the
    appellant would be deported in circumstances  where  his  mother  would
    remain in the UK.

10.   Although paragraph 8  of  the  respondent's  grounds  make  a  general
    assertion  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) or (b) no meaningful  challenge  has  been  put
    forward to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings  relating  to  the
    first limb of the test. The judge did not just accept  the  concessions
    already  made  in  the  decision  letter  and  examined  the   relevant
    circumstances in a balanced way before coming to the conclusion that it
    would be unduly harsh for either child to be expected to  live  in  the
    country to which the appellant would  be  deported.  In  light  of  the
    particular factual matrix of this case those findings were open to  the
    judge to make and disclose no material errors of law.

11.   As the judge pointed out in paragraph 55 of the decision the  crux  of
    the case turned on whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    children to remain in the UK without the appellant if  he  were  to  be
    deported. He weighed the circumstances and accepted that  the  case  in
    relation to L was weaker than the case for R because she did  not  live
    with her father. The role that her mother played as her  primary  carer
    would not be disturbed by his removal. While the judge noted that there
    was no independent evidence to show that the appellant lived with R  he
    heard evidence from the witnesses to the effect. He took  into  account
    the fact that the oral evidence was unchallenged and for these  reasons
    accepted on the balance of probabilities that the  appellant  lived  in
    the same household as R and his mother.  He  accepted  that  there  was
    credible evidence to show that the appellant shared responsibility  for
    R's care and upbringing. While he noted that R's mother  was  primarily
    responsible for R's maintenance and accommodation he accepted  that  it
    would be contrary to R's best interests  to  lose  direct  and  regular
    contact with his father, which he concluded was also true of L,  albeit
    to a lesser extent [55].

12.   The judge summarised the main findings of an  expert  report  prepared
    by an approved social worker who specialised in mental health work [56-
    60]. She assessed the relationship between the appellant  and  his  two
    children and their mothers. She concluded that there were already signs
    that R had taken the news of his  father's  possible  deportation  very
    badly and that his permanent removal from the UK was  likely  to  cause
    "significant detriment" in the form of lasting and damaging effects  on
    the children. She concluded that it was in the best interests  of  both
    children for their father to remain in the UK. The judge noted that  in
    so far  as  those  observations  went  they  were  uncontroversial  and
    commented that he was sceptical about the claim that the children  have
    no contact with other relatives in the appellant's  country  of  origin
    60]. In so far as those findings  went  they  were  well  balanced  and
    considered the positive and  the  negative  aspects  arising  from  the
    report.

13.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to remind himself that the  best
    interests of the children were of substantial importance but  were  not
    determinative of the question of whether it would be "unduly harsh" for
    them to remain in the UK without their father. He directed  himself  to
    relevant case law of the Tribunal in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options)
    Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223. The decision  does  not  give  quite  the
    correct citation  but  this  minor  error  is  immaterial  because  the
    Tribunal nevertheless took into account the correct  case  [61-62].  In
    citing paragraphs 46 and 47 of MK (Sierra Leone) the judge quite  clear
    had in mind the only guidance available at the  time  relating  to  the
    meaning of "unduly harsh" for the purpose of the immigration rules:

            "45. The determination of the two questions which we have  posed
           in [44](d) above requires an evaluative assessment on  the  part
           of the Tribunal. This is to be contrasted with  a  fact  finding
           exercise.  By way of self-direction, we are mindful that "unduly
           harsh"  does  not  equate  with   uncomfortable,   inconvenient,
           undesirable  or  merely   difficult.    Rather,   it   poses   a
           considerably more elevated threshold.  "Harsh" in this  context,
           denotes something severe, or bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of
           pleasant or comfortable.    Furthermore,  the  addition  of  the
           adverb  "unduly"  raises  an  already  elevated  standard  still
           higher.  Approached in  this  way,  we  have  no  hesitation  in
           concluding that it would be unduly harsh for either of  the  two
           seven year old British citizen children concerned to be abruptly
           uprooted from their United Kingdom life  setting  and  lifestyle
           and exiled to this struggling, impoverished and plague  stricken
           west African state. No reasonable or right thinking person would
           consider this anything less than cruel.

            46.  The final question is whether it would be unduly harsh  for
           either child  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
           Appellant.  This is a different question from that considered in
           [46]  above.  We  have  identified  a   range   of   facts   and
           considerations bearing on this issue.  Once again, an evaluative
           judgment on the part of the Tribunal is required.  In performing
           this exercise we view everything in the  round.   The  Appellant
           plays an important role in the lives of both children  concerned
           particularly that of his  step  son.   He  is  the  provider  of
           stability, security, emotional support and financial support  to
           both children.  We have rehearsed above the various benefits and
           advantages which he  brings  to  the  lives  of  both  children,
           coupled with his personal  attributes  and  merits.   We  remind
           ourselves of section 55 of the 2009  Act.   We  acknowledge  the
           distinction between harsh and unduly harsh. We remind  ourselves
           again of the potency  of  the  main  public  interest  in  play,
           emphasised most recently by the Court of Appeal  in  SSHD  v  MA
           (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 1192.   The  outcome  of  our  careful
           reflections in this difficult and  borderline  case  and  in  an
           exercise  bereft  of  bright  luminous  lines  is  as   follows.
           Balancing all of the facts and factors, our conclusion  is  that
           the severity of the  impact  on  the  children's  lives  of  the
           Appellant's abrupt exit with all  that  would  flow  there  from
           would be of such proportions as to be unduly harsh."

14.   With  that  guidance  in  mind  the  judge  weighed  up  the  relative
    strengths and weaknesses of  this  appellant's  case  to  that  of  the
    appellant in MK  (Sierra  Leone).  He  observed  that  the  appellant's
    offending was considerably less serious and the position of  the  child
    was stronger than in MK (Sierra Leone) but went on to weigh the serious
    fact that the  appellant  had  absconded,  which  contrasted  with  the
    immigration history of the appellant in MK  (Sierra  Leone)  [64].  The
    judge summed up by taking into account public interest factors such  as
    the seriousness of the offence and the fact that the appellant had  not
    reoffended, which he considered justified the original assessment  that
    he was at low risk of  reoffending.  The  judge  made  clear  that  the
    seriousness of the offence was sufficient reason for the respondent  to
    justify the order  being  maintained.  However,  after  having  made  a
    "holistic  assessment"  of  the  relevant  factors  he  concluded  that
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" on the appellant's two children. He
    explained that in light of the  unchallenged  expert  evidence  he  was
    satisfied that the abrupt removal of the appellant from the  children's
    lives would not merely damage them but "cause a gaping chasm  in  their
    lives to their serious detriment" [65].

Discussion

15.   In order to assess whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  his
    consideration of paragraph 399(a)  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
    meaning of the phrase "unduly harsh".

16.   In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  the  Court  of  Appeal
    concluded that the immigration rules relating to deportation provided a
    "complete code" to Article 8. This was largely because  the  provisions
    contained in paragraph 398 of the immigration rules were deemed  to  be
    sufficiently wide to encompass a full proportionality  assessment  that
    was compliant with Article 8 of  the  European  Convention.  The  plain
    wording of paragraph 398 makes clear that  a  full  balancing  exercise
    should be conducted because it states  that  "the  public  interest  in
    deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where  there  are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A". The respondent's own guidance recognises that
    the exceptions  relating  to  family  and  private  life  are  separate
    considerations and that the assessment of the cumulative effect of  all
    the relevant factors is likely to take place within the wider ambit  of
    paragraph 398 of the immigration rules: see paragraph 6.6 "Chapter  13:
    Criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases".

17.   Part 5A of the  NIAA  2002  introduced  a  statutory  requirement  for
    courts and tribunals to have regard to certain factors when considering
    "the public interest question". Nothing in the wording of sections 117A-
    D would appear to undermine the assessment under the immigration rules,
    which remain a complete code due to the broad  nature  of  the  enquiry
    under paragraph 398. By virtue of section 117A(2) a court  or  Tribunal
    must have regard to the factors outlined in sections 117B and  117C (in
    deportation cases) when "considering  the  public  interest  question".
    Section 117A(3) goes on to define "the  public  interest  question"  as
    "the question of whether an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
    respect  of  private  life  is  justified  under  Article  8(2)".   The
    definition contained in section 117A(3) shows that the "public interest
    question" is intended to be the same as the proportionality  assessment
    under Article 8(2). The wording of section 117A(3)  reflects  the  long
    established case law relating to the proper interpretation of Article 8
    of the  European  Convention:  see  questions  (iv)  and  (v)  of  Lord
    Bingham's five stage approach outlined in  R  v  SSHD  ex  part  Razgar
    [2004] 3 WLR 58.

18.   It is clear that the combined effect  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,
    section 117C of the NIAA 2002 and the amendments made to Part 13 of the
    immigration rules now emphasise the significant weight that  should  be
    given to the public interest in deportation of foreign  criminals.  The
    wording of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules  reflects  the  basic
    principle outlined in section 117C(1) that the deportation of a foreign
    criminal is in the public interest.  The  sliding  scale  of  offending
    contained in paragraph 398(a)-(c) and sections  117C(4)-(6)  recognises
    the principle outline in section 117C(2)  that  the  more  serious  the
    offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public
    interest in deportation. The sliding scale shows that a person who  has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of more than four years will
    only be able to  resist  deportation  if  there  are  "very  compelling
    circumstances" that outweigh the public interest.  In  cases  involving
    sentences of less than four years the scheme recognises that Article  8
    rights might still outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in
    certain circumstances where the foreign criminal meets the requirements
    of the exceptions contained in paragraphs 399 and  399A  (reflected  in
    sections 117C(4)-(5)).

19.   In MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435  the  Tribunal
    found that the plain wording of the rule including the  phrase  "unduly
    harsh" does not  import  a  balancing  exercise  requiring  the  public
    interest to be weighed against the circumstances of the individual. The
    focus is solely upon an evaluation of the consequences  and  impact  of
    deportation on the individual concerned. Whether  the  consequences  of
    deportation will be  "unduly  harsh"  involves  a  considerably  higher
    threshold  than   the   consequences   merely   being   "uncomfortable,
    inconvenient,  undesirable,   unwelcome   or   merely   difficult   and
    challenging". The consequence for an individual will be "harsh" if they
    are "severe" or "bleak" and they  will  be  "unduly"  so  if  they  are
    "inordinately" or "excessively"  harsh  taking  into  account  all  the
    circumstances of the individual. The Tribunal's interpretation  in  MAB
    (USA) was broadly consistent with the observations in paragraph  46  of
    MK (Sierra Leone) as to the demanding threshold required to show that a
    deportation decision is "unduly harsh" on a child.

20.   In KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh)  Nigeria  [2015]  UKUT  00543  the
    Tribunal took a different approach. The Tribunal conducted an  analysis
    of the statutory framework, including the provisions of section  117A-D
    of the NIAA 2002. The Tribunal concluded there was nothing in the rules
    or statute to eliminate from the assessment of what is  "unduly  harsh"
    considerations of the seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
    foreign criminal. The Tribunal concluded that the phrase anticipated an
    evaluative  assessment  that  should  include  consideration   of   the
    seriousness  of  the  offence  in  order  to  reflect   the   statutory
    considerations outlined in section 117C. The Tribunal concluded:

           "24. The immigration rules, when applied in the context  of  the
           deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete code. Where an
           assessment is required to be made as to whether a  person  meets
           the requirements of para 399 of the immigration rules,  as  that
           comprises an assessment of that person's claim under  article  8
           of the ECHR, it is necessary to  have  regard,  in  making  that
           assessment, to the matters  to  which  the  Tribunal  must  have
           regard  as  a  consequence  of  the  provisions  of  s117C.   In
           particular, those include that  the  more  serious  the  offence
           committed, the greater is the public interest in deportation  of
           a foreign criminal. Therefore, the word "unduly" in  the  phrase
           "unduly harsh" requires consideration of whether, in  the  light
           of the seriousness of the  offences  committed  by  the  foreign
           criminal and the public interest considerations that  come  into
           play, the impact on  the  child,  children  or  partner  of  the
           foreign criminal being deported is inordinately  or  excessively
           harsh."

21.   On the face of it the Tribunal's conclusions in  KMO  (Nigeria)  would
    appear to accord to some extent with  the  broader  approach  taken  in
    paragraph 47 of MK (Sierra Leone) but as the Tribunal pointed  out  the
    issue did not form the focus of argument in MK (Sierra Leone)  and  was
    arguably immaterial to the case given the fact that the  appellant  had
    apparently been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  over  four
    years and would not have been eligible to rely  on  the  exceptions  to
    deportation  contained  in  paragraph  399(a)  (reflected  in   section
    117C(5)) in any event.



22.   I find that the reasoning of the Tribunal  in  MAB  (USA)  as  to  the
    focus of the enquiry under paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the  immigration
    rules (reflected in section 117C(5) NIAA 2002) is more  persuasive.  In
    clear contrast to the wording of paragraph 398  the  plain  wording  of
    paragraph 399 is not phrased in  a  way  that  gives  rise  to  a  full
    proportionality assessment. It does not state that the  impact  on  the
    child or partner must be weighed against the public interest or against
    the seriousness of the offence. Either a decision to deport  is  unduly
    harsh on an individual or it is not. Seeking to weigh  the  consequence
    of deportation against the seriousness of the offence does not make  it
    any more or less harsh on an individual.

23.   The partial  balancing  exercise  proposed  by  the  Tribunal  in  KMO
    (Nigeria) does not equate to a full proportionality  assessment,  which
    in order to be compatible with Article 8  of  the  European  Convention
    must weigh all the relevant circumstances in a particular case. For the
    purpose of  Article  8  a  partial  proportionality  assessment  is  no
    proportionality assessment at all.

24.   The Tribunal in KMO (Nigeria)  was  correct  to  point  out  that  the
    statutory framework outlined  in  sections  117A-D  of  the  NIAA  2002
    reflects the significant weight that should be  placed  on  the  public
    interest in deportation. Section 117A(2) makes clear that  a  court  or
    tribunal "must have regard" to the factors outlined in sections 117B-C.
    The scheme of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the immigration rules  is
    broadly reflected in the provisions contained in section 117C  but  the
    statutory provisions do not stand alone as a complete code  to  Article
    8. The fact that the scheme contained in the immigration rules and Part
    5A of the NIAA 2002 is tautological in nature does not detract from the
    plain wording of section 117A(2), which makes clear that the provisions
    only apply when a court or  tribunal  comes  to  consider  the  "public
    interest question" i.e. the Article 8(2) balancing exercise.

25.   It is established law that deportation decisions should be  considered
    through the lens of the immigration rules. The respondent has chosen to
    set out certain "exceptions" to the general principle that it is in the
    public interest to deport a foreign criminal. Unlike paragraph 398  the
    plain wording of those exceptions  does  not  import  the  language  of
    proportionality or expressly state that any particular matter should be
    weighed against the public interest. As  has  been  recognised  by  the
    Tribunal in all three of the above  cases  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"
    provides a demanding threshold before the exception to  deportation  is
    engaged. The very nature of such a stringent test reflects  the  weight
    that is normally given to the public interest  in  deportation  but  it
    does not follow that the  phrase  imports  a  balancing  exercise.  The
    immigration rules are said to strike a fair balance that  is  compliant
    with Article 8  of  the  European  Convention:  see  policy  statements
    outlined at paragraphs 11-13 of MF (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2014]  2  All  ER
    543.

26.   In cases involving less serious criminality the rules (echoed  in  the
    statutory framework) accept  that  if  the  effect  of  deportation  is
    "unduly harsh" on a partner or child the foreign criminal will meet the
    requirement of the exception. The focus of the enquiry is quite clearly
    on the effect that deportation would have on qualifying family members,
    which must be sufficiently serious  to  engage  the  operation  of  the
    exception.

27.   While the important principles regarding the weight  to  be  given  to
    the public interest in deportation underpin the immigration  rules  and
    statutory framework, on the face of the wording, paragraph 398  appears
    to be the only provision which directly engages  the  "public  interest
    question" for the purpose of section 117A(2) NIAA 2002.  The  provision
    places significant weight on the public  interest  that  will  only  be
    outweighed  by  other  factors  in  "very  compelling   circumstances".
    However, in order to be  compliant  with  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention, at its  heart,  paragraph  398  includes  the  question  of
    "whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for  private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2)" as outlined in section
    117A(3). It is at this point that the factors contained in section 117B
    and 117C must be considered by a court or tribunal.

Findings relating to this appeal

28.   The respondent's grounds of appeal submit that the appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules and argue that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was not entitled to conclude  that  the  effect  of
    deportation was unduly harsh on the facts of  this  case.  It  is  also
    argued that the judge erred in failing to take into account the factors
    outlined in section  117B  and  117C  NIAA  2002  and  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the public interest in deportation.

29.   It is apparent from the above analysis that it was not  necessary  for
    the judge to conduct a partial  balancing  exercising  as  part  of  is
    assessment of the "unduly harsh" test. Even if I am wrong  in  relation
    to the legal position it is apparent that the judge clearly had in mind
    the full circumstances of the case including the serious nature of  the
    offence and  the  appellant's  immigration  history.  He  set  out  the
    statutory framework at the beginning of  this  decision.  The  test  of
    "unduly harsh" is the same whether considered through the lens  of  the
    immigration rules or the statutory framework. The judge made  reference
    to MK (Sierra Leone) and it is quite clear that the  stringent  meaning
    of the phrase "unduly harsh" was at the forefront of his mind  when  he
    made  his  assessment.  He  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    citizenship, age and family circumstances of the children  as  well  as
    the unchallenged  expert  evidence  of  the  social  worker.  He  heard
    evidence from witnesses and was in a position to assess the  effect  of
    deportation in light of  the  other  evidence  before  him.  For  these
    reasons I  conclude  that  the  grounds  are  phrased  in  terms  of  a
    disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal decision and do not  disclose
    any material errors of law.

30.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the
    decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

[pic]
Signed                                                         Date:      30
November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
