
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01105/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                       and Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BCT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr S Walker, Senior Office Home Presenting Officer
Respondent:    Mr  M  Schwenk,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Parker  Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is aged 27 years and a citizen of  DRC.   On  05  October
    2012 the Appellant received the conventional notification on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State") that he was liable to be deported from the United Kingdom under
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and was invited to show  cause
    why deportation should not occur.  This appeal has its origins  in  the
    ensuing decision made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  19
    March 2013, which rejected the case made by the Appellant and confirmed
    that section 32(5) would apply.

 2.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the   "FtT")
    successfully.  The issue for the Judge was whether the Appellant's case
    came within either, or both, of the statutory exceptions which disapply
    the automatic deportation provisions  where  it  is  demonstrated  that
    deportation would infringe ECHR rights or contravene the obligations of
    the United Kingdom under the Refugee Convention.   The  Judge  resolved
    both issues in the Appellant's favour, allowing his appeal on  each  of
    these grounds.  His reasons for acceding to the asylum ground of appeal
    are expressed in the following terms:

         "I have considered the policy bulletin and the bundle of  objective
         evidence ...

         I have considered the High Court decision in the case of  P.   This
         Appellant on account of his convictions and the length of  time  he
         has been absent from DRC since  he  was  aged  17  years  would  be
         questioned by professional,  skilled  and  experienced  immigration
         officers and  there  is  a  real  and  substantial  risk  that  his
         offending which resulted in a sentence of more than 12 months would
         have been reported in some  form  and  readily  identified  through
         internet searches. He would not be able to hide the  fact  of  this
         convictions in the face of interrogation designed  to  elicit  that
         very fact.  There would be a real and substantial risk  that  as  a
         criminal deportee he would be subjected to further imprisonment and
         ill treatment if returned to DRC.  I  have  considered  the  policy
         bulletin and even allowing for the further objective material there
         is no certainty that interrogation would be a case  of  asking  him
         some questions to clarify his situation rather than  some  form  of
         violence that would include ill treatment or torture ....

         I therefore find that he is at risk of persecution or serious  harm
         on return to DRC and internal relocation is not viable, as he would
         be detained upon arrival."

    In the immediately ensuing paragraph, the Judge stated:

         "The Appellant has also made a claim under the  Human  Rights  Act.
         The Appellant claims his return would be a breach of Articles 2 and
         3 of the ECHR.  The facts upon which he  relies  are  identical  to
         those in his application under the Qualification Regulations  [sic]
         and to [sic] humanitarian protection."

    Followed by:

         "Given my conclusions I find the decision  appealed  against  would
         cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of the law  or  [sic]  its
         obligations under the 1950 Convention."

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  in  respect  of
    each of the grounds canvassed on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    These were, respectively:

    (a)  The Judge's conclusion in  respect  of  asylum  was  unsustainable
         since the status of foreign criminal did not render the  Respondent
         a member of a particular social  group  for  the  purposes  of  the
         Refugee Convention.

    (b)  The  Judge  "...  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  the
         [Respondent's] offence will be known to the  authorities  when  his
         offence was not high profile ....  [and  in  any  event]  ....   as
         stated in the Home Offices Country Policy bulletin of February 2014
         .... the [DRC authorities]  are  not  interested  in  the  criminal
         activities of their nationals outside of the [DRC] even  if  it  is
         known and therefore would not have an interest ....   The  Tribunal
         has  simply  dismissed  this   bulletin   ..    with   barely   any
         consideration ...

         Furthermore, the Home Office has now published an  updated  version
         of this Policy bulletin on 22 October  2014  which  reinforces  the
         previous bulletin and clearly shows that the [Respondent] would not
         be at risk on return ... "

    There followed an error of law hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

 4. By its decision dated 27 February 2015 the Upper Tribunal held that the
    decision of the  FtT  is  vitiated  by  material  error  of  law.   The
    substance of the error found is identifiable in the following excerpts:



         "While the Judge stated that he had regard to the Policy  bulletin,
         there is no analysis of the new material contained ....

         It is insufficient in my judgment to merely recite it ...   It  was
         incumbent on the Judge to analyse and engage with that new evidence
         ....

         There was no critique of the material and why,  if  it  merited  no
         weight, that was the case."

    While it was acknowledged that, in principle, one course  open  to  the
    FtT was to reject the evidence in question on a properly reasoned basis
    this did not occur.   Finally,  certain  of  the  FtT's  findings  were
    preserved.

 5. The final determination of the appeal was, properly,  deferred  on  the
    ground that the Upper Tribunal was, at that time, scheduled to  hear  a
    group of specially selected appeals with a view to promulgating  a  new
    country guidance decision in respect of  DRC.   The  conjoined  appeals
    were duly  heard,  giving  rise  to  the  decision  in  BM  and  Others
    (Returnees: Criminal and Non-Criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293 (IAC).  As the
    title indicates, this decision has the designation of country guidance.
     It decided as follows:

    (i)  A national of DRC who has acquired the status of foreign  national
         offender in the United Kingdom is not, simply  by  virtue  of  such
         status, exposed to a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  or
         treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in  the  event  of  enforced
         return to the DRC.

    (ii) A national of the DRC whose attempts to acquire refugee status  in
         the United Kingdom have been unsuccessful  is  not,  without  more,
         exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  for
         proscribed treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR  in  the  event  of
         enforced return to DRC.

    (iii)    A national of the  DRC  who  has  a  significant  and  visible
         profile within the APARECO (UK) is, in the event  of  returning  to
         his country of origin, at real risk of persecution for a Convention
         reason or serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by
         virtue of falling within one of the  risk  categories  ...   in  MM
         [2007] UK AIT 00023.  Those  belonging  to  this  category  include
         persons who are, or are perceived to be, leaders, office bearers or
         spokes persons.  As a general rule, mere rank and file members  are
         unlikely to fall within this category.  However, each case will  be
         fact sensitive, with particular attention directed  to  the  likely
         knowledge and perception of DRC state agents.

    (iv) The DRC authorities have an interest in certain types of convicted
         or suspected offenders, namely those  who  have  unexecuted  prison
         sentences in the DRC or in respect of  whom  there  are  unexecuted
         arrest warrants in the DRC or who allegedly committed  an  offence,
         such as document fraud, when departing the DRC.  Such  persons  are
         at real risk of imprisonment for lengthy  periods  and,  hence,  of
         treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

 6. In one of the conjoined appeals the  Upper  Tribunal  made  a  separate
    reported decision. See BM (False Passport) [2015] UKUT 467  (IAC).   In
    this case, the Tribunal took the opportunity to emphasise that a person
    claiming to belong to any of the aforementioned  risk  categories  will
    not be at risk of persecution unless likely to come to the attention of
    the DRC authorities.  Thus in every case there will be an intense focus
    on matters such as publicity and individual prominence [and others] and
    how these matters impact on the individual claimant.

DECISION

 7. At the hearing we drew to the attention of the parties' representatives
    the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance  Note  2011,
    number 2.  The subject matter of this instrument is reporting decisions
    of this Chamber.  We highlighted in particular paragraph 11,  which  we
    need not reproduce.  In short, since the decision in BM and Others  has
    the designation, or kite mark, of Country Guidance ("CG"),  it  is,  at
    this moment in time, binding on us.   Mr  Schwenk,  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, confirmed, in response to the  pre-hearing  case  management
    directions, that there is no application to adduce any  fresh  evidence
    and, further, that in this remaking exercise the Appellant would not be
    adducing any evidence at all.

 8. Mr Schwenk concurred with the Tribunal's  assessment  of  his  skeleton
    argument, namely that this does not bring the appeal within any of  the
    categories identified in paragraph 11 of the Practice  Direction  which
    would enable this Tribunal to reconsider the decision in BM and Others.
     In short, there is absent from the equation any fresh evidence or  any
    subsequent decision addressing further issues not considered in BM.  Mr
    Schwenk further  confirmed  that  the  contentions  formulated  in  his
    skeleton argument are based  on  certain  of  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to the Court of Appeal has been sought  in  BM.   We  append
    hereto the decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing such application. We
    draw attention particularly to the conclusion that it -

         "... falls measurably short of satisfying the appeal test  viz  the
         requirement  that  the  application  for  permission  raises   some
         important point of principle or practice or  generates  some  other
         compelling reason warranting the grant of permission."

    Mr Schwenk indicated that his instructions are that the  Appellant  BBM
    has applied to the Court of Appeal for permission to  appeal.   Relying
    on this fact, he requested that this appeal be adjourned.

 9. We ruled against the adjournment application, mainly on  the  basis  of
    the manifestly unpromising grounds upon which BBM is seeking permission
    to appeal and having  regard  to  the  uncompromising  terms  in  which
    permission was refused by the Upper Tribunal.  We consider it timely to
    draw attention to the following statement of Jackson LJ in AB (Sudan) -
    v - SSHD [2013] ECWA Civ 921, at [32]:

         "In my view the power to stay immigration cases  pending  a  future
         appellate decision in other litigation is a  power  which  must  be
         exercised cautiously and only when, in the interests of justice, it
         is necessary to do so. It may be necessary to grant a stay  if  the
         impending appellate decision is likely to have a critical impact on
         the current litigation. If courts or tribunals exercise their power
         to stay cases too freely, the immigration system (which is  already
         overloaded with work) will become even more clogged up."

    This statement is informed by its full context: see [24]-[32] and [50]-
    [51].

10. We proceeded to determine the appeal substantively.  In pronouncing our
    decision, we noted the acknowledgement of Mr  Schwenk,  properly  made,
    that his client's case does not fit within any of the  risk  categories
    declared in BBM.  Accordingly, giving effect to Guidance Note  2011  no
    2, we allow the Secretary of State's appeal.  The  effect  of  this  is
    that the FtT should have  dismissed  the  Respondent's  appeal  and  we
    remake its decision accordingly.
                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 15 September 2015

                                  APPENDIX

           IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      APPLICATION FOR  PERMISSION TO APPEAL TO THE
                               COURT OF APPEAL

                                                    Appeal No: DA/01135/2013
                                  BBM (DRC)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Heard before: The President, The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey and Upper
Tribunal Judge Jordan


                                        Final date of hearing: 28 April 2015


Nature of hearing:  Appeal by the Appellant to the Upper Tribunal from the
First-tier Tribunal




Date of notification of determination:  02 June 2015


Result of hearing:    Appeal dismissed.


Decision


The application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.
 Please see attached.







Signed:  [pic]


President of the Upper Tribunal
Dated:   09 July 2015



                              BBM (DRC) - SSHD


                         Appeal No.:  DA 01135 2013



   1. The first ground challenges the Tribunal's evaluation  of  a  discrete
      segment of evidence.  It fails to recognise that it was  incumbent  on
      the Tribunal to interpret and evaluate the evidence.  This is what the
      Tribunal did in its decision.  The standard for intervention  on  this
      issue is that of irrationality (see Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC  ...)
      it is considered that the Tribunal's evaluation of this  evidence  and
      its associated findings fall comfortably  within  the  bounds  of  the
      standard of rationality.

   2. The second ground is, in principle, indistinguishable from  the  first
      and, hence, the same response is appropriate.

   3. This is  a  "cherry  picking"  ground  which  fails  to  consider  the
      determination  as  a  whole,  overlooks  the  basis  upon  which  this
      Appellant's  case  was  made,  neglects  the  generic   findings   and
      conclusions of the Tribunal and airbrushes [100] of the determination.

   4. The issue of law framed in this ground arises in a vacuum, given  that
      there was  no  "contest"  between  the  "unduly  harsh"  criterion  in
      paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rules and that of "very compelling
      circumstances" in paragraph 398(a). This issue simply did  not  arise.
      Furthermore, this ground is advanced without any reference  whatsoever
      to authority, in circumstances where there  is  substantial  Court  of
      Appeal guidance on the "very compelling circumstances" standard.

Conclusion

   5. For the reasons digested above it is concluded that  this  application
      for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal falls measurably short
      of satisfying the second appeal test  viz  the  requirement  that  the
      application for permission raises some important point of principle or
      practice or generates some  other  compelling  reason  warranting  the
      grant of permission.

