
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DA/01083/2013
      DA/01084/2013
      IA/46935/2013
      IA/46927/2013
      IA/46940/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 19 January 2015                   |On 23 January 2015                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                         Poornimah Rungoo First Appellant
                         Manraj Munroo    Second Appellant
                         Keshav Rungoo    Third Appellant

                                     and

           The Secretary of State for the Home Department     Respondent

                                     AND

                                   Between

             Secretary of State for the Home Department   (appellant)

                                     and

                           Greata Rungoo    (respondent)


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin, of Counsel, instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction


 1. I shall refer to the parties as follows:


         Poornimah Rungoo (born 2 August 1965) as the first appellant;
         Manraj Munroo (born 15 August 1958) as the second appellant;
         Keshav Rungoo (born 11 July 1991) as the third appellant;
         Greata Rungoo (born 8 December 1994) as the fourth appellant; and
         the Secretary of State as the respondent

 2. The appellants are nationals of Mauritius. The first appellant (aged 49
    years) is the wife of the second appellant (aged 56 years).  The  third
    and fourth appellants are their son and daughter, respectively, aged 23
    years and 20 years respectively. The first  appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 22 September 2004 and the remaining appellants on  23
    October 2004, aged, respectively, 39, 46, 13 and 9 years 10 months.

 3. These appeals concern a determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)
    (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R Sullivan and Non-Legal Member  Mrs.
    W Jordan) (hereafter the "panel").

 4. The panel found that the fourth appellant satisfied the requirements of
    para 276ADE(iv) of the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC
    395 (as amended) (the "IRs") and therefore allowed her appeal under the
    IRs as well as on human rights grounds, Article 8.   It  dismissed  the
    appeals of the remaining appellants on all grounds.

 5. There were five appeals before the panel as follows:

    i.     The first  appellant  had  appealed  (DA/01083/2013)  against  a
         deportation order dated 10 May 2013. Reasons were given in a letter
         of the same date as to why s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  (the
         2007 Act") applies.

    ii.    The second appellant  had  appealed  against  two  decisions  as
         follows:

         (a)      an appeal (DA/01084/2013) against a deportation  order  of
             11 May 2013 as a family member of the first appellant. Reasons
             were given in a letter of the same date as to why  s.32(5)  of
             the 2007 Act applies; and

         (b)      an appeal (IA/46935/2013) against a decision of 23 October
             2013 to refuse to vary leave to enter or remain and to  remove
             him by way of directions  set  under  s.47  of  the  (Removal:
             person with statutorily extended leave)  of  the  Immigration,
             Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (the "2006 Act").

    iii.   The third  appellant  had  appealed  (IA/46927/2013)  against  a
         decision of 23 October 2013 to refuse to vary  leave  to  enter  or
         remain and to remove him by way of directions set under s.47 of the
         2006 Act.

    iv.    The fourth appellant  had  appealed  (IA/46940/2013)  against  a
         decision of 23 October 2013 to refuse to vary  leave  to  enter  or
         remain and to remove her by way of directions set under s.47 of the
         2006 Act.

    The third and fourth appellants had also had  deportation  orders  made
    against them as family members of the first appellant but their appeals
    against those decisions (DA/01086/2013 and DA/01087/2013) were  allowed
    in a determination of the Upper Tribunal dated 9 October 2013,  on  the
    ground that, as they were over 18 years  of  age,  they  could  not  be
    deported as family members of the first appellant.  Accordingly,  these
    appeals were not before the panel.

 6. The decision to deport the  first  appellant  was  made  following  her
    conviction on 25 November 2011 at Isleworth Crown Court of one  offence
    of possession/control of an identity document with  improper  intention
    contrary to s.4(1) and (2) of the  Identity  Documents  Act  2010.  She
    bought a passport she knew to be false, her motive  being  to  use  the
    passport to avoid the necessity of paying student fees  in  the  United
    Kingdom by pretending to be a French national. On 14 December 2011, she
    was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment.

 7. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  to  the
    respondent to challenge the decision allowing the appeal of the  fourth
    appellant. Permission was also granted to the first, second  and  third
    appellants to challenge the decisions dismissing their appeals.

 8. At the hearing before me, the parties agreed that, as  the  grounds  in
    relation to the appeals of the first, second and third appellants  rely
    upon the fact that the fourth appellant's appeal was allowed, I  should
    first consider whether there is a material error of law in the  panel's
    decision to allow her appeal such that  that  decision  should  be  set
    aside. My decision on this point will have a bearing on  the  remaining
    appeals, for reasons which will become apparent (see [22] below).

 9. The directions to the parties for the hearings before me made it  clear
    that the hearings on 19 January 2015 would be limited  to  whether  the
    decisions of the panel on the appeals should be set aside. However, Mr.
    Martin and Mr. Tufan  confirmed  they  were  able  to  proceed  when  I
    proposed hearing submissions and (on a provisional basis and subject to
    whether I decided that the relevant decisions fell  to  be  set  aside)
    oral evidence (to the extent that the appellants wished  to  give  oral
    evidence) in any re-making of the decisions on their appeals (if  their
    appeals were to be re-made).

10. On  that  basis  and  with  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  I  heard
    submissions on all issues and oral evidence from the fourth  appellant,
    followed by oral evidence from the third appellant. Mr. Martin did  not
    wish to call the first or second appellants.

11. I shall not  repeat  the  immigration  history  and  other  information
    explained by the panel with great care in its determination.

    ASSESSMENT

    The respondent's appeal:

12. The panel gave its reasons for allowing the fourth  appellant's  appeal
    at [74]-[79]. The panel found that the fourth appellant satisfied  para
    276ADE(iv), in that, she had lived in the United  Kingdom  continuously
    for more than 7 years. They found that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the United Kingdom. The panel's  reasons  for  this
    finding may be summarised as follows:

    i.     The fourth appellant had attended primary and  secondary  school
         in the United Kingdom. She had attained a  number  of  GCSE  and  A
         levels and had been offered a  place  at  the  University  of  West
         London to take a foundation course leading to a law course. She had
         enquired about studying law in Mauritius and  understood  that,  as
         she does not speak French, she  would  have  to  undertake  further
         studies to be eligible for a university place. The  panel  accepted
         that her removal would disrupt her education.

    ii.    She was a member of a church group and was well settled  in  the
         United Kingdom.

    iii.   She had lived in the United Kingdom from the age of 9  years  to
         18 years, years which were recognised as significant  (Azimi-Moayed
         and others (decisions affecting children; onwards  appeals)  [2013]
         UKUT 197 (IAC)).

    iv.    The panel relied upon its earlier findings, made in relation  to
         the first and second appellants,  as  to  whether  there  would  be
         accommodation and maintenance for the family in Mauritius. It found
         that the second  appellant  had  sold  his  interest  in  a  family
         property in Mauritius when he knew that there was a  risk  that  he
         and his family members would be deported or required the leave  the
         United Kingdom. It had not been  shown  that  the  first  appellant
         would not be able to rent property in Mauritius or that  she  would
         be unable to work in Mauritius. It had  not  been  shown  that  the
         second appellant would have to retire in Mauritius earlier than  in
         the United Kingdom.

      v.   The panel rejected the evidence of the family that, as  converts
         from Hinduism to Christianity, they would suffer societal  problems
         in Mauritius.

13. The panel also said, at [77]-[78] as follows:

         "77.     We accept the fourth appellant's evidence that hers  is  a
         very close family and she turns to her  mother  in  particular  for
         advice. The fourth appellant has  not  established  an  independent
         life. She was offered the opportunity to  live  on  campus  at  the
         University of West London but  did  not  apply  for  accommodation,
         preferring to live at home. We accept that she finds  it  difficult
         to imagine living in Mauritius and does not want to  return  there.
         We accept that it will be very upsetting for her  to  be  separated
         from her parents and brother. We accept that it will not be as easy
         for her to turn to her mother for advice if her mother is overseas.
         However, the fourth appellant is now an adult.  We  asked  to  what
         extent she relied on her parents; they support her financially  and
         her mother is always there for her. Financial  support  and  advice
         could in our view continue even if the fourth  appellant's  parents
         are overseas albeit  that  the  fourth  appellant  would  not  have
         regular face to face contact with them.

         78.      We find that it was not reasonable to  expect  the  fourth
         appellant to leave the United Kingdom. She qualified for  leave  to
         remain on the basis of private life under para 276ADE(iv)."

14. Having concluded that the fourth appellant satisfied  the  requirements
    of para 276ADE(iv), the panel considered Article 8 outside the  IRs  as
    follows ([79]):

         "79.     We accept that the fourth appellant has  both  family  and
         private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Returning  the   [fourth]
         appellant's parents and brother to Mauritius would mean  separating
         the fourth appellant from them. There would be an interference with
         the family life. We are not satisfied that the interference  is  so
         serious that the fourth appellant would be forced  to  abandon  her
         plans to study in the United Kingdom. It was clear to us  that  the
         fourth appellant is an intelligent young woman and we are satisfied
         that she is capable of living independently. In our view it  cannot
         be said that a parent's or sibling's wish to support  a  university
         student is a compelling compassionate circumstance  justifying  for
         any of them a grant of leave outside the Rules."

         (my emphasis)

15. The respondent challenged the decision allowing the  appeal  under  the
    IRs, with reference to para  276ADE(iv)  as  well  as  Article  8.  Her
    grounds may be summarised as follows:

    As to para 276ADE(iv):

    i.     The panel had failed to engage with the public interest factors;
         in particular, the prevention of disorder and crime, in relation to
         the first appellant's offending and her reasons for her  offending,
         which were linked to the financial support of the third and  fourth
         appellants.

    ii.    The panel had not lawfully engaged with all of the evidence. The
         fourth appellant's private life did not disclose  any  aspect  that
         could  not  be  re-established,  in  its  essential  elements,   in
         Mauritius. As the fourth appellant had  grown  up  in  a  Mauritian
         household, she will be familiar with the cultural and social  norms
         of her country of  birth:  she  will  be  able  to  rely  upon  her
         parents/brother for support with reintegration.

    iii.   There is provision for education in Mauritius. It would  not  be
         unreasonable to expect her to  apply  herself,  with  her  family's
         support, with a view to studying in Mauritius.  If  she  wished  to
         undertake studies in the United Kingdom, she could apply for  entry
         clearance as a student from Mauritius.

    As to Article 8:

    iv.    The panel's findings on Article 8 appear to relate  directly  to
         their findings under the IRs. There was no indication that they had
         considered whether there were any exceptional circumstances outside
         the IRs.

    v.     The fourth appellant and the members of her family  had  entered
         the United Kingdom in  a  temporary  capacity  and  could  have  no
         legitimate expectation that they could continue  their  family,  or
         private lives, in the United Kingdom if the IRs were not satisfied.

    vi.    Non-British nationals do not have a right to  education  in  the
         United Kingdom (Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV  (Philippines)
         v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874).

16. Mr. Tufan relied upon the grounds. He submitted that  Azimi-Moayed  was
    decided before the IRs were amended  by  HC  194.  He  submitted  that,
    essentially, the panel had allowed the  fourth  appellant's  appeal  in
    order to allow her to pursue her studies in the United Kingdom.

17. As to i., Mr. Martin submitted that  the  state's  interests  were  not
    relevant in deciding whether it was reasonable for the fourth appellant
    to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  the  fourth  appellant's
    circumstances did not to  need  to  be  balanced  against  the  state's
    interests in deciding whether it would be reasonable for her  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. Mr. Martin submitted  that  the  remainder  of  the
    respondent's grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement  with  the
    pane's finding.

18. I have not had the benefit of any authorities on the  question  whether
    the public interest must be taken into account in deciding  whether  it
    is reasonable for an individual to leave the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    purposes of para 276ASDE(vi). The amendments of the IRs on 9 July  2012
    did not herald a change in the principles applied in assessing  Article
    8 claims. Prior to 9 July  2012,  any  assessment  of  whether  it  was
    reasonable for an individual  to  return  to  their  home  country  was
    considered on the basis of the  circumstances  of  the  individual  and
    others affected by the decision. The state's interests featured in  the
    balancing exercise  after  findings  as  to  reasonableness  and  other
    relevant findings had been made. I therefore agree with Mr. Martin that
    consideration of whether it is reasonable for the fourth  appellant  to
    return to Mauritius did not require the state's interests to  be  taken
    into account. I therefore reject the respondent's ground i.

19. As to the remaining grounds, both in relation to  para  276ADE(iv)  and
    Article 8, I have to say that, whilst I may not have reached  the  same
    finding myself, these grounds do amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    panel's reasoning. I accept that it appears that the panel  placed  too
    much weight on the fourth appellant's desire to  study  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that, if she were required to leave the United Kingdom  and
    live in Mauritius with her parents and brother, this would disrupt  her
    studies. This much is evident from the panel's reasoning  at  [74]-[79]
    as a whole, but, in particular,  the  sentence  in  [79]  that  I  have
    emboldened in the quote above.

20. However, the panel gave other reasons as well, including the fact  that
    the fourth appellant had attended primary and secondary school  in  the
    United Kingdom and that the time she had spent in the  United  Kingdom,
    was significant, given the determination of the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-
    Moayed. Mr. Tufan asked me not to rely upon Azimi-Moayed on  the  basis
    that it was decided before HC 194 amended the IRs. I do not accept that
    HC 194 has made any material difference to the principles applied prior
    to 9 July 2012 in assessing whether it is reasonable for a child  under
    18 to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Indeed,  the  very  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State decided to include the requirements set out in  para
    276ADE(vi) is support for the view that para 276ADE(vi)  reflected  the
    then jurisprudence on the subject.

21. I therefore dismiss the respondent's appeal against the decision of the
    panel to allow the appeal of the fourth appellant under para 276ADE.

The first, second and third appellant's appeals

22. The grounds of the first, second and third appellants may be summarised
    as follows:

    i.     The  second  appellant  asserts  that,  given  that  the  fourth
         appellant's appeal was allowed under para 276ADE, he satisfies  the
         requirements of Appendix  FM  and  the  panel  was  wrong  to  find
         otherwise. It is contended that, if the second appellant  satisfies
         Appendix FM, this will impact upon the  Article  8  claims  of  the
         third appellant and the first appellant.

    ii.    However, even if the second appellant does not satisfy  Appendix
         FM, the panel erred in its consideration of the  Article  8  claims
         outside the IRs of the first, second and third appellants, in that,
         it failed to consider, firstly, whether family life continued to be
         enjoyed between  each  of  them  and  the  fourth  appellant,  and,
         secondly, the impact upon each of them of being separated from  the
         fourth appellant. It is accepted that the situation  of  the  first
         appellant is different owing to the fact  that  she  is  a  foreign
         criminal. However, if the Article 8 claims outside the IRs  of  the
         second and third  appellants  fall  to  be  re-assessed,  then  her
         Article 8 claim should also  be  re-assessed.  In  essence,  it  is
         contended that the panel failed to apply Beoku-Betts v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39.

The second appellant: Appendix FM

23. I  now  consider  the  second  appellant's  challenge  to  the  panel's
    determination on the basis that the  fourth  appellant  satisfies  para
    276ADE(iv) of the IRs.

24. Mr Martin submitted  that,  if  the  fourth  appellant  satisfies  para
    276ADE(iv), then the second appellant qualifies  Appendix  FM  and  the
    panel was wrong to conclude otherwise.   Although  E-LTRPT.1.1.  states
    that all of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2 must  be
    met, it is not necessary for me to go beyond E-LTRPT.2.4.  for  reasons
    which will become clear. The relevant paragraphs are:

         "Section E-LTRPT: Eligibility for limited leave to remain as a
         parent


         "E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a parent
         all of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2. must be
         met.


         Relationship requirements


         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-


             (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or
             where the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant
             was first granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a
             parent under this Appendix, must not have formed an
             independent family unit or be leading an independent life;
             (b) living in the UK; and
             (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or
             (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
             immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph
             EX.1. applies.


         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-


             (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for
             the child or the child normally lives with the applicant and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK);or
             (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives
             must be-
                  (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;
                  (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here includes
                  a person who has been in a relationship with the applicant
                  for less than two years prior to the date of application);
                  and
                  (iii)      the applicant must not be eligible to apply for
                  leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix.


         E-LTRPT.2.4.


             (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-
                  (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child, or that
                  the child normally lives with them; or
                  (ii)       access rights to the child; and
             (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
             and intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
             upbringing."

25. At [65] of its determination, the panel said that the second  appellant
    did not qualify under Appendix FM because the fourth appellant was  not
    settled in the United  Kingdom.  I  agree  with  Mr  Martin  the  panel
    overlooked the fact  that  E-LTRPT.2.2(d)  was  an  alternative  to  E-
    LTRPT.2.2(c ). The fourth appellant had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
    application. Given the panel's finding that it  would  be  unreasonable
    for the fourth appellant to leave the United  Kingdom  (which  has  not
    been vitiated by error of law) paragraph EX.1 applied.

26. However, the question is whether  this  error  was  material.  In  this
    respect, Mr Martin submitted that a parent can satisfy E-LTRPT.2.3  and
    2.4 even if he/she is still living with the other parent and  therefore
    there  is  no  question  of  either   parent   having   sole   parental
    responsibility. He submitted that  a  narrow  interpretation  of  these
    paragraphs would give parents who are separated an advantage over those
    who are still living together, which he submitted would  be  illogical.
    He submitted that the sole responsibility rule  is  irrational  and  in
    breach of Article 8. If it is unreasonable for the fourth appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom and paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.3 and  2.4  were  not
    construed widely, she  would  lose  daily  contact  with  both  of  her
    parents.

27.  I  cannot  accept  Mr  Martin's  submissions.  Any  challenge  to  the
    lawfulness of E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4 must be raised elsewhere. This is not
    the forum to raise that issue.

28. It is plain that, in order to satisfy E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4,  the  second
    appellant must have sole responsibility.  The  interpretation  that  Mr
    Martin suggests is not merely a  wide  interpretation,  it  would  mean
    effectively disapplying E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4. It  is  not  open  to  the
    Upper Tribunal to do so. On that basis, it is  plain  that  the  second
    appellant cannot satisfy Appendix FM, notwithstanding the error made by
    the panel at [65].

29. Accordingly, I have concluded that the panel's error  at  [65]  of  its
    determination is not material.

The first, second and third appellants: Article 8 outside the IRs

30. At [66] of its determination the panel said, in relation to the  second
    appellant's appeal, as follows:

         "66.     As to Article 8 we accept that the  second  appellant  has
         established family life and private life in the United Kingdom  and
         that the [decision to deport him as  a  family  member]  and  [his]
         immigration decision interfere with the right to respect for  those
         rights. However we are bound by Nagre and Gulshan (Article 8 -  new
         Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC). In our view this
         is not a case in  which  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
         sufficiently recognised by the Rules. The [decision to  deport  the
         second  appellant]  and  [his]  immigration  decision  are  lawful,
         justified and proportionate."

         (my emphasis)

31. Mr Martin submitted that, in stating that it was bound by R  (Nagre)  v
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  720  (Admin)  and
    Gulshan, the panel  had  failed  to  consider  the  second  appellant's
    Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules. He  submitted  that,  in
    relation to the third appellant, the panel had considered  whether  his
    relationship with Ms Ramandeep Kaur amounted to family life but it  did
    not mention at all whether he  enjoyed  family  life  with  the  fourth
    appellant.

32. I do not accept that the panel failed to consider whether  family  life
    was being enjoyed between the fourth appellant and each of  the  first,
    second and third appellants. It is clear from the first  two  sentences
    of [79] that the panel found that family life was being enjoyed.

33. Mr Martin accepts that the panel considered the impact  on  the  fourth
    appellant of being separated from the other members of her family. This
    must be right because the contents of [77]  of the determination do not
    assist  in  understanding  why  the  panel  found  that  it  would   be
    unreasonable for the fourth appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    Similarly, the contents of [79] do not assist in  understanding why the
    fourth appellant's claim to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis
    of Article 8 outside the IRs succeeded.

34. It is plain that the panel considered that the relationship between the
    fourth appellant and her mother, the first appellant, was  the  closest
    in this family. Although it did not mention in terms at [77]  and  [79]
    the impact on the first appellant of being separated  from  the  fourth
    appellant, it must plainly have had that in  mind.  Indeed,  the  final
    sentence of [79] suggests that the panel must  have  had  in  mind  the
    impact of separation on the first, second and third appellants,  as  it
    specifically considered their wish to remain in the United  Kingdom  to
    support the fourth appellant through her studies. The sentence at  [66]
    of the determination that I have emboldened above  also  suggests  that
    the second appellant's claim outside the IRs was considered.  When  the
    determination is read as a whole,  it  is  plain  that  the  panel  was
    acutely aware of the effect its decision would have on the  family,  in
    that, if the fourth appellant remained in the United Kingdom, she would
    be separated from the rest of her family. There is no reason  to  think
    that it did not consider the impact on  the  first,  second  and  third
    appellants of being separated from the fourth appellant.

35. However, even if I am wrong, I am  satisfied  that  any  error  is  not
    material. The panel plainly found that the impact of separation on  the
    fourth appellant was not such as to justify the  remaining  members  of
    her family being allowed to remain. She is the youngest member of  this
    family and would be left to cope on her own in the United  Kingdom  not
    having lived on her own previously, whereas the  other  appellants  are
    not only older, they would have each other in Mauritius.  In  addition,
    in their cases, the balancing  exercise  required  to  be  carried  out
    outside the IRs in relation to proportionality meant  that  the  public
    interest in their removal had to be taken into account, given that  the
    second and third appellants did not qualify for leave under the IRs and
    the first appellant's criminal  conviction.  There  was  no  compelling
    evidence before the panel that the impact on  each  of  them  would  be
    greater than the impact on the fourth appellant such that, taking  into
    account that they would have the support of each  other  and  balancing
    their circumstances against the public interest in their removal, their
    removal would be disproportionate.

36. I am therefore satisfied that, if the panel had  considered  the  issue
    (if, that is, they had not done so),  it  is  inconceivable  that  they
    would have concluded that the impact on the  first,  second  and  third
    appellants of being separated from the fourth appellant was such as  to
    render their removal disproportionate.

37. It is therefore not necessary for me to consider the oral evidence that
    the third appellant and the fourth appellant gave before me.

38. I dismiss the appeals of the first, second and third appellants to  the
    Upper Tribunal.


    Decision


    The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal on the five appeals before  it
    did not involve the making of an error on a point of law such that  any
    of the decisions fell to be set aside.



Signed      Date: 22 January 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

