
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01272/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2016                             |On 25 November 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    S N D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order for the sake to the Appellant's children.

    2. The appellant did not attend the hearing.  After  I  had  heard  the
       case I received a message from my clerk to say  that  the  appellant
       had reported at the Hatton Cross Hearing Centre and she  arrived  at
       the Royal Courts of Justice shortly before I finished my  list.   By
       that time this appeal had been heard.  I explained to her  that  she
       had been represented by experienced Counsel and  that  the  decision
       would be sent to her.  I  also  assured  her  that  I  accepted  her
       explanation for her late arrival (of course she was not  obliged  to
       attend at all) and that whatever decision I reached it would not  be
       because she failed to attend the hearing.

    3. This is an appeal by a citizen of Jamaica born in 1977  against  the
       decision of the respondent on 7 June 2013 to make her the subject of
       a deportation order  on  the  grounds  that  her  removal  would  be
       conducive to the public good.

    4. The appeal has previously  been  determined  unsatisfactorily.   The
       appeal was heard again and dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Nightingale  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  18  July   2016.
       Permission to appeal was given on one ground only which  I  set  out
       below:

  "Fourthly, the Judge is further incorrect at paragraph  130  to  describe
  the evidence of the Appellant's current parental  relationship  with  [K]
  (H3) as her 'unsupported word'.  In fact,  there  was  support  for  this
  evidence in the letter of Andrea Trulli dated 23 May  2016,  her  Support
  Worker: 'currently the child is cared for  by  his  paternal  grandmother
  (the perpetrator's mother) during the week and stays with Ms  Daley  over
  the weekends (from Fri-Mon).'  Thus the finding on current family life is
  fundamentally flawed."

    5. I confirmed at the start of the hearing that it  was  understood  by
       both parties that the appeal was limited to this one ground.

    6. Given the limited nature of the appeal I do not think  it  necessary
       or even helpful to set out all the matters  that  were  relevant  to
       Judge Nightingale's decision.

    7. In summary  the  appellant  first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
       December 1999.  She made an unsuccessful application for asylum  but
       remained in the  United  Kingdom  and  in  March  2005  applied  for
       indefinite leave to remain but the application was refused.

    8. The appellant was removed to Jamaica on 29 May 2006.

    9. On 17 February 2008 the appellant was admitted to the United Kingdom
       as a family visitor.  She made various applications  to  extend  her
       stay.  They were unsuccessful but she remained.

   10. The  appellant  then  made  a  further  claim  for  asylum.  It  was
       unsuccessful but she was given discretionary leave to  remain  until
       1 October 2011 while Family Court proceedings were ongoing.

   11.  In  October  2011  she  applied  for  humanitarian  protection   or
       discretionary leave.

   12. She was sent a "liability to deportation notice  and  questionnaire"
       which she returned on 16 May 2012.  She made further representations
       seeking asylum.  She was refused asylum  and  on  6  June  2015  the
       respondent decided to deport her.

   13. The appellant's family history  summarised  in  Judge  Nightingale's
       decision makes for sad reading.

   14. The child born in 1999 and another born in 1995 were taken into care
       in November 2003.

   15. A third child was born in March 2002 and  a  fourth  child  born  in
       August 2005.  They were in care and had been adopted.

   16. The appellant claims to have a fifth child born in Jamaica.

   17. Her sixth child was born in 2010 and is in the care of  his  father.
       Judge Nightingale noted  that  "there  appears  to  have  been  some
       supervised contact with the appellant".

   18. Her seventh child, the "K" mentioned herein, was born in  July  2013
       and  so  is  now  3  years  old.   She  lives  with   her   paternal
       grandparents.  The nature of the appellant's contact with her was  a
       matter of dispute.

   19. Judge Nightingale summarised the appellant's convictions  from  July
       2000 until May  2016.   It  may  be  the  case  that  the  appellant
       genuinely cannot remember all of her  court  appearances  but  I  am
       satisfied that Judge Nightingale's summary, which I repeat below, is
       substantially accurate.

   20. The appellant first got into trouble in the United Kingdom  in  July
       2000 when she was made the subject of probation order for two  years
       for theft.  She was conditionally discharged in 2003  for  a  public
       order offence and later that year she was fined for attempted  theft
       and going equipped.  In 2004 she was made the subject of a 50 hours'
       community   punishment   order   and   a   twelve-month    community
       rehabilitation order for possessing an offensive  weapon  and  using
       threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour.  In March 2004
       she was made the subject of a nine months' community  rehabilitation
       order  and  in  March  2005   subject   to   a   further   community
       rehabilitation   order   for   something   described   as    "public
       order/assault on police".

   21. She was fined for handling stolen goods in February 2006 and ordered
       to do 60 hours' unpaid work for an  offence  of  theft  in  February
       2009.  She was made the subject of  an  eighteen  months'  community
       order with a supervision requirement and a twelve months'  exclusion
       requirement for an offence  of  theft  in  March  2009.   I  do  not
       understand   the   significance   of   a   "twelve-month   exclusion
       requirement".

   22.  In  October  2009  she  was  formally  warned  at  the   Camberwell
       Magistrates' Courts for failing to comply with the requirements of a
       community order.

   23. In August 2009 she was sent to prison for twenty weeks for  offences
       of battery and conduct contrary to Section 4 of the Public Order Act
       1986.  In April 2010 she was sent to prison for an  attempted  theft
       and in March 2011 she was sent to prison for an assault  occasioning
       actually bodily harm.  In April 2015 she was made the subject  of  a
       suspended sentence of imprisonment again for an assault  occasioning
       actual bodily harm and in May 2016 for offences of theft and  common
       assault and being in breach  of  the  requirements  of  a  suspended
       sentence  she  was  subject  to  a  further  suspended  sentence  of
       imprisonment and ordered to do 120 hours of unpaid work.

   24. In short the appellant had shown herself to be dishonest and violent
       and unreliable in her dealing with the courts.

   25. In fairness to the appellant, although of little relevance in  these
       proceedings, it is also right to record that she has been the victim
       of many bad experiences.  I see no need to  elaborate  on  them.   I
       have read the papers.  In summary the appellant has been  raped  and
       has been the victim of other particularly serious  sexual  assaults.
       She has been stabbed and she has been shot.  She is married but  the
       marriage is not subsisting.  She and her husband parted  because  of
       his extreme violence. As a result of that violence he is in prison.

   26. Judge Nightingale noted that the child K was in the day-to-day  care
       of his paternal grandmother and was the  subject  of  a  supervision
       order and a guardianship order.  The appellant was supposed  to  see
       him at weekends but there were difficulties  with  that  arrangement
       and contact did not always take place.

   27. Judge Nightingale, in conducting the balancing exercise necessary to
       determine if the appellant should be  removed,  had  regard  of  all
       relevant factors and set out the relevant parts of Section 117A-D of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   28. She also considered medical evidence concerning the appellant.   She
       has an "antisocial personality disorder"  and  found  no  basis  for
       thinking she could change.  Judge Nightingale said at paragraph  113
       of her decision:

  "In view of the  nature  of  some  of  the  offences  committed,  in  the
  circumstances described, most of which are not in  dispute,  I  am  fully
  satisfied that the appellant is a person with an  antisocial  personality
  disorder as described and diagnosed by two Psychologists."

   29. The only conceivable way in  which  this  appeal  could  be  allowed
       responsibly in accordance with established law is if  the  effective
       removal was unduly harsh on any of her  children.   There  was  only
       evidence of occasional contact with  any  child  except  K  and  the
       relationship with  those  children,  if  there  is  any,  is  not  a
       meaningful consideration.

   30. Judge Nightingale was  critical  of  the  lack  of  expert  evidence
       concerning the appellant's relationship with K.  The  appellant  has
       the benefit of experienced solicitors.  No application was  made  to
       adduce expert evidence  before  me.   Mr  Hawkin  made  many  wholly
       sensible submissions concerning the general desirability of  parents
       having contact with their children.  Clearly it is generally in  the
       best interests of a child to have contact with both parents.  Indeed
       it is generally in the best interests of the child to live with both
       parents but very often that cannot be achieved.

   31. The only new evidence before me that was relevant was a letter  from
       Charles  Allotey  &  Company  Solicitors  dated  28  September  2016
       apparently referring to this appellant but using  a  different  name
       (she has various aliases), saying: "we can confirm that by the order
       or the Court Mrs Daley-Powell has contact with her son once  a  week
       on Saturdays in the community."

   32. This is a rather imprecise phrase but  certainly  does  not  suggest
       there is staying contact or any contact more frequent  than  once  a
       week.

   33. My attention has been drawn to a letter from Andrea Turi at the Beth
       Centre.  Ms Turi is described as a "parenting the domestic  violence
       worker".  In her letter of 23 May 2016 she said that the child K is
       cared for by the parental grandmother during  the  week  and  "stays
       with [the appellant] over the weekends (from Fri-Mon)."

   34. I am satisfied that Judge Nightingale was wrong when she  said  that
       there was no evidence to support the claimed contact.  In all  other
       respect her decision appears to be  thorough  and  measured  but  Ms
       Trulli's letter was before her and she gave  no  proper  reason  for
       discounting it.   There  is  a  parental  relationship  between  the
       appellant and her child.  She sees her child  and  the  relationship
       really cannot  be  described  as  anything  other  than  a  parental
       relationship.

   35. That said, the relationship is not a strong one.  I am unsure  about
       how often she sees her child.  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the
       child does not live with her but with his grandparents  and  contact
       with the mother is no more than every week.

   36. There is nothing before me to indicate that there  is  any  plan  in
       Social Services, with or without the involvement of the  court,  for
       the child to live with the appellant on a permanent basis.  At  most
       there is staying contact although the evidence that that takes place
       is skimpy and does not  appear  to  be  supported  by  the  relevant
       solicitors.  It is quite plain from the history that  the  appellant
       has great difficulty in providing the sort of support  that  mothers
       normally provide.  I do not say that to her discredit.   She  cannot
       help the state of her mental health but the  fact  is  that  however
       strong her maternal feelings may be she has not previously been able
       to translate them into the sort of relationship that can be expected
       between parent and child and her present relationship with her son K
       is weak.

   37. Mr Hawkin's arguments about the likely effect of removal were  based
       solely on what ordinarily happens when small  children  do  not  see
       their parents.  It was not supported  by  any  independent  evidence
       from experts relating to this case.

   38. Given that contact is taking place I am satisfied that  interrupting
       that contact will, in the short-term, have a detrimental  effect  on
       the  child.   The  child  will  know  his  mother   and   would   be
       disadvantaged by not having contact even on a weekly basis.  However
       this is not a case of removal breaking up  a  close  parental  child
       relationship.  I do not suggest for one moment that contact by Skype
       or other fast and readily accessible means of communication  are  an
       adequate substitute for physical contact between  mother  and  child
       but they are a way of keeping a place in the child's life.

   39. The Secretary of State was plainly entitled to form the view  it  is
       in the public good to remove  the  appellant.   Her  persistent  bad
       behaviour clearly shows that her presence is detrimental to the good
       order of the United Kingdom.  This is not a case where  her  removal
       can be expected to have a strongly  adverse  effect  on  her  child.
       There is no expert evidence to that effect or any particular  reason
       to think that that would happen.  It is speculative to say that  she
       would be missed at all but  I  am  prepared  to  make  that  finding
       because that is so likely.  I cannot take  it  any  further  because
       there  is  no  credible  evidence  about  the  importance   of   the
       relationship or the role of the mother in the child's life.

   40. It follows that although I disagree with Judge Nightingale about the
       nature of the relationship between the appellant and her child I  am
       satisfied that it would not be unduly harsh on  the  child  for  the
       mother  to  be  deported.   All  the  other  factors  in  favour  of
       deportation  and  against  have  been  weighed  carefully  by  Judge
       Nightingale.  I do not need to revisit them.  I have noted them  and
       considered them.  The impact on the child will not be  unduly  harsh
       and the mother should be deported.

   41. It follows therefore that although I set aside the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal I substitute a decision dismissing  the  appeal
       for the reasons given above.

   42. I am grateful to Mr Hawkin for  pursuing  energetically  the  points
       that could be made on the appellant's behalf.

Decision

   43. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law by misunderstand some evidence.
       I set aside its decision and  remake  the  decision  dismissing  the
       appeal on all grounds.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 November 2016               |

