

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01220/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd October 2014                          |On 31st October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between



                                SAFEEN HAMAD
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr E Rutherford, counsel, instructed by
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. A First-tier Tribunal panel allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Hamad  on  the
      grounds  that  his  deportation  was  not  proportionate.  The   panel
      dismissed his appeal on international protections grounds.  Permission
      to appeal was granted to Mr Hamad on the grounds that it was  arguable
      that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to consider  adequately  the
      expert report by Ms Laizer and made erroneous findings with regard  to
      the consistency of his account and failing to have adequate regard  to
      the background material.


   2. Ms Rutherford confirmed that Mr Hamad was not seeking to rely  on  the
      "political" element of his  claim  for  international  protection  but
      relied on what could be termed his personal claim  arising  out  of  a
      fear from the family  of  his  former  partner.  Before  me  Mr  Mills
      conceded that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  as
      regards this claim for international protection could not be opposed.


   3. This was in my view a sensible  concession  to  have  made  and  I  am
      satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
      consideration and findings  of  Mr  Hamad's  claim  for  international
      protection.

   4. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal the finding of
      the First-tier Tribunal that deportation was not proportionate on  the
      grounds that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  have
      erred  in  law  for  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for   their
      conclusion; had placed inordinate weight upon  the  low  risk  of  re-
      offending and had failed to have adequate regard to the legitimate aim
      of deportation. Miss Rutherford contended that the First-tier Tribunal
      determination disclosed no error of law; the Tribunal  had  considered
      the evidence before it and had reached conclusions that  were  neither
      perverse nor inadequate nor unreasoned. I indicated  an  initial  view
      that there were some difficulties in the determination in  so  far  as
      article 8 was concerned, principally that in [39] although the  First-
      tier Tribunal panel states that the ultimate question is  whether  the
      conviction  and  sentence  outweighs  family  and  private  life   the
      subsequent reasoning, and that set out earlier  in  the  determination
      (notably [37]) does not appear to factor in  the  public  interest  in
      deportation. The reference to Judge Obhi's determination in [41] as  a
      starting point does not appear to appreciate that Judge  Obhi  allowed
      the appeal on the basis of the potential and possibly significant harm
      that would be caused to Mr Hamad's child Ari if he were  deported  and
      yet Ari himself has now been deported.


   5.  Ms Rutherford further contended that the panel had been very aware of
      Mr Hamad's status and his offending behaviour and that the conclusions
      reached had been in the full  knowledge  of  this.  [40]  specifically
      finds that there are sufficiently compelling reasons to  outweigh  the
      public interest.

   6. I do not agree with Ms  Rutherford's  submissions.  The  determination
      plainly does not give adequate consideration of the public interest in
      deportation despite the findings made as to the relationship and  risk
      of re-offending.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its findings both  as  regards
      international protections grounds of appeal and Article 8.

     8. The findings and conclusions that have to be made on a remaking  of
        the decision  require  primary  fact-finding.  The  scheme  of  the
        Tribunals Court and  Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not  assign  the
        function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


     9. S12 (2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First
        tier with directions or remake it for myself. After discussion  and
        agreement with the parties and  in  accordance  with  the  Practice
        Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
        Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal I remit this  appeal
        to be heard before the First-tier Tribunal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision.

     I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

     Consequential Directions


    The First-tier Tribunal may wish to  consider  listing  a  CMR  hearing
    prior to the substantive re-hearing of this  appeal  given  the  recent
    serious accident sustained by Mr Hamad's son.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  There
    was no request for anonymity and I do not consider  such  an  order  is
    required.




                                    Date 29th October 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

