
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01147/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th October 2013                            |On 29th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE Renton
                        Upper Tribunal JUDGE McGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     AAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sierra Leone, born on 31st  December
    1984.  It seems to be the case that in August 1992, when the  Appellant
    was not yet 8 years of age, he came to the UK with his  grandfather  in
    order to visit his mother, TB,  who  was  a  student.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant was granted leave  to  remain  and  then,  in  October  1996,
    indefinite leave to remain as a dependant of his mother.

 2. On 13th June 2005 the Appellant was convicted at the Inner London Crown
    Court of the offence of possessing a Class A controlled drug.   He  was
    subsequently sentenced to two years six  months'  imprisonment.   As  a
    consequence, on 20th March  2006  the  Respondent  decided  to  make  a
    deportation order against the Appellant.  The Appellant  appealed  that
    decision unsuccessfully, and on 9th August 2006 a Deportation Order was
    signed against him.

 3. In August 2012  the  Appellant  submitted  to  the  Respondent  further
    representations as to why he should not  be  deported  and  these  were
    treated as an  application  to  revoke  the  Deportation  Order.   That
    application was refused on 21st August 2012 for the reasons set out  in
    the Respondent's letter of that date.  The Appellant appealed, and  his
    appeal was heard by a panel chaired by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Ruth (the Panel) sitting at Taylor House on 17th July 2013.  The  Panel
    decided to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds for the reasons given in its  Determination  dated  31st
    July 2013.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on
    23rd August 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 4. We must first decide if the decision of the Panel contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  At the hearing we heard
    submissions from both representatives on that subject.  First, however,
    we refused an application made by Ms Kiai  to  introduce  new  evidence
    being an  Addendum  to  the  Report  of  Dr  Agnew-Davies,  a  Clinical
    Psychologist.  We were of the view that  a  report  as  to  the  mental
    health of the Appellant's  partner  could  have  no  relevance  to  the
    question of whether the Panel had made an error of law.

 5. The Panel dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and also  on
    human rights grounds.  Its reasons for so doing  are  set  out  in  the
    Determination.  The Panel took as its starting point  the  findings  of
    fact made in the Determination of the previous appeal,  promulgated  on
    20th June 2006, and went on to find that the Appellant was  lacking  in
    credibility.  Indeed, he had lied during his  evidence  to  the  Panel.
    The Panel found further that the Appellant had  manipulated  "everybody
    around him for his own benefit", and as a consequence the Panel was not
    satisfied that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his claimed  partner,  LS.   Therefore  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraphs 399  and  399A  of  HC 395  and
    consequently the appeal failed under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Panel went on to consider the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR  rights.
    It found that the Appellant  had  a  family  life  only  with  his  two
    children from an earlier marriage, named R and T, but  that  he  had  a
    "particularly strong and deep private life" in the UK.  That family and
    private life would be interfered with by  the  Appellant's  removal  to
    such a degree of gravity as to engage his Article 8  rights,  but  that
    his removal would be proportionate.  The Panel accepted that  it  would
    not be in the best interests of the Appellant's children for him to  be
    deported but, at paragraph 145 of the Determination, found  that  other
    factors in the appeal weighed more heavily than the best  interests  of
    the children.  The Panel's decision was summarised at paragraph 142  of
    the Determination which reads as follows:

         "142.    In this particular case, we consider the Appellant's  past
              and continuing criminality, the continuing risk he  poses  to
              the public in our view and the very powerful interests of the
              Respondent outweigh his interests in this  case.   We  accept
              that a higher level of compulsion is necessary for exile  and
              in this case we find that the higher threshold is met."

 7. The Panel therefore found that there were no exceptional  circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

 8. At the hearing, Ms Kiai argued that the  Panel  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming  to  these  conclusions.   She  referred  to  the   grounds   of
    application and submitted that the Panel had misunderstood the evidence
    and drawn inferences not supported by  the  evidence  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that the Appellant had no  commitment  to  his  relationship
    with LS as he had been in a relationship with another woman at the same
    time.  This was material to the Panel's finding that the Appellant  was
    manipulative.  Further, the Panel  had  failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant  evidence  about  when  the  Appellant  and  LS  had   started
    cohabiting, and the Panel's subsequent finding about  LS's  ability  to
    care for her child.

 9. Ms Kiai went on  to  submit  that  the  Panel  had  made  perverse  and
    irrational findings which were not  sufficiently  explained  concerning
    the risk of reoffending of the  Appellant.   In  particular  the  Panel
    failed to explain why it attached no weight to the  Independent  Social
    Worker's Report.  Further, the Panel erred in law by  failing  to  take
    into account the evidence contained in certain witness statements, such
    as that of Granville Williams, which went to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant, particularly relating to his relationship with his children.
     Finally, Ms Kiai submitted that the Panel  had  failed  to  take  into
    account sufficiently explanations  appearing  in  the  evidence,  again
    relating to the relationship between the Appellant and other members of
    his family.

10. In response, Ms Horsley referred to the Rule  24  response  and  argued
    that read as a whole the  Determination  amounted  to  a  detailed  and
    comprehensive analysis of the evidence which dealt assiduously with all
    the issues.  The Panel had given a number of reasons for its finding as
    to the credibility of the Appellant.  There were  no  misunderstandings
    as  to  the  evidence.   All  the  findings  made  by  the  Panel  were
    sustainable on the evidence  before  it.   The  arguments  of  Ms  Kiai
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the weight attached by the
    Panel to certain parts of the evidence.  That weight was a  matter  for
    the Panel, and in respect of each finding a full explanation was given.

11. At the end of the hearing we reserved our decision which we now give.

12. We find that we are in agreement with the arguments of Ms Horsley  that
    the decision of the Panel contained no material errors of law  so  that
    it should be set aside.  This was  a  very  thorough  Determination  in
    which all of the issues raised in the appeal were dealt  with  and  the
    evidence was carefully and comprehensively analysed.  We are  satisfied
    that there are sufficient reasons given for all of the decisions of the
    Panel.  Those findings are based firmly on the evidence and we find  Ms
    Kiai's arguments to amount  mainly  to  mere  disagreement  with  them.
    According to the contents of paragraph 47  of  the  Determination,  the
    Panel had no doubt that the Appellant had deliberately lied  to  it  in
    his evidence, and that the Appellant was a witness of  no  credibility.
    The  Panel  found  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to   accept   the
    responsibility for and the consequences of his criminal behaviour.  The
    Panel further found that it could not rely upon the evidence of  LS  as
    she was a victim of the Appellant's ability to manipulate.   The  Panel
    dealt with the evidence of the  other  witnesses  and  found  that  the
    Appellant could not benefit from the provisions of paragraphs  399  and
    399A of HC 395.  That particular decision has not been impugned in this
    appeal.

13. The Panel went on to consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights  as
    it was bound to do.  The Panel rejected many of the Appellant's  claims
    as to his family life in the UK, but was satisfied that  the  Appellant
    had a family life with two of his  children,  and  also  a  significant
    private life in the UK. It also found that that family and private life
    would be interfered with by the deportation to such a degree of gravity
    as to engage the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  In  its  decision,  the
    Panel then demonstrated that it  had  carried  out  the  balancing  act
    necessary for any assessment of proportionality.  The Panel  took  into
    account the best interests of the children as a primary  consideration,
    but found that those  best  interests  and  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant were not so exceptional as to outweigh the  public  interest.
    This was a conclusion open to the Panel on the evidence before  it  and
    which, again, it fully explained.

14. Turning to the grounds of application as  argued  by  Ms  Kiai  at  the
    hearing, the Panel's finding as  to  the  nature  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and LS were derived from a  careful  analysis  of
    the evidence relating to that relationship and  was  one  open  to  the
    Panel on the basis of its findings.  The Panel's interpretation of  the
    evidence was one open to it and this ground amounts to little more than
    a disagreement with that interpretation.  Further, the Panel's  reasons
    for its finding that there was a continuing risk to the public that the
    Appellant  will  re-offend  are  given  at   paragraph   131   of   the
    Determination.  In this paragraph it is recorded that the assessment of
    the Independent Social Worker was that the  risk  of  re-offending  was
    "medium" and this assessment was taken into account by the  Panel.   It
    therefore cannot be argued that the expert opinion of  the  Independent
    Social Worker was ignored, nor that there is any  lesser  degree  of  a
    risk of re-offending.

15. The witness statements of other witnesses are referred to in  paragraph
    84 of the Determination.  The Panel  explained  why  it  attached  less
    weight to them than to other evidence, and again it is a matter for the
    Panel to decide what weight to attach to such evidence, and to disagree
    with that weight does not satisfy us that there was any error  of  law.
    The fourth and final ground again is no more than a  disagreement  with
    the findings of the Panel.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and we continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008.






Signed                          Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
