
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01440/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2015                             |On 23 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MR BENJAMIN BIO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O J Brown instructed by M J Solomon & Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  (Judge  T  R  Cockrill)  allowing  an  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 23 July 2014 that s.32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applied and to make  a  deportation  order  under  the
    automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.

 2. For convenience, I will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born  on  2  October
    1981.  He arrived in the UK on 23  October  1998  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor.   He  was  initially  granted  leave  until  16  October   2000.
    Thereafter, he was granted further leave until 27  July  2002.   On  24
    July  2002,  he  applied  for  an  extension  of  his  leave  but  that
    application was refused on 3 October 2003 and his subsequent appeal was
    dismissed on 17 May 2005.  Reconsideration of that decision was refused
    by a judge of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal on 10 June 2005.   In
    that claim, the appellant relied upon Article 8 and, in particular, his
    mental health as he had  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  paranoid
    schizophrenia.

 4. On 11 July 2005, the appellant  made  further  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State and indefinite leave to remain was, albeit some time
    later, granted to  the  appellant  on  26  April  2010.   A  subsequent
    application for British citizenship was refused on 12 November 2012  on
    good character grounds.

 5. During his time in the United Kingdom, the appellant has been convicted
    of a number of offences between 1 March 2000 and 20 June  2012.   There
    were, in total, nine convictions  for  a  total  of  nineteen  offences
    including a battery,  four  offences  of  common  assault,  failing  to
    surrender to custody, fraudulent use  of  a  vehicle  licence,  driving
    otherwise in accordance with the licence,  driving  without  insurance,
    failing to comply with a  traffic  sign,  resisting  or  obstructing  a
    constable, using a vehicle without a test certificate, criminal damage,
    burglary, theft and three instances of begging.  The appellant was also
    in breach of a conditional discharge on two occasions.

 6. Between 20 December 2012 and 14 April 2014, the appellant was convicted
    of a further thirteen offences relating to  begging,  possession  of  a
    class A controlled drug, namely cocaine and several breaches of an anti-
    social behaviour order.

 7. On 14 April 2014, having pleaded guilty, the appellant was sentenced to
    eighteen months' imprisonment for robbery  together  with  one  month's
    imprisonment concurrently for breach of anti-social behaviour orders.

 8. On 26 June 2014, the Secretary of State notified the appellant  of  his
    liability to deportation under the 2007 Act and provided  him  with  an
    opportunity to  make  representations  as  to  why  he  should  not  be
    deported.  On 23 July 2014, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to
    apply the 2007 Act to the appellant - which is the decision appealed in
    this case - and a deportation order was signed.

The Appeal

 9. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Before  Judge
    Cockrill the appellant relied both upon the  Immigration  Rules  namely
    paras 399 and 399A and also Art 8 of the ECHR.   Judge  Cockrill  found
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of either  para  399
    or 399A.  That decision is not  challenged.   However,  Judge  Cockrill
    went on to consider Art 8 and,  in  particular,  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant's mental health if he were deported to Sierra  Leone.   Judge
    Cockrill found that the appellant's deportation would breach Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal from the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the grounds that:

    (1)  the judge had failed to deal properly with the 2005  determination
         in which the appellant's appeal had been dismissed;

    (2)  the judge had failed to consider properly whether there were "very
         compelling circumstances" to outweigh  the  public  interest  under
         para 398 of the Rules given that the appellant could not  meet  the
         requirements of either para 399 or 399A of the Rules; and

    (3)  given that the appellant had committed a "series of  very  serious
         offences", including a robbery the judge had failed to give  proper
         weight to the public interest.

11. On 27 October 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Ford)  refused  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on those grounds.

12. The Secretary of State renewed her application for  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The Secretary of State  continued  to  rely  upon  the
    grounds submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  but  also,  in  separate
    grounds, argued that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  identify
    "any exceptional or compelling  characteristics  in  [the]  appellant's
    circumstances"  and  failed  to  give  effect  to  the  "strong  public
    interest" in  deporting  the  appellant.   Further,  referring  to  the
    decision of Bensaid v UK [2001] ECHR 82, the grounds argue that it  was
    "unclear" whether the judge had considered the  relevant  case  law  in
    respect of Article 8 and there was no evidence that  he  had  "balanced
    the [strong]  public  interest  in  removal"  against  the  appellant's
    personal circumstances.

13. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards relied upon both sets of  grounds.
    He acknowledged, however, that  the  Devaseelen  point  raised  in  the
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal was, perhaps, not the  strongest  of
    grounds although he did not  withdraw  it.   Mr  Richards  centred  his
    submissions on the "public interest" point.  In particular,  he  relied
    upon a sentence in paragraph 40 of the judge's determination which,  he
    submitted, demonstrated that the judge had  failed  properly  to  apply
    s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted
    by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) by  concluding  that  the  "public
    interest" was served by the appellant remaining in the UK.  Mr Richards
    submitted that it was clear under s.117C  that  the  deportation  of  a
    foreign criminal was in the public interest.  This was a material error
    of law which undermined the determination.  He submitted that the judge
    had clearly not balanced the public interest against the rights of  the
    individual as he was required to do.

14. Mr Brown, on behalf of the appellant, accepted that  it  was  wrong  to
    state that the "public  interest"  would  be  served  by  allowing  the
    appellant to remain in the UK if that created an  impression  that  the
    public interest was not a "foregone conclusion".  However, he submitted
    that if the sentence in  para  40  of  the  judge's  determination  was
    erroneous, it was not material.  Mr Brown submitted that the judge had,
    in fact, considered all the circumstances and found that they prevailed
    over the public interest.  He submitted that the remaining grounds were
    no more than a disagreement with the Immigration Judge's findings.

Discussion

15. I will deal first with the Devaseelan point.  As Mr  Richards  candidly
    acknowledged in his submissions, the original determination was in 2005
    and there had been a considerable  passage  of  time  and  more  recent
    evidence before Judge Cockrill than  was  before  the  previous  judge.
    That, in my judgment, disposes of  this  ground.   Judge  Cockrill  had
    before him further evidence, including an  updated  psychiatric  report
    dealing with the appellant's paranoid schizophrenia and the impact upon
    his mental health if deported.  He heard oral evidence, not  only  from
    the  appellant,  but  also  from  other  witnesses  dealing  with   the
    appellant's circumstances.  The judge made specific reference  at  para
    47 to the earlier judge's determination.  Nothing in the  determination
    leads me to conclude that the judge did not have that determination  in
    mind when reaching his decision but he had a body of  further  evidence
    which he was required to take into account which, as will become  clear
    shortly, I am satisfied he properly considered.

16. Turning now to the central argument made by Mr Richards, that concerned
    a sentence in para 40 of the judge's  determination  which  is  in  the
    following terms:

         "Overall then it seems to me that the public interest  is  in  fact
         best served by allowing the Appellant to  remain  in  this  country
         knowing that he can get appropriate medical care here  and  knowing
         also that he has got the active help and support of Pastor Oniawu."

17. Read in isolation, that sentence contradicts the terms of s.117C(1)  of
    the NIA Act  2002  which  states  that:  "The  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest."

18. The deportation of this appellant was  in  the  public  interest.   The
    issue for the judge was whether that public interest was outweighed  by
    the appellant's personal circumstances, in particular the  effect  upon
    his mental health of deportation to Sierra Leone.

19. However, reading the judge's determination as a whole it is clear  that
    the judge did not fail to carry out  the  balancing  exercise  required
    under Article 8 and determined  whether  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" within para 398 of the Immigration Rules.

20. That provision provides, in relation to the appellant who was sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of less than four years, as follows:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the UK's obligation under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,
         and ...

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than four years but at  least
             twelve months; ...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

21. It is clear that the judge was  alive  to  the  relevant  legal  issue,
    having decided that paras 399 and 399A  did  not  apply  and  that  the
    appellant must establish "very compelling circumstances".  At  para  38
    the judge said this having concluded that paras 399 and  399A  did  not
    apply:

         "However, matters should not end there because this is a case where
         in my overall assessment and judgment  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, specific to this Appellant, that do  require  proper
         consideration.  I focus really then upon his mental health issues."

22. That is a correct direction in law consistent  with  para  398  of  the
    Rules.

23.  Then  at  paras  39-40,  the  judge   dealt   with   the   appellant's
    circumstances, in particular his mental health issues as follows:

         "39. What seems to be very important is for the Appellant  to  have
             appropriate medication regularly and properly given to him  in
             order to maintain  some  sort  of  stability  for  his  mental
             health.  The current drug that he is receiving is  Haloperidol
             once a month.  I am concerned that the Respondent, in relation
             to that specific drug, is  saying  that  it  is  available  in
             Sierra Leone.  The information that is relied upon strikes  me
             as being old.  It is material from 2013 in a  reply  given  by
             the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Service   in   entirely
             difference circumstances in relation  to  someone  else  where
             there is reference to Kissy Mental Hospital having  that  drug
             and, frankly, only that hospital seemed to have it.   What  we
             really do not know is what the present position is in relation
             to  that  drug  and  Kissy  Mental  Hospital  because  it   is
             absolutely crucial that if the Appellant  does  not  get  that
             drug he is going to deteriorate mentally.  That point is  made
             plain, as I see it, by the doctor who had got control  of  the
             Appellant's care at the prison, Dr.  Govindarajula  who  is  a
             Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist.  Although the Appellant  can
             rightly be described as fit for travel  and  removal,  matters
             really do not end there.  What the doctor says, and  this  has
             already been highlighted in the determination, is  that  there
             are "high risks of deterioration  of  the  Appellant's  mental
             health if he does not receive adequate mental health treatment
             in Sierra Leone.  What I underscore heavily in  this  case  is
             that it really has not  been  shown  that  there  is  adequate
             mental health treatment in Sierra Leone.  That doctor was  not
             aware as to whether there was appropriate treatment  available
             and also, perhaps equally importantly, whether  the  Appellant
             could access it.   It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  this
             Appellant has demonstrated what I see  as  a  high  degree  of
             vulnerability.   Even  within  the  organised  and  restricted
             regime of a  prison  the  Appellant  still  suffers  blackouts
             frequently, I accept that as a  fact.   That  shows  just  how
             physically vulnerable he is and  that  is  when  he  is  still
             getting his regular prescribed medicine.  It  surely  must  be
             the case that if the Appellant is exposed to  life  in  Sierra
             Leone as a  single  male,  with  this  diagnosis  of  Paranoid
             Schizophrenia, he is going to find it extraordinarily hard  to
             cope and to survive.  As I see it the reality is that he faces
             a significant risk of deterioration in his mental  health  and
             the real risk,  as  I  find,  of  ending  up  on  the  streets
             destitute.  He would be forced back into begging or  worse  in
             order to try to survive.   It  does  not  seem  to  me  unduly
             speculative to be saying that, given his history which is well
             documented.   Basically,  I  am  concerned  that  there  isn't
             adequate  mental  health  care  in  Sierra  Leone   for   this
             Appellant.  It  seems  plain  enough  that  there  is  a  real
             question mark over whether Procyclidine is available.  The COI
             response from July 2012 indicates that it is  unlikely  to  be
             available.  There is no material at all  which  would  suggest
             that the situation has improved from 2012.   That  drug  would
             deal with the side effects and,  because  it  is  a  sensitive
             balance  that  needs  to  be  struck  with   the   Appellant's
             medication, it seems wholly wrong as I see it to adopt what  I
             might term a  rather  blanket  approach  by  saying  there  is
             medication available,  there  are  some  psychiatric  services
             available and, therefore,  the  Appellant  can  go  to  Sierra
             Leone.  It seems to me that that is not really perceiving  the
             reality of the situation which is that this man would be  very
             vulnerable indeed if he was sent back on  his  own  to  Sierra
             Leone with all the uncertainties that exist in trying to  gain
             access to appropriate medication and for the Appellant to take
             that medication reliably  and  consistently  to  preserve  his
             mental health stability.  All in all then, it seems to me that
             there are insufficient safeguards and insufficient information
             about the clinical situation in Sierra Leone which is  current
             to persuade me that it  really  would  be  safe  to  let  this
             Appellant go back to Sierra Leone.  It cannot be right, in  my
             judgment, consistent with his country's obligations under  the
             Human Rights Act, to put the Appellant in a  situation  almost
             in the knowledge that he is gong not only to suffer  mentally,
             because he would be then suffering hallucinations and  hearing
             voices if he does not get his prescribed medicine  but,  worst
             that than that, that he would not have  any  sort  of  support
             structure whatsoever to help him on a day to day basis.

         40.  By contrast, there are some encouraging signs in this country.
              The Pastor who came to give evidence is obviously someone who
             cares for the Appellant and is trying to look after him  in  a
             thoroughly Christian way.  The Appellant obviously is prepared
             to work closely with the Pastor and it does seem  to  me  that
             that provides the best prospect for the Appellant to remain in
             reasonably good mental health and not to become  a  threat  to
             society.  Overall then it seems to me that the public interest
             is in fact best served by allowing the Appellant to remain  in
             this country knowing that he can get appropriate medical  care
             here and knowing also that he has  got  the  active  help  and
             support of Pastor.Oniawu.  The alternative is taking a  course
             which involves a very high degree of risk, as I see  it,  with
             the  Appellant's  life  and  safety  and,  given  his  obvious
             vulnerabilities, given  the  clinical  diagnosis  of  Paranoid
             Schizophrenia, it seems to me that the balance  does  fall  in
             favour of the Appellant being permitted to stay, that it would
             be a disproportionate interference with his right  to  respect
             for private life by the decision of the Respondent  to  deport
             him.  It seems that the best way to preserve and maintain  the
             Appellant with some sense of dignity and purpose in life is to
             enable him to stay in this country and not expose him  to  the
             very considerable risks that as I see lie  ahead  for  him  if
             this Appellant is expected to go back to  Sierra  Leone.   The
             current  Ebola  virus  outbreak  serves  to   underscore   the
             difficulties that the medical authorities have  in  trying  to
             preserve  the  health  of  the  population.   I  conclude   by
             emphasizing that this conclusion would not be one that I  draw
             unless the Appellant had marked mental health problems.  As he
             does, it seems to me that it is wholly inappropriate  for  him
             now at this stage of his life to go to Sierra Leone."

24. It is clear, on a fair reading of  these  paragraphs,  that  the  judge
    considered that there would be a significant risk of a deterioration in
    the appellant's mental health if he returned to Sierra Leone given  his
    vulnerability and the uncertainties about whether he would be  able  to
    gain access to appropriate medication.  The medical evidence was  plain
    that without medication, including Procyclidine which  dealt  with  the
    symptom caused by the other medication, the appellant's  mental  health
    would destabilise and he would suffer as a consequence.

25. I should point out that neither Mr Richards, nor the grounds, challenge
    those factual findings.

26. Having made those findings, and having in para 40 set out the  sentence
    which the Secretary of State challenges, the judge went on to  conclude
    that the exposure of the appellant to  "very  considerable  risks"  and
    "his obvious vulnerabilities" given the clinical diagnosis of  paranoid
    schizophrenia meant that "the balance" fell in favour of the  appellant
    and it would be a "disproportionate interference"  with  his  right  to
    respect for his private life if he were deported.

27. That is, in my judgment, a  clear  application  by  the  judge  of  the
    balancing test inherent in an assessment of proportionality (see Razgar
    v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [20] per Lord Bingham of Cornhill).

28. Whilst the challenged sentence could,  undoubtedly,  have  been  better
    expressed it is clear that, first the judge  was  doing  no  more  than
    expressing the outcome of the  "balancing  test"  under  Art  8.2;  and
    secondly, he carried out that balancing exercise explicitly.

29. It is also clear that the judge took into account  the  seriousness  of
    the appellant's offending.  At para 32 of his judgment,  he  stated  as
    follows:

         "The Appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  the  offence  of  robbery  and
         received a sentence of eighteen months' imprisonment.  That  was  a
         serious offence that he committed.  It involved using some  measure
         of force on an elderly lady to get her to hand over her cash  which
         she had only  just  withdrawn  from  a  cash  point,  this  offence
         occurred in the early hours of  the  morning  and  the  victim  was
         someone  who  was  seen  to  be  vulnerable.   I  recognise  fully,
         therefore, that this is a serious matter which  has  triggered  the
         present deportation proceedings."

30.  In  directing  himself  that  only  "compelling  circumstances"  could
    outweigh the public interest, the judge  recognised,  in  effect,  that
    only a "strong" claim could outweigh  the  public  interest:  see,  for
    example SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

31. As I have already indicated, Mr Richards did not directly challenge the
    judge's findings concerning the deterioration  and  the  risks  to  the
    appellant's health to which he would be exposed if deported  to  Sierra
    Leone.  Whilst the grounds refer to  the  decision  of  the  Strasbourg
    Court in Bensaid, nothing in Judge Cockrill's decision runs counter  to
    that decision.  There, the Strasbourg Court found at [40] that the risk
    to that applicant's mental health was based  "on  largely  hypothetical
    factors".  Here, the judge's findings were based upon medical  evidence
    specific to the appellant and background evidence concerning  treatment
    and  medication  available  in  Sierra  Leone.   In  relation  to  this
    appellant, the impact upon the appellant was not speculative  or  based
    upon hypothetical factors.  The judge's reasoning at paras 39-40 (which
    I set out above) fully supports his findings.   Given  his  finding  in
    relation to the impact upon the appellant's mental health  if  deported
    to Sierra Leone, it was not irrational for the judge to  conclude  that
    there were "very compelling circumstances" which outweighed the  public
    interest to reflect the seriousness of the appellant's offending.

32. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's challenges to  the
    determination.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow   the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision stands.

33. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.





                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal




