

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01346/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 31 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between


                            bruce brandon mclean

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Wray, Counsel with Kings Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1. The appellant, a Jamaican citizen, appeals with  permission  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carroll
   and Mrs S E Singer, a non-legal member) dismissing his appeal against the
   decision of the Secretary of State that he is a foreign criminal  subject
   to automatic deportation pursuant to section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
   2007.  He is now 24 years old. The respondent was not satisfied that  any
   of the exclusions, and in particular Exclusion 1, set out in s.33 of that
   Act applied to the appellant.

Background

2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 10 May 2000  when  he  was  a
   minor.  He was then the dependent child of  his  father,  Dwight  Anthony
   McLean, who sought indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a  British
   citizen.  Indefinite leave to remain was granted to the appellant and his
   father on 6 January 2001.  The appellant's  father  subsequently  changed
   his name by deed poll to Wayne Richard Martin.

3.  On 8 March 2009 the appellant,  now  19  years  old,  was  convicted  of
   having an article with a blade in a public place, possession of  class  B
   controlled drugs and using a vehicle whilst uninsured.  For that  offence
   he received a sentence of 180 hours unpaid work in the community.

4. The offence which  triggered  the  automatic  deportation  provisions  of
   section 32 was convicted was robbery; he was convicted on 18  July  2011,
   when he was 22 years old, along with another man, Bruce McLean.  It  took
   place at Brockwell Lido.  The appellant  pleaded  guilty  and  was  given
   credit for that.  He was sentenced to 40 months' imprisonment, which  was
   more than sufficient to engage the foreign criminal provisions of s.32.

5. The circumstances which are said to engage Exception 1 under s.33 of  the
   Act relate to the claimed relationship  between  Ms  Hermione  Steele,  a
   Grenadian national who now has discretionary leave to remain until  April
   2015.  Ms Steele arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2001 as  a  visitor
   and overstayed; she made no application to regularise her position  until
   March 2012.  She has two children, Tayashun and Sahar.  The elder  child,
   Tayashun, is Ms Steele's child with the appellant  when  he  was  settled
   with indefinite leave to remain and is a British citizen.  Sahar  is  not
   his child and is a citizen of Granada.

6. Ms Steele did not include the younger child Sahar in her application  for
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom and Sahar has no  status  now.   No
   explanation for the omission of Sahar from Ms  Steele's  application  was
   offered.

7. Ms Steele claimed in her application that  she  and  this  appellant  had
   been in a relationship for six years.  However, Ms  Steele's  application
   for leave to remain in the United Kingdom, which was limited  to  herself
   and Tayashun, was  accompanied  by  a  number  of  letters  from  persons
   supporting her application, none of whom mentioned  a  relationship  with
   the present appellant.

8. The appellant in the present application stated that he  had  been  in  a
   relationship with Ms Steele for four years and eight months.  The parties
   did not cohabit  until  October  2012  when  the  appellant  was  granted
   immigration bail to Ms Steele's address.

9. The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  they  were  a  family  unit  and
   considered that as Ms Steele had been responsible for the children's day-
   to-day welfare and health, it was in their best interests  to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom with her.  It was open to Ms  Steele  to  relocate  to
   either Granada or Jamaica if she  considered  that  to  be  in  the  best
   interests of her children; Tayashun had a right to grow up in the  United
   Kingdom as a British and EU citizen.

10. The appellant claimed to have no relatives in Jamaica, but had  returned
   there several times since his arrival in the United  Kingdom.   According
   to his account, his family members were now all  in  the  United  States.
   The appellant was an intelligent, articulate man who had achieved  eleven
   GCSEs and begun studying for a  BTech  in  manufacturing  engineering  at
   Kingston College before dropping out of his course to earn money.   There
   was no evidence of employment, nor of any community engagement.

The First-tier Tribunal determination

11. The First-tier Tribunal heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  Ms
   Steele and the appellant's father Mr Martin.  In their determination, the
   First-tier Tribunal held that  the  appellant  could  not  bring  himself
   within the Article 8 provisions of the Immigration Rules.

12. Considering the facts outside the Immigration  Rules  under  Article  8,
   the First-tier Tribunal was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
   Steele were in a committed or durable  relationship.   His  paternity  of
   Tayashun was not disputed.  The evidence relating  to  private  life  was
   slight, particularly as the appellant had now been in the United  Kingdom
   for 12 years. They did not believe that he had, as claimed, no meaningful
   familial, cultural or social ties to Jamaica.  The Tribunal  applied  the
   decision of the Upper Tribunal in Masih (deportation - public interest  -
   basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC) and considered  that  the
   s.33 exceptions were not made out and that removal of  the  appellant  to
   Jamaica would be lawful and proportionate.

Permission to appeal

13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers granted permission to appeal  on  the
   basis that it was 'just arguable' that the First-tier Tribunal  may  have
   erred in law in their proportionality assessment as to the best interests
   of the child Tayashun and/or the low risk which the  appellant  posed  to
   the community in the United Kingdom.



Rule 24 Reply

14. The respondent filed a reply pursuant to rule 24 of the  Upper  Tribunal
   Procedure Rules, of which the material paragraphs are as follows:

         "3.      The panel carried out a detailed and factual  analysis  of
         the appellant's circumstances.  The conclusion reached  as  to  the
         nature  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  Ms   Steele   are
         sustainable. Neither the appellant nor Ms Steele were considered to
         be credible  witnesses  as  to  the  nature  and  length  of  their
         relationship.

         4. There were good reasons to indicate that  the  relationship  was
         not of significance and from this situation it can  be  clearly  be
         inferred that the contact between the appellant and  his  son  with
         whom he has a family life by virtue of parentage  was  limited  and
         resulted from the need for a bail address  and  little  else.   The
         appellant's current residence  with  Ms  Steele  was  found  to  be
         opportunistic.

         5. The child Tayashun is of an age where he is largely dependent on
         his mother, has spent the majority of his life with her  alone  and
         there was no independent evidence  of  his  or  his  sister's  best
         interests.

         6. Given the limited involvement of the appellant  with  Ms  Steele
         and her family and the assessment of the appellant's character  and
         the lack of credibility in the accounts of the parties it was  open
         to the panel to conclude on  the  evidence  before  them  that  the
         deportation  of  the   appellant   was   not   a   disproportionate
         interference."

15. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me.

Upper Tribunal hearing

16. In submissions, Mr Wray argued that although  the  appellant's  offences
   were serious, he had received some credit for mitigating circumstances.

17. The appellant in this case had an  Offender  Assessment  System  (OASys)
   report which assessed his overall risk of re-conviction as low, but  that
   he posed a medium risk of harm to the community.  That  was  relevant  to
   the assessment of s.33 and Exception 1.

18. The interests of the children outweighed the  public  interest  in  this
   appeal.  The appellant's son was a British citizen and his  step-daughter
   had no applied to register as a British citizen when she reached 10 years
   old.  The appellant continued to  rely  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Masih (deportation -  public  interest  -  basic  principles)
   Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC).

19. Mr Wray was aware  of  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
   (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
   550. He asked me to allow the appeal.

20. I indicated to Mr McGirr that it would not be  necessary  to  hear  from
   him.

The law

21. The automatic deportation provisions are set  out  in  s.32  of  the  UK
   Borders Act 2007:

         "32.     Automatic deportation
         (1)In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
             (a)  who is not a British citizen,
             (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
             (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

         (2)      Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months. ...

         (4)For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971
         (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to  the
         public good."

22. There is no dispute that the appellant is a 'foreign criminal' as  there
   defined.   The presumption that  his  deportation  is  conducive  to  the
   public good is triggered, and under section 32(5) the Secretary of  State
   must make a deportation order against him.  Such a deportation order  may
   be revoked only where the appellant can bring himself within one  of  the
   exceptions set out in s.33, or he has left the United Kingdom, or for the
   purpose of taking certain actions under the Immigration Acts or making  a
   fresh deportation order.

23. The exception provisions relevant to  this  appellant  are  set  out  as
   Exception 1 in section 33(2) of the 2007 Act:

         "33(2)   Exception 1 is where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-
             (a) a person's Convention rights, or
             (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
             Convention."

24. The Upper Tribunal considered that exception  in  Masih,  and  gave  the
   following guidance:

         "The following basic principles can be  derived  from  the  present
         case law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation to
         the deportation of foreign criminals:

         (a)       In a case of automatic deportation, full account must  be
             taken  of  the  strong  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
             citizens  convicted of serious offences, which lies not only in
             the  prevention  of  further  offences  on  the  part  of   the
             individual concerned, but in deterring others  from  committing
             them in the first place.

         (b)       Deportation  of  foreign  criminals  expresses  society's
             condemnation of serious criminal activity and  promotes  public
             confidence in  the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
             committed them.

         (c)        The  starting-point  for  assessing  the  facts  of  the
             offence of which an individual has been  committed,  and  their
             effect on others, and on the public as a  whole,  must  be  the
             view taken by the sentencing judge.

         (d)       The appeal has to be dealt  with  on  the  basis  of  the
             situation at the date of the hearing.

         (e)        Full account should also be taken  of  any  developments
             since sentence was  passed,  for  example  the  result  of  any
             disciplinary adjudications in prison or detention, or any OASys
             or licence report.

         (f)         In considering  the  relevant  facts  on  'private  and
             family life' under article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
             "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the  major
             part of his or her childhood and youth in [this] country,  very
             serious reasons are required to justify expulsion".

         (g)       Such serious reasons are needed "all the  more  so  where
             the person concerned  committed  the  relevant  offences  as  a
             juvenile"  ; but "very serious  violent  offences  can  justify
             expulsion even if they were committed by a minor".  Other  very
             serious offending may also have this consequence."

25. The question has also been considered by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
   (Nigeria), the  relevant  passages  being  at  paragraphs  52-56  in  the
   judgment of Lord Justice Laws:

         "52.  In my  opinion,  however,  [the  legislative  source  of  the
         policy] is a central element in the adjudication of Article 8 cases
         where it is proposed to deport a foreign criminal pursuant to  s.32
         of  the  2007  Act.  The  width   of   the   primary   legislator's
         discretionary area of judgment is in  general  vouchsafed  by  high
         authority: Brown, Lambert, Poplar, Marcic,  Lichniak  and  Eastside
         Cheese, cited above. But it is lent added force where, as here, the
         subject-matter of the legislature's policy lies  in  the  field  of
         moral and political judgment, as to which  the  first  and  natural
         arbiter of the extent to which it  represents  a  "pressing  social
         need" is what I have called the  elected  arm  of  government:  and
         especially the primary legislature,  whose  Acts  are  the  primary
         democratic voice. What, then, should we make of  the  weight  which
         the democratic voice  has  accorded  to  the  policy  of  deporting
         foreign criminals?

         (2) THE NATURE OF THE POLICY: MORAL AND POLITICAL

         53.  The importance of the moral and  political  character  of  the
         policy shows that the two drivers of the decision-maker's margin of
         discretion - the policy's  nature  and  its  source  -  operate  in
         tandem. An Act of Parliament is anyway to be  specially  respected;
         but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind.  In  this
         case, the policy is general and overarching.  It  is  circumscribed
         only by five carefully drawn exceptions,  of  which  the  first  is
         violation of a person's Convention/Refugee Convention rights.  (The
         others concern  minors,  EU  cases,  extradition  cases  and  cases
         involving  persons  subject   to   orders   under   mental   health
         legislation.) Clearly, Parliament in the 2007 Act has attached very
         great weight to the policy as a well justified imperative  for  the
         protection of  the  public  and  to  reflect  the  public's  proper
         condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley  LJ  was  with  respect
         right to state that "[in the case of a 'foreign criminal'  the  Act
         places in the proportionality scales a markedly greater weight than
         in other cases".

         54.  I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained
         in s.33(7): "section  32(4)  applies  despite  the  application  of
         Exception 1...", that is to say, a foreign  criminal's  deportation
         remains conducive to the public good notwithstanding his successful
         reliance on Article 8. I  said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the
         authorities demonstrate that there is no rule of exceptionality for
         Article 8, they also clearly show that the more pressing the public
         interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim
         under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The  pressing  nature  of  the
         public interest here is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by
         Parliament's express declaration the public interest is injured  if
         the criminal's deportation is not effected. Such a result could  in
         my judgment only be justified by a very strong claim indeed.

         (3) SUMMARY

         55.  None of this, I apprehend, is  inconsistent  with  established
         principle, and the approach I have outlined is  well  supported  by
         the  authorities  concerning   the   decision-maker's   margin   of
         discretion.  The  leading  Supreme  Court  cases,  ZH   and   H(H),
         demonstrate that the interests of a child  affected  by  a  removal
         decision are a matter of substantial importance, and that the court
         must  proceed  on  a  proper  understanding  of  the  facts   which
         illuminate those interests (though upon the latter  point  I  would
         not with respect accept that the decision in  Tinizaray  should  be
         regarded  as  establishing  anything  in  the  nature  of   general
         principle). At the same time H(H) shows the impact  of  a  powerful
         public interest (in that case extradition)  on  what  needs  to  be
         demonstrated  for  an  Article  8  claim  to   prevail   over   it.
         Proportionality, the absence of an "exceptionality" rule,  and  the
         meaning  of  "a  primary  consideration"  are  all,  when  properly
         understood, consonant with the force to be attached in cases of the
         present kind to the two drivers of the decision-maker's  margin  of
         discretion: the policy's source and the  policy's  nature,  and  in
         particular to the great weight which the 2007 Act attributes to the
         deportation of foreign criminals.."

   and paragraph 62, in that of Mr Justice Mann:

         "62.      In  this  appeal  counsel  for   the   appellant   placed
         considerable emphasis on the  need  for  the  Tribunal  to  satisfy
         itself as to the interests of the child in such a way as  suggested
         an  inquisitorial  procedure.  I  agree  with  Laws  LJ  that   the
         circumstances in which the Tribunal will require further  inquiries
         to be made, or evidence to be obtained, are likely to be  extremely
         rare. In the vast majority of cases the Tribunal  will  expect  the
         relevant interests of the child to be drawn to the attention of the
         decision-maker by  the  individual  concerned.  The  decision-maker
         would then make such additional inquiries as might appear to him or
         her to be appropriate. The scope for the Tribunal to require,  much
         less indulge in, further inquiries of its own seems  to  me  to  be
         extremely limited, almost to the extent that  I  find  it  hard  to
         imagine when, or how, it could do so."

Discussion

26. The question for me is whether it was open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   on the facts found to conclude that the appellant  had  not  made  out  a
   sufficient case to bring himself within Exception 1 as set out in section
   32(2)(a) in relation to Article 8 ECHR.  The evidence in relation to  the
   best interests of Ms Steele's children was not strong  and  the  Tribunal
   had no inquisitorial duty, as set out by Mann J in SS's case.

27. The appellant had committed a serious offence for which  he  received  a
   sentence of 40 months.  His relationship with Ms  Steele  was,  at  best,
   intermittent and the Tribunal was entitled to find that it  did  not  add
   much  weight   to   the   proportionality   balance.     The   Tribunal's
   determination was a proper representation of the weight to  be  given  to
   the public interest as set out in a statutory provision.  The conclusions
   reached were not, properly understood, legally erroneous  in  the  weight
   attached to the best interests of the appellant's son and  step-daughter,
   or to such private and/or family life as  has  been  enjoyed  between  Ms
   Steele, the appellant, and her children.

28. There was no material error of law in the Tribunal's  determination  and
   I uphold it.


DECISION

The making of the previous decision involved the making of  no  error  on  a
point of law
I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:                                        Signed

                                            Judith Gleeson

                                            Judge of the Upper Tribunal

