
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01415/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MARK ANTHONY REID
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Haywood, counsel, instructed by Owen Stevens
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BASIC  FACTS OF THE APPELLANT'S CASE

1.   The Appellant, who was born  on  16  August  1963,  is  a  national  of
    Jamaica.  In the present proceedings he said that he entered the United
    Kingdom illegally using a cousin's ID in May 1993.  His older son  [Jo]
    was born on [ - ].  His next child, a daughter called [G], was born  on
    [ - ] and on [ - ] he married their mother, [K].  A  further  daughter,
    [Je], was born [ - ] and on 14 July 2008 he applied for leave to remain
    under the seven year policy on the basis that he had a  child  who  had
    been living in the United Kingdom for more than seven years and who was
    a British citizen.

2.   This application was refused but subsequently allowed on appeal and  in
    October 2009 the Appellant was granted  discretionary  leave  until  26
    October 2012.  Meanwhile a further daughter, [Ka], had been born on [ -
    ].  On 25 October 2012 he applied for further leave to remain.  However
    on 8 November 2012 a letter was sent to the Appellant asking him to put
    forward reasons why he should not be deported.  On 2  January  2013  he
    replied to the questionnaire.

3.   The Appellant has a long criminal history. On 15 May 1997  he  received
    a conditional discharge for being in possession of a bladed article and
    on 4 March 1999 he was given a community service  order  for  being  in
    possession of an offensive weapon.

4.   On 30 January 2003 he was found guilty of possession of a Class A  drug
    with intent to supply and sentenced to two years in prison. Then, on  7
    October 2008 he was convicted of possession of heroin and sentenced  to
    one year suspended for one year. Subsequently, on 22  October  2011  he
    received a conditional discharge for obstructing a drug search.

5.   Finally, on 14 September 2012  he  was  convicted  of  five  counts  of
    supplying crack cocaine and one count of supplying heroin with a number
    of other people. They were supplying these drugs on  the  streets.   He
    was initially sentenced to six years in prison but this was reduced  to
    four years by the Court of Appeal.

6.   It is because of this  conviction  that  his  application  for  further
    leave was refused and he was asked for reasons why  he  should  not  be
    deported.

7.   The Appellant was released on licence on 19 May 2014 and a  deportation
    order was made in relation  to  him  on  9  July  2014.   This  was  an
    automatic deportation order under Section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  as
    he had been sentenced to more than twelve months in prison. He appealed
    against this decision on 21 July 2014 on the basis of his rights  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, asserting that he
    had no family in Jamaica to return to and that  his  deportation  would
    have an adverse affect on his children.

8.   On 16 January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  allowed  his
    appeal.  The Secretary of  State  subsequently  appealed  against  this
    decision on 22 January 2015 and First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker granted
    permission to appeal on 6 February 2015.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

9.   At the error of law hearing Mr. Clarke  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    had had to establish that there were very compelling  circumstances  in
    his case over and above the exceptions described in paragraphs 399  and
    399A of the Immigration  Rules  and  had  failed  to  do  so.  He  also
    submitted that there was insufficient evidence to justify some  of  the
    findings of fact reached by the First-tier Judge in paragraphs 71 to 80
    of his decision.  Instead, he erroneously relied on bare  assertion  or
    judicial notice.  He emphasised that the Appellant needed  to  do  more
    than show that the effect of his  deportation  on  his  family  members
    would be unduly harsh and very compelling.

10.  Mr. Haywood then replied and submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had directed himself to sections 117A and C of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  relevant  case  law.   He  also
    submitted that the Judge was entitled to reach  a  decision  which  was
    fact sensitive and that his analysis conformed with the  relevant  case
    law. He also submitted that read as a  whole  the  decision  took  into
    account all relevant factors, including the oral evidence given at  the
    appeal hearing. He then referred me to the evidence relied upon by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in some detail.

11.  I accept that First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert did refer  to  sections
    117A and C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and some
    relevant case law in paragraphs 56  -  62  of  his  decision.   But  in
    paragraph 61 of his decision he noted that the starting point  for  his
    consideration was to ask whether  or  not  the  Appellant  could  bring
    himself within paragraph 339 and 339A of the new Rules by asking itself
    whether there were  very  compelling  reasons  within  the  exceptional
    circumstances rule break in paragraph 339 to outweigh the strong public
    interest of deportation in the appellant's case.

12.   However,  as  the  Appellant  had  been  sentenced   to   four   years
    imprisonment and he did not fall within sub-paragraphs 398(b)  and  (c)
    and paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules, the correct  test
    to be applied was whether the public interest in deportation  would  be
    outweighed by  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

13.  In paragraph 63 the First-tier Tribunal Judge did say that

         "The starting  point  is  that  a  foreign  criminal's  deportation
         remaining  conducive  to  the  public  good   notwithstanding   his
         successful reliance on Article 8.  In the balancing exercise, great
         weight should be given to the public interest in deporting  foreign
         criminals who do not satisfy paragraphs 398 and 399A.  It  is  only
         exceptionally that such foreign criminals would succeed in  showing
         their rights under Article 8(1) trump the public interest in  their
         deportation."

14.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert did also give considerable weight  to
    the public interest in deportation  but  when  conducting  a  balancing
    exercise,  he  relied  on  a  passage  from  McLarty   (Deportation   -
    proportionality balance) [2014] UKUT 00315 (IAC) which stated that:

         "Where two important countervailing principles collide - the public
         interest in deportation versus the interests of the  individual  in
         having an opportunity to develop a relationship with his  children,
         fairness requires that the Tribunal provide full and proper reasons
         in relation to their consideration of both these factors"

15.  He failed to remind himself of  another  passage  from  McLarty,  which
    held that:

         "There can be little doubt that, in enacting  the  UK  Borders  Act
         2007, Parliament  views  the  object  of  deporting  those  with  a
         criminal record as a very strong policy, which is constant  in  all
         cases (SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         [2013] EWCA Civ 550). The weight to  be  attached  to  that  object
         will, however, include a variable  component,  which  reflects  the
         criminality in issue.   Nevertheless,  Parliament  has  tilted  the
         scales strongly in favour of deportation and for them to return  to
         the  level  and  then  swing  in  favour  of  a  criminal  opposing
         deportation  there  must  be  compelling  reasons,  which  must  be
         exceptional."

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  briefly  consider  the  Appellant's
    criminal history in paragraphs 6 and 67  of  his  decision.  But,  when
    considering his criminality, the Judge did  not  explicitly  take  into
    account the fact that the Appellant had been convicted on two occasions
    for possession with intent to supply Class A drugs, once for possessing
    a Class A drug and once for obstructing a drugs search.

17.  Therefore, in my view, he was not following  the  approach  adopted  in
    Chege (s117D: Article 8: approach: Kenya) [2015] UKUT 165 (IAC) by  the
    Upper Tribunal where it held  that  the  questions  to  be  asked  were
    whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above those in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules,  such  identification
    to be informed by the seriousness of the criminality  and  taking  into
    account the factors set out in section 117B.

18.  At most the First-tier Tribunal Judge  said  in  paragraph  67  of  his
    decision that the context of the last offence was that  he  was  street
    dealing to feed his own habit as he was addicted to cocaine and heroin.
    He did not analyse the seriousness of the Appellant's criminality.

19.  He also needed to find compelling factors which  were  over  and  above
    the fact that it may be unduly harsh on his children and wife  for  him
    to be deported to Jamaica.

20.  What is  said  by  the  Appellant's  Counsel  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did look at additional factors between paragraphs 71 and
    83 of his decision and that cumulatively those factors were  sufficient
    to amount to very compelling circumstances.

21.  I have some difficulties with that submission.  Firstly,  many  of  the
    factors relied on by the First-tier Tribunal are used by him to led  to
    the conclusion at paragraph 81 of his decision that it would be  unduly
    harsh to expect the Appellant's  wife  and  children  to  join  him  in
    Jamaica. Others relate to the fact that the children may have  to  grow
    up here without him and his wife may  not  be  able  to  qualify  as  a
    midwife.   These may have an unduly harsh effect on them but they could
    not be characterised as very compelling. In AJ (Angola) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 the Court of  Appeal
    held that compelling meant powerful or irresistible and said  that  the
    use of "very" imposed a very high threshold.

22.  I also note that the evidence suggested that the Appellant's  wife  had
    been able to attend her course on a part-time basis when  her  children
    were at nursery and school and that she had been  the  breadwinner  for
    most of the time during which the Appellant said he had been addicted.

23.  In paragraph 71 of his decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that the Appellant had shown insight into his offending and that  there
    was evidence of his remorse and progress while  in  custody.   He  also
    noted that the Appellant had the benefit of a loving wife who had stood
    by him and four children who appeared  devoted  to  him.   Again  these
    could not be characterised as very compelling factors.

24.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also relied  on  generalised  assertions,
    which are not backed up with objective  evidence  or  expert  evidence.
    For example, at paragraph 76 of his decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge said: "I find that there is overwhelming objective evidence  that
    despite an addiction and a previous period of criminality such  parents
    can nevertheless provide good enough parenting". That may be  the  case
    but there was no evidence in this  particular  case  to  back  up  that
    finding.

25.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  also  found  in  paragraph  77  of  his
    decision that the Appellant's removal "would place all four children in
    a downward spiral to expose them to varying degrees of  emotional  harm
    because single parent families where the father figure is  removed  are
    more likely to end in care, or to enter into delinquency and failure at
    school". Again that may well be the finding of some research but it was
    not research that was before the Judge. He also referred  in  paragraph
    78 to  statements  by  the  Metropolitan  Police  about  Afro-Caribbean
    children falling into delinquency but again they were  not  adduced  at
    the appeal.

26.  There  was  some  evidence  from  their  schools  that  the  older  two
    children's behaviour had deteriorated whilst the father was  in  prison
    on the last occasion and that their behaviour had improved when he came
    out. But there  was  no  evidence  about  other  possible  reasons  for
    misbehaviour especially because the documents on file noted  there  had
    been periods of domestic violence in the past and also there  had  been
    child protection plans in place.

27.  At paragraph 81 of his decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    found that it would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant's  wife  to
    remove herself and  children  to  Jamaica  as  it  would  significantly
    interfere with their education and development  and  prevent  her  from
    qualifying as a midwife and undermine the parents' ability to bring  up
    and care for the children as there was not a level of  social  services
    support to the extent there is in the United Kingdom. Again  there  was
    no objective evidence to show that the children would not  be  able  to
    complete their education in Jamaica. Furthermore, the  evidence  before
    the Judge was that there was no longer any social services  support  in
    place for the family and that social services had no  present  concerns
    about the family. '

28.  At paragraph 82 of his decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    referred to the family being left  effectively  destitute  and  reliant
    upon extended family members that they may not be able  to  locate,  if
    they joined the Appellant in Jamaica. Instead, the  evidence  suggested
    that the Appellant's wife had been born and brought up in  Jamaica  and
    that at least her mother was still living there. The  Appellant's  wife
    had also been working as a carer  and  was  shortly  to  qualify  as  a
    midwife.  The Appellant had also said in evidence  that  he  wished  to
    work as a labourer or hairdresser and he  had  obtained  qualifications
    whilst in prison on the last occasion which would assist him in getting
    a job in construction.

29.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  did
    make material errors of law in his decision in the manner in  which  he
    applied the relevant legal test to establish whether  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and above  the  factors  referred  to  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules and  section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Notice of Decision

30.  The Respondent's appeal is allowed.

31.  The Appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert.


Signed

Nadine Finch  Date 4 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

