
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01364/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House,                |Date promulgated:                    |
|Breams Buildings, London             |On: 19 January 2017                  |
|on 06 December 2016                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President and
         The Hon. Mr Justice Soole, as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                   Between

                                     HB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr J Walsh, of counsel, instructed by Morgan Has Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                             ANONYMITY DIRECTION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is hereby made.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal
or Court orders otherwise, no report of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


                                  DECISION
Introduction

 1. By this decision we  hereby  remake  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT") which was set aside by an earlier decision of this
    Tribunal dated 11 August 2015.  Regrettably,  our  attempts  to  relist
    this appeal soon were unsuccessful.


 2. The origins of the appeal to this Tribunal lie in the decision made  on
    behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State"), dated 04 July 2014,  whereby  an
    application to revoke a deportation order in respect of the  Appellant,
    a national of Turkey aged 39 years, was refused.


Factual Framework

 3. We rehearse the following facts, which are uncontentious:


      a) The Appellant's father having been  granted  exceptional  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom, in January 1998 the  Appellant  (then
         aged 20) and his mother joined his father in the United Kingdom.


      b) The Appellant was granted leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
         until 14 January 2000 and, on  19  January  2000,  he  was  granted
         indefinite leave to remain.

      c) On 16 December 2001, a son ("KB") was born to the Appellant and his
         partner, who were married  subsequently  on  08  October  2003  and
         remain married.

      d) Between October 2004 and October 2007 the Appellant  was  convicted
         of eight offences of  dishonesty,  one  of  assault  and  three  of
         failing to surrender  to  custody.   He  was  sentenced,  on  three
         separate occasions, as follows:

          i) A community service order of 120 hours  and  payment  of  �300
             compensation.


          ii) 90 days imprisonment.

         iii) Nine months imprisonment.

      e) On 03 April 2008 the Secretary of State made a deportation order in
         respect of the Appellant.


      f) On 04 September 2008  the  ensuing  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
         Tribunal.

      g) On 30 January 2009 the  Appellant  was  deported  from  the  United
         Kingdom.

      h) Around December 2013 the Appellant re-entered the  United  Kingdom,
         unlawfully.

      i) On 17 January 2014 the  Appellant  was  discovered  to  be  working
         illegally and was apprehended.   He  remained  in  detention  until
         March 2015, when he was granted bail.


 4. Summarising, the four main events since the  Appellant's  unlawful  re-
    entry to the United Kingdom have been the Secretary of State's  refusal
    to revoke the deportation  order,  the  Appellant's  successful  appeal
    against that decision, the decision of this Tribunal setting aside  the
    decision of the FtT as erroneous in law and the birth of a  second  son
    of the family on 11 September 2014.

 5. The appeal was conducted through the medium of witness  statements  and
    other documentary evidence.  Having considered this, duly  supplemented
    by the  submissions  of  the  parties'  representatives,  we  make  the
    following additional material findings:


    (a)  From January 2009 the (then) three members of the family unit  did
         not enjoy normal family life for a period of some five years.


      b) During this period the older son, KB, made two brief visits to  the
         Appellant in Turkey.


      c) In 2011 the Appellant's spouse  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  and  she  has  subsequently  acquired
         British citizenship.

      d) Post-2011, the Appellant's spouse visited him in  Turkey,  probably
         more than once. She had a legitimate reason, namely  her  uncertain
         immigration status, for not doing so sooner.

      e) The Appellant's motivation for illegal working was to  provide  for
         his family.

      f) From February 2010 to June  2014  the  Appellant's  spouse  was  in
         active,  low-paid  employment.   She  is  likely  to  re-engage  in
         employment quite soon.

      g) Between 2009 and 2013 the family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom
         suffered a series of hardships, mainly emotional and financial.

      h) Since his release from detention in March 2015, the  Appellant  has
         complied fully with his conditions of  bail  and  the  family  have
         enjoyed the  benefits  and  advantages  to  be  expected  from  his
         constant presence in their lives.  These  benefits  and  advantages
         extend to the Appellant himself.

    Legal Framework

 6. The starting point is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
    offenders, enshrined in section 117B (1) of the NIAA  2002  (the  "2002
    Act").  This is of undeniable potency, as emphasised  in  a  series  of
    decisions, SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550  at  [48]  -  [54]  perhaps
    being the leader in this particular field.  The  profuse  jurisprudence
    which Part 5A of the 2002 Act has generated has not modified or diluted
    in any way the simple statement in section 117C (2):

         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal".

    We consider that these statutory words require no gloss  of  any  kind.
    Their meaning is crystal clear.  They convey  the  principle  that  the
    potency of this public interest, strong to begin with, varies according
    to the context.  Where  the  person  concerned  has  committed  heinous
    crimes, the public interest is at its most robust  and  uncompromising.
    On the other hand, its bite is gentler where the  crimes  committed  by
    the offender belong towards the lower end of the notional spectrum.



 7. We next turn our attention to the obligatory  statutory  considerations
    enshrined in Part 5A of (the "2002 Act") and apply these as follows:

      i) It is not disputed that all four members of the family  unit  speak
         fluent English.

     ii) Nor is there any dispute that the family unit has,  at  all  times,
         been financially independent (and see our findings above).

    iii) KB is a "qualifying child".

     iv) The Appellant's spouse is a "qualifying partner".

      v) It is not disputed that the Appellant has (in the language  of  the
         statute) a genuine and subsisting relationship with his spouse  and
         a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with KB.

 8. The central question in this appeal is whether the so-called "Exception
    2" applies to the Appellant, given that his  commensurate  sentence  of
    imprisonment in 2007 was less than four years  (it  was  nine  months).
    section 117C (5) of the 2002 Act provides:


         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of C's
         deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."


    [Our emphasis]


    Section 117C (5) is one of a series of provisions  arranged  under  the
    rubric "Article  8  -  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals".  This is followed immediately by:


         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal."


    This latter provision is reflected in section 117C (3), which  makes  a
    clear distinction between those who have been sentenced  to  less  than
    four    years   imprisonment and others.


 9. The "unduly harsh" statutory criterion appears twice in  the  Secretary
    of State's statement of policy (as the Rules must be characterised), as
    regards "qualifying children", in  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  of  the
    Rules:
         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -
         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or
             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case
                  (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported;
                      and
                  (b)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported; or
         (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and
             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and
             (ii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
             (iii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported."
    As we have observed, this is not a legal rule, rather  a  statement  of
    the Secretary of State's policy: Hesham Ali v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 at [17].

10. The above statutory provisions were considered recently by the Court of
    Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 932, a case concerning a decision refusing to revoke  a
    deportation order.  Arden LJ stated at [52]:


         "The function of section 117C is to set out the weight to be  given
         to  the  public  interest  to  be  taken  into   account   in   the
         proportionality exercise to be carried out under Article 8  of  the
         Convention in the case of a foreign criminal."


    The judgment continues, at [53]:


         "To understand the length of  the  deportation  in  any  particular
         case, the tribunal hearing the case has to examine the  Immigration
         Rules.  From that the tribunal is bound to observe that those Rules
         proceed on the basis that, in the absence of undue  harshness,  the
         appropriate period of absence from this jurisdiction in a case such
         as A's is ten years (paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules).  That
         is a very long period in anyone's life and so it is an indicator of
         the gravity of the effect on the community  which  the  offence  is
         considered to have.  That is the period for which the  deportee  is
         expected to be removed from the jurisdiction.   As  has  been  said
         before, removal from the jurisdiction inevitably entails separation
         from people and places  previously  enjoyed  here,  and  the  pain,
         inconvenience and hardship which that separation entails."


    Followed by, at [54]:


         "Moreover, it is clear from section 117C (2) that the nature of the
         offending is also to be taken into account.  The tribunal will have
         access to the circumstances of the offence and to the length of the
         sentence and so on."


    And next an important passage, at [55]:


         "Subsection (1) and (2) of section 117C together make manifest  the
         strength of the public interest. In order to displace  that  public
         interest, the harshness brought about by the  continuation  of  the
         deportation order must be undue, i.e.  it  must  be  sufficient  to
         outweigh that strong public interest. Inevitably, therefore,  there
         will have to  be  very  compelling  reasons.   That  conclusion  is
         consistent  with  MF  Nigeria  and  ZP  India  even  though   those
         authorities are based on different Immigration Rules and  statutory
         provisions."


11. The next component of the legal framework is section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  which  mandates  that  the  best
    interests of both children of the Appellant's family rank as a  primary
    consideration in the balancing exercise.  This statutory provision  has
    featured in the jurisprudence of this Tribunal: see  in  particular  JO
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC) and MK (Section 55  -  Tribunal  Options)
    Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).  The principles which the ECtHR has
    formulated concerning the best interests of children in the  Article  8
    context were summarised in one of its recent decisions thus:


         "The Court has further  held  that  there  is  a  broad  consensus,
         including in international law, in support of the idea that in  all
         decisions  concerning  children,  their  best  interests  must   be
         paramount ....


         The Court pays particular attention to  the  circumstances  of  the
         minor children concerned, especially their age ... and  the  extent
         to which they are dependent on their parents ...


         While the best interests of the child cannot be a 'trump card'  the
         domestic courts must place the best interests of the child  at  the
         heart of their consideration and attach crucial weight to it ...."

    See Ghatet v Switzerland [Application no: 56971/10], at [46].


12. The decision in Hesham Ali and previous cases  were  reviewed  by  this
    panel of judges in Treebhawon v SSHD [IA/45443/2014] [2017] UKUT  00013
    (IAC), where a spectrum of foreign national offenders  was  identified.
    See [40]:


             "The fundamental importance of identifying the characteristics
             and conduct of the person against whom removal or  deportation
             action is proposed courses through the veins of Part 5A of the
             2002 Act and the growing jurisprudence in this  field.  It  is
             one of the themes of  the  decision  in  Hesham  Ali  (supra),
             where, in [46] one  finds  an  important  distinction  between
             foreign  national  offenders  who  have  been  punished  by  a
             custodial sentence of four  years  or  more  and  those  whose
             sentences belong to the  bracket  of  twelve  months  to  four
             years."


    And at [41]:


             "... it is of no little significance that in Part  5A  of  the
             2002 Act Parliament has singled out foreign national offenders
             for special attention and treatment.  There  are  "additional"
             considerations in their cases:  per  section  117A(2)(b).   In
             very  brief  compass,  the  hurdles  in  the  way  of  foreign
             criminals who seek to resist deportation by invoking Article 8
             ECHR are  greater:  they  find  themselves  within  a  heavily
             circumscribed  statutory  regime  containing  elevated  tests.
             Furthermore,  in  their  cases  the  additional,  freestanding
             public  interest  underpinning  the  deportation  of   foreign
             criminals is engaged, per section 117C (1)."


    Next, in the context of our consideration of Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803  we  stated  with
    reference to the "little weight" provisions in section 117B, at [45]:


             "... the recently promulgated decision of this chamber in Kaur
             v SSHD [HU/02209/2015] contains a thesis on the words  "little
             weight" and the notional sliding scale which they entail. Kaur
             reasons that this produces the result that  in  some  cases  a
             private  life  developed  during  a  period  of  unlawful   or
             precarious  leave  in  the  United  Kingdom  may  qualify  for
             virtually no weight, whereas in others the quantity of  weight
             to be attributed may verge on the notionally  moderate,  where
             the  assessment  is  that  the  particular  case,   with   its
             individual traits and circumstances, belongs to the upper  end
             of the "little weight" spectrum."


13. Ultimately, the  essential  issue  to  be  determined  is  whether  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  refusing  to  revoke  the  Appellant's
    deportation order constitutes a disproportionate interference with  the
    right to respect  for  family  life  guaranteed  to  all  four  persons
    concerned by Article 8(1) ECHR, via section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  The legal framework within  which  this  question  falls  to  be
    decided is formed by Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act  2002  (the  "2002  Act")  and  the  discrete  regime  within   the
    Immigration Rules constituted by paragraphs A398,  398,  399,  399  and
    399A.  These provisions  have  been  reproduced  exhaustively  in  many
    decisions of this Tribunal and the Court of Appeal.


    Consideration


14. The submissions of Mr Deller  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    identified three factors to be placed on the public  interest  side  of
    the notional scales:  the Appellant's offending between 2004 and  2007,
    his breach of the  deportation  order  by  unlawfully  re-entering  the
    United Kingdom and his illegal working.  We are mandated by  Parliament
    to view these factors as lying  within  the  embrace  of  the  specific
    public interests in the maintenance of  effective  immigration  control
    and the deportation of foreign national offenders:  per  sections  117B
    (1) and 117C (1) of the 2002 Act.  We also take account of  the  policy
    statement in paragraph 396  of  the  Rules  that  the  public  interest
    requires the deportation of a person who is liable to this measure.

15. In our evaluation of the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in  this
    particular, we have sought to probe the basis of the deportation  order
    made in respect of the Appellant in January 2009.  In doing so, we have
    established that there was no  OASYS  report  or  probation  report  or
    anything comparable.  Thus, there was no evidence - and there still  is
    none - that the Appellant poses  a  particular  risk  of  re-offending.
    There is no assessment of risk to  the  public.   We  note  that  these
    issues are not addressed  at  all  in  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal in September  2008.   The  Tribunal's
    decision contains  very  little  assessment.  It  is  conclusionary  in
    nature.  Coincidentally, we consider that the same  assessment  applies
    to the decision of the Secretary of State underpinning this appeal.  It
    is of the logarithmic, "boilerplate" variety ticking a series of  boxes
    as it progresses to its formulaic finish and resulting in  a    product
    which is positively anaemic.

16. We turn to identify those aspects  of  the  overall  matrix  which  can
    legitimately inform our measurement of the public  interests  in  play.
    First,  bearing  in  mind  section  117C  (2)  of  the  2002  Act,  the
    Appellant's  offending,  while   inexcusable   and   lacking   in   any
    identifiable mitigation, belongs to  the  lower  end  of  the  notional
    scale.  This is reflected in the  fact  that,  in  total,  his  various
    offences  attracted  the  sanction  of  nine  months'  and   90   days'
    imprisonment.  Second, by virtue of the latter factor, the  Appellant's
    case  belongs  to  the  least  serious  category  of  foreign  national
    offenders liable to deportation.  Third, there is no evidence that  the
    Appellant poses any particular risk of re-offending or any special risk
    to the public.  In this respect, we take into account  the  nature  and
    vintage of his offending and the sanctions imposed.  Linked to this  is
    the consideration that his convictions are all "spent" by virtue of the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.

17. Further, a degree of mitigation may be identifiable in the  Appellant's
    illegal working, of very  brief  duration  (approximately  one  month),
    given its motivation, namely  to  provide  for  his  family  (which  is
    undisputed).  We consider that if a prosecution  had  materialised  the
    Appellant's motivation could conceivably have ranked  as  a  mitigating
    factor.  On the  other  hand,  we  are  bound  to  recognise  that  the
    Appellant's twin acts of re-entering the United Kingdom unlawfully  and
    engaging in work unlawfully almost immediately thereafter  are  aspects
    of the public interest inclining in favour of his deportation  and,  as
    such, operate to his detriment in the context of this appeal.

18. We turn next to consider the main facts and factors  belonging  to  the
    family life side of the balancing exercise.  Prior to his  deportation,
    the Appellant had been lawfully present in the United Kingdom for  some
    nine years.  During eight of these years, he was the father member of a
    stable, secure family unit.  KB, the older child, was born in  December
    2001, is now aged almost 15 years and has spent his entire life in  the
    United Kingdom.  Both he and  his  sister,  now  aged  two  years,  are
    British  citizens.   Mother  and  son  suffered  greatly   during   the
    Appellant's five years' absence from the United  Kingdom  beginning  in
    January 2009.  However, through  the  limited  mechanisms  of  frequent
    telephone contact and infrequent visits to the Appellant in Turkey, the
    marriage has survived and the family unit remains intact.  Family  life
    has, predictably, been greatly enhanced during the period of almost two
    years elapsed since the Appellant was granted bail.

19.  We  consider  that   notwithstanding   the   progressively   intensive
    prescription which has become a hallmark of both legal  rules,  through
    statutory intervention, and the Secretary of State's policies, via  the
    Immigration  Rules,  it  remains  the  case  that  where  a   qualified
    Convention  right  -  most  typically  Article  8   -   is   in   play,
    proportionality balancing exercises do  not  savour  of  hard-edged  or
    bright-line rules.   The guidance in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 at [12]
    is an enduring member of the leading jurisprudence in this  field:  see
    in particular Hesham Ali at [47].  Per Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill,  at
    [12] -

         "Thus  the  Appellate  Immigration  Authority  must  make  its  own
         judgment and that judgment  will  be  strongly  influenced  by  the
         particular facts and circumstances of the particular case ... There
         is in general no alternative  to  making  a  careful  and  informed
         evaluation of the facts of the particular case.  The search  for  a
         hard-edged or bright-line rule to be applied to the  generality  of
         cases is incompatible with the difficult evaluative exercise  which
         Article 8 requires."

    We add only that tribunals must always be alert to certain crucial  and
    recurring imperatives in this sphere, namely to separate  the  material
    from the immaterial, to make findings on contested material  issues  of
    fact as required, to provide adequate and intelligible reasons for  key
    findings of fact and conclusions and, finally, to  prepare  the  scales
    diligently in every case: see per Lord Thomas LCJ in Hesham Ali at [83]
    - [84] and Forman [2015] UKUT 442 (IAC) at [20].

    Our Conclusions

20. As has been previously stated, in cases of this kind it is incumbent on
    the tribunal to undertake some prediction of likely future events. This
    has been described in other judgments of this Tribunal as a predictive,
    evaluative assessment. We consider that if the Appellant  is  compelled
    to leave the United Kingdom, the probabilities are that he will  do  so
    alone and his isolation will endure throughout the short to medium term
    extending to the entirety of the balance of the  period  prescribed  by
    the Rules namely the next four years. Our view of the likely future for
    this family is  informed  substantially  by  past  events  and  present
    realities.  We further take into account that, at  this  juncture,  the
    Appellant has "served" approximately six of  the  ten  years  of  exile
    prescribed by paragraph 391 of the Rules.  Mr Walsh, realistically, did
    not dissent from this analysis.

21. We begin by assessing the best interests of the two children concerned.
     This exercise produces the obvious outcome that the best interests  of
    these children will be  furthered  by  the  maintenance  of  a  stable,
    unfragmented family unit with their father,  the  Appellant,  having  a
    daily role and presence in their lives.  This, by reason of section  55
    of  the  2009  Act,  ranks  as   a   primary   consideration   in   the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

22. Given our findings above, the next critical question, via section  117C
    (5) of the 2002 Act, becomes: will the effect of the Appellant's  exile
    from the United Kingdom for a period of at least four years  be  unduly
    harsh on his spouse and/or  KB?   We  consider,  firstly,  the  spouse.
    Having made some reference to her situation above, we draw attention to
    the following uncontested passages in her witness statement:

         "When my husband was deported [in 2009]  I  also  suffered  various
         health issues [which] ... shortened my lifespan  ....   I  suffered
         financial difficulties and providing my son a good life ....


         Things were very difficult as a single mother during  my  husband's
         absence. I and my son lived with anxiety about the future ....


         Anxiety and fear are only part of the damaging impacts on my family
         ....


         My home environment has changed since the  release  of  my  husband
         from the detention centre ...


         My husband has dedicated his life to his children  and  spends  all
         his time with them."

    As regards the impact on KB, in addition to the matters highlighted
    above, we draw attention to the following passages in his mother's
    witness statement:

         "There has been a dramatic improvement  in  [KB's]  behaviour.   He
         feels safe and comfortable with his father's presence at  home.  He
         has been doing very well at school and is  able  to  do  activities
         such as playing football and computer games with his father  as  he
         wasn't able to do so with myself.  He is also able to  express  his
         feelings and thoughts.   After  his  visits  to  Turkey,  [KB]  was
         traumatised upon our every return as my husband was unable to  join
         us ...  He always found it difficult to adapt to his  normal  life,
         he would stop eating and suffer stress-induced  stomach  aches  and
         headaches.  [His] performance in school suffered ...  [He] is under
         constant fear that his father could, at any moment, be  taken  away
         ...  My son has suffered behavioural problems from time to time ...


         He is a very happy child now with higher academic achievements.  My
         husband has dedicated his life to his children and spends  all  his
         time with them ....


         I now hear constant laughter in my home whereas previously  it  was
         complete silence and sadness.  The sight of  the  happiness  of  my
         children and my husband completes my life."

The predictable impact on the Appellant's spouse is, of course, largely
inseparable from that on the children, albeit all three impacts have their
distinguishing features.

23. The Appellant's spouse also points out that  their  second  child,  now
    aged two, has grown up in her father's presence  throughout  her  short
    life. We are mindful that as this child is less than seven  years  old,
    she does not feature in  the  section  117C  (5)  test.   However,  the
    section 117C regime contains a series  of  "additional  considerations"
    which are not designed to constitute an exhaustive  list:  see  section
    117A(2) and the words  in  parenthesis  "(in  particular)".   Thus  the
    situation of the younger child and the foreseeable  adverse  impact  on
    her in the event of the Appellant being removed from  her  life,  given
    that she will be reared for at least the next four years by one  parent
    rather than two parents, are, in orthodox public law doctrine, material
    considerations.  We take these factors into account accordingly.

24. In MK Sierra Leone (supra), this  Tribunal  stated  in  [46]  that  the
    criterion "unduly harsh" -

         "....  does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably
         more elevated threshold.  'Harsh' in this context denotes something
         severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already
         elevated standard still higher."

    We consider that the  Appellant's  exile  during  a  five  year  period
    beginning in January 2009 had a heavy adverse impact on  his  wife  and
    son.  His  departure  was  the  trigger  for  five  years  of  constant
    struggle, stress, anxiety and uncertainty.  If he is  abruptly  removed
    from their lives again the impact will be at least as acute as  regards
    mother and son.  Overall,  it  will  be  still  more  acute  given  the
    expansion of the family unit with  the  advent  of  the  second  child.
    Contact  of  sorts,  both  verbal  and  visual,  supplemented  by   the
    occasional  visit  to  the  Appellant  in  Turkey,  can  of  course  be
    maintained.   However,  the   contrast   between   maintaining   family
    relationships in this way and as a stable, secure unit living  together
    is stark.  Furthermore, having regard to financial  realities  and  the
    increased size of the family, any visits to the Appellant in Turkey are
    likely to be highly infrequent and will in any event be  no  substitute
    for normal family life.


25. We are also mindful that by virtue of the recent decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, the "unduly harsh"
    standard in section 117C (5) of the 2002 Act is to be viewed through  a
    somewhat broader lens than the statutory language seems to suggest.  It
    incorporates a balancing of the wider  public  interests,  encompassing
    all the circumstances  including  in  particular  the  immigration  and
    criminal history  of  the  parent  concerned.   As  this  Tribunal  has
    recently observed, the incorporation  of  this  latter  factor  in  the
    balancing exercise does not infringe the seventh principle in the  code
    devised in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74, namely that  a  child  should
    not be blamed for matters for which it is not responsible such  as  the
    conduct of a parent: see Kaur v SSHD [Appeal number  HU/02207/2015]  at
    [36] - [37] especially.

26. The "unduly harsh" standard  must  also  be  addressed  in  considering
    whether the Appellant's case satisfies the Secretary of State's  policy
    expressed in paragraph 399 of the Rules.  The first three  elements  of
    this  policy  (parental  relationship,  age  of  children  and  British
    citizenship status of children) are all satisfied.  The fourth (in this
    context) entails determination of whether it would  be  "unduly  harsh"
    for either child to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant.



27. We have outlined above the main  facts  and  factors  bearing  on  this
    question.  The conclusion that the impact on  both  children  of  their
    father's  deportation,  with  the  resulting  separation   during   the
    forthcoming four years, will be harsh is readily made.   Both  will  be
    denied the presence of their father in their  respective  lives  during
    critical periods of their development and will thus be deprived of  the
    important emotional support and sustenance which he is clearly  capable
    of providing. There will likely be reduced stability in their lives  in
    consequence.  Furthermore, there will be resulting greater strains  and
    stresses on their mother which, in turn, may compromise her ability  to
    provide the optimal maternal services.  She will be  no  surrogate  for
    their father. Following a  "honeymoon"  period  of  almost  two  years'
    duration, the austere status quo ante will be reinstated.  On the other
    hand, this had become the norm for the older child and a certain degree
    of resilience is to be expected in consequence.

28. Harshness would undoubtedly result.  But, we conclude that the elevated
    threshold of undue harshness is not overcome.  This is  our  evaluative
    judgment.  The nature of  this  threshold  is  such  that  it  will  be
    satisfied only in a comparatively rare case.   This  case,  though  far
    from lacking in appeal and persuasion, does not possess  the  necessary
    potency in this respect.  This conclusion is  reinforced  when,  giving
    effect to MM (Uganda), the public interests engaged and the immigration
    and criminal history of the Appellant are balanced.  We would add  that
    even without the MM (Uganda) approach, our  conclusion  on  this  issue
    would be unchanged.

29.  The  final  question  is  whether,  notwithstanding  the   Appellant's
    inability to satisfy the Secretary of State's policy within the  Rules,
    the interference with the right to respect for family  life  guaranteed
    to all four members of the family unit concerned by Article 8 ECHR is a
    proportionate means of fulfilling the  public  interests  engaged.   As
    indicated in [13] above, in Razgar terms, this appeal, both within  and
    outwith the Rules framework, involves  the  fifth  and  final  of  Lord
    Bingham's questions, the first four all inviting an affirmative answer.



30. Having identified above the main facts and  factors  belonging  to  the
    family life side of the notional scales, we turn our attention  to  the
    public interests engaged.  These must be considered in both the  intra-
    Rules and extra-Rules contexts.  In summary, both in statutory form  at
    this stage of their evolution, they are the  public  interests  in  the
    maintenance of firm immigration control and the deportation of  foreign
    national offenders.  In the particular context of  this  appeal,  these
    inter-related public interests have roughly equal potency.   While  the
    public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  national  offenders
    requires no elaboration in this specific context, the  public  interest
    in the maintenance of firm immigration control partakes of the discrete
    contextual ingredients noted above, namely the  Appellant's  breach  of
    the deportation order, his unlawful re-entry to the United Kingdom  and
    his illegal working, all wilful acts.

31. Notably, the decision in IT (Jamaica) (supra) assumes,  at  [54],  that
    tribunals  will  have  access  to  certain  information  regarding  the
    offender's criminality.  But the reality is otherwise.  The  assumption
    is indeed correct in the cases of the more serious immigrant  offenders
    where OASys reports and/or probation reports are routinely generated in
    the prosecution context.  However, as we have observed in  [15]  above,
    there is precious little information of  this  kind  available  in  the
    present case.  This arises not least because of the  uninformative  and
    unsatisfactory content of the Secretary of State's decision  underlying
    this appeal.

32. We remind ourselves that, as a matter of correct legal  principle,  the
    Appellant must demonstrate a very compelling case in order to  overcome
    the public interests engaged.  Displacement  of  the  public  interests
    requires "very compelling reasons":  IT  (Jamaica)  at  [14].   As  our
    analysis above makes clear, we consider  that  the  standard  of  "very
    compelling" must be calibrated according  to  the  individual  context.
    This calibration results in  the  test  being  applied  in  a  somewhat
    gentler and less robust manner in  a  case  such  as  the  present,  in
    contrast to the cases of the armed robber, the rapist, the murderer  or
    the terrorist.  Does this approach avail the Appellant and his  family?



33.  We  are  required  to  form  an  evaluative  judgment.   It  is  worth
    emphasising that this is not a mechanistic exercise.  On the  contrary,
    it requires a broad assessment of the key  facts  and  factors  in  the
    balancing scales.  It entails an element of  intuition.   Having  these
    characteristics, differently constituted  courts  and  tribunals  might
    conceivably make differing decisions in the same case, without  lapsing
    into error.  In this sense the exercise involves a  certain  margin  of
    appreciation.  The overarching duties on the judge are to identify  and
    weigh all material facts and factors and to direct oneself correctly in
    law.

34. Our evaluative conclusion  is  that  the  Appellant's  case  lacks  the
    potency, appeal and merit to overcome the exacting  threshold  of  very
    compelling circumstances duly calibrated in his particular context.  As
    we have recognised in [21] - [23] and [27] above, the Appellant's  case
    is not devoid of certain positive and favourable features.   These,  in
    substance, relate to the best interests of his two  children  and  what
    would be best for the family  as  a  whole.   It  is  not  infrequently
    observed  that  the  impact  on  families  of  the  legal  rules  which
    Parliament has chosen to enact will commonly involve separation coupled
    with much emotional pain and anguish, together with other hardships and
    detriments of a kindred kind.  These are the  typical  and  predictable
    effects of the deportation of the father member of  a  family  unit  in
    many cases.  We consider that such  effects  partake  of  ordinary  and
    routine  consequences  and,  as  such,  do  not  satisfy  the  elevated
    threshold of  very  compelling  circumstances.   Something  of  greater
    potency, merit and allure is required.  Viewing the Appellant's case as
    sympathetically as possible, we are unable to identify anything of this
    nature.  An appeal of this genre can succeed on Article 8 family and/or
    private life grounds  only  where  "a  very  strong  claim  indeed"  is
    demonstrated (SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] 550, at  [54]  per  Laws  LJ).
    For the reasons explained above, our conclusion  is  that  this  appeal
    falls short of this elevated and exacting standard.


Decision

35. This appeal is dismissed accordingly.










                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:  30 December 2016
