
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01921/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5th March 2015                             |On 22nd April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 kamal amini
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Marshall, Legal Representative instructed by
NBS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Fox made following a hearing at Bradford on 4th December 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Iran born on 1st July 1980.  He arrived in
    the UK on 31st March  2003  and  claimed  asylum.   He  was  ultimately
    refused and became appeal rights exhausted on 21st September 2004.

 3. On 27th June 2005 he was convicted of unlawful wounding  and  sentenced
    to 18 months' imprisonment.  On 17th November 2005 he was issued with a
    notice of intention to make  a  deportation  order  and  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 17th February 2006.  On  17th  September  2007  the
    deportation order was signed but not implemented.  A series of  further
    representations were made and finally, on 2nd October 2014  a  decision
    was made to refuse to revoke the deportation order by virtue of Section
    5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 4. The judge accepted that the claimant enjoys family life with  his  wife
    and his two British citizen children, then aged 5 and 2 years old.  His
    wife is a locum pharmacist and she is the breadwinner in the household.
     The claimant is the primary carer for the  children.   The  Presenting
    Officer accepted, as did the author of the refusal letter, that he  has
    a caring relationship with both his wife and his children.

 5. The judge recorded that the public  interest  requirement,  so  far  as
    Article 8 was concerned, was covered at Sections 117A to 117D of Part 5
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   After  recording
    the facts the judge said:

         "On the evidence before me today I am satisfied that the  appellant
         has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife  and
         children.  I am satisfied that he provides the main  care  for  the
         children by taking them to and  from  school  and  nursery.   I  am
         satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for these two  children  to
         live in a country to which the appellant may be deported.  Although
         young enough to adapt the overall impact  upon  the  entire  family
         would be disproportionate.  The  appellant's  wife  would  find  it
         difficult to re-integrate even if she could return to Iran.   There
         is no certainty that she would be able to return.

         In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the appellant can meet
         the requirements of the exception to  deportation  as  set  out  in
         paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules."

 6. The judge then considered the broader Article 8 claim outside the Rules
    and allowed the appeal both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the Convention.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the Tribunal had erred by only assessing whether it was reasonable  for
    the children to leave the UK.  It would not be  unduly  harsh  for  his
    children to remain without him.  There was no evidence  that  his  wife
    could not care for them in his absence and it would not be unduly harsh
    on her to either change her employment hours or  change  employment  or
    hire child care in his absence.  It remains the choice of his  wife  as
    to whether she and the children remain here without him or leave.

 8. The claimant's wife is originally from Iran,  which  would  assist  re-
    integration and it cannot be said that she has  become  estranged  from
    the way of life there.

 9. The remainder of the grounds argue that there was no  provision  for  a
    deportation appeal to be allowed on Article 8 grounds outside the rules
    in reliance on MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 since they  are
    a complete code

10. They cite a number of cases including the Court of Appeal  judgment  in
    LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 and SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    1636 and submit that the Tribunal failed to recognise that  the  scales
    were very heavily weighted in favour of deportation and something  very
    compelling was required to outweigh the public interest in deportation.
     The Tribunal failed to give any  consideration  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's public interest policies given  the  severity  of  the  offence
    committed and the findings are inadequate.   The  deportation  has  the
    effect not only of removing the risk of re-offending  by  the  deportee
    himself but also of deterring other  foreign  nationals  in  a  similar
    position.  Deportation of foreign criminals preserves public confidence
    in a system of control whose loss would itself tend towards  crime  and
    disorder.  In DS (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 544 the Court of  Appeal  said
    that even if it could properly be said that there was no  risk  of  re-
    offending the respondent  would  be  entitled  to  say  in  appropriate
    circumstances that the removal of an offender from the country  was  in
    the public interest.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grimmett on 23rd January 2015
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

12. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that the Secretary of State's grounds  were  in
    part based upon a mistake of fact.  The claimant's wife  was  not  from
    Iran but from Iraq.  Otherwise he relied on the grounds.

13. Mr Marshall submitted that the grounds amounted  to  disagreement  with
    the decision.  The judge reached a decision open to him and was mindful
    of all of the relevant factors in the case.  He relied  on  the  recent
    Tribunal decision in Dube (Sections 117A to 117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 for
    the proposition that it was not an error of law for the judge  to  fail
    to refer to Sections 117A to  117D  considerations  if  the  judge  has
    applied the test he or she was  supposed  to  apply  according  to  its
    terms; what matters is substance and not form.

Findings and Conclusions

14. Under Section 117C additional considerations in cases involving foreign
    criminals are set out.  Under Section 117C(3) in the case of a  foreign
    criminal (C) who has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    four years or more the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
    Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

15. Exception 1 is not relevant.  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner or a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and the effect
    of C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

16. The judge used the terminology of the Act.  Mr Diwnycz did not seek  to
    develop any argument at the hearing that  he  had  in  fact  applied  a
    reasonableness test rather than one of undue harshness.  On  the  facts
    as found by the judge and not challenged by the Secretary of State  the
    claimant is the primary carer of the children since his wife works very
    long hours.

17. The judge took into account the  fact  that  the  children  were  young
    enough to adapt to life in Iran but it was open to him to find that the
    overall impact upon the family would be disproportionate.

18. Insofar as the  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  considerations  under
    Article 8 outside the rules  they  are  misconceived  since  the  judge
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds within them.

19. There are two real difficulties with these grounds.  One is  the  clear
    mistake of fact so far as the nationality of  the  claimant's  wife  is
    concerned.  There was no confusion in the refusal letter which accepted
    that she is an Iraqi national.  Mr Marshall said that there was no such
    confusion at the hearing either.  The wording in paragraph  26  of  the
    determination is ambiguous and I suspect that this is the foundation of
    the Secretary of State's view.  Nevertheless it is a mistake of fact.

20. Second, there appears to have  been  a  concession  by  the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing.  The judge records the detailed reasons for the
    Secretary of State's decision  in  the  refusal  letter  where  it  was
    accepted that he enjoyed family life with his wife and child.  He  then
    states:

         "These  submissions  have  been  slightly  altered  in   that   the
         respondent now concedes that it may be difficult to  fully  justify
         and resist the Article 8 arguments  under  the  heading  of  family
         life.   It  is  now  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  caring
         relationship with his wife and his two children."

21. That suggests that the respondent was not only  conceding  that  family
    life existed, but also that the Presenting Officer was  accepting  that
    the Article 8 arguments being made at the hearing had some merit.

22. This  determination  is  a  little  thin.   It  would  have  been  less
    susceptible to challenge had the Immigration Judge provided  a  greater
    depth of reasoning and explained his conclusions more  fully.   However
    that may have been because of his view that the stance of the Secretary
    of State had changed and that a concession had been made  that  it  was
    difficult to resist the Article 8 arguments.

23. The Secretary of State is in a difficult position to argue that a judge
    erred in law on the basis that his conclusions were not  properly  open
    to him if an  impression  had  been  given  at  the  hearing  that  the
    claimant's arguments might be difficult to resist.

24. This is not a decision which every Immigration Judge would have reached
    but that is not the test.  The Secretary of State has  not  established
    that the judge erred in law.

Notice of Decision

25. The Secretary of State's appeal is  dismissed.   The  original  judge's
    decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 10th March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

