
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01096/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th May 2013                              |On 3rd June 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            LATEYI OLADIPO LAWSON
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Messrs Freemans
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State.   However,  for
    convenience, we shall refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Further,  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    their determination recorded that no order for anonymity was  made  and
    there were no representations to the contrary at the hearing before us,
    we have decided for the purposes of our determination,  that  it  would
    not be appropriate to identify the Appellant's children by name.

2.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17 January 2013, allowing the appeal
    of the Appellant, who is of dual Togolese and Nigerian nationality  and
    born on 2 July 1957, on human rights (Article 8 of the  ECHR)  grounds,
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 15 November  2012
    to make a Deportation Order against him, he being a foreign criminal as
    defined by S.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  in  accordance  with
    the provisions of S.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

3.   The immigration history of the Appellant as set out  in  form  ICD.3237
    of the Tribunal bundle, shows that the Appellant married his spouse  in
    Nigeria on 2 July 1994 and applied for Entry Clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 30 September 1998.  This was granted until  20  April  2000.
    The Appellant then entered the UK on 26 February 2000, aged 42  as  his
    wife's  spouse,  and  was  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Enter.    An
    application for naturalisation was received on 17  January  2002.   The
    Appellant's wife was granted a Right of Abode in the UK  on  12  August
    2002.  On 14 September 2004 the Appellant's application for nationality
    was refused as he had applied too early and did not qualify.

4.   On 3 January 2003 for "attempt/obtaining  property  by  deception"  the
    Appellant was convicted and  sentenced  to  a  term  of  eight  months'
    imprisonment.  On 6 November 2003 for "possessing a controlled Class  B
    drug" he was fined �100.  On 28 July 2006 following a plea of guilty to
    conspiring to steal, the Appellant was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  two
    years' imprisonment and he was considered for  deportation  by  the  UK
    Border Agency.

5.   On 26 July 2007 a Notice of a Decision to make a Deportation Order  and
    Reasons for Deportation Letter was served.

6.   Following the completion of  the  Appellant's  custodial  sentence  the
    Appellant was detained by the UKBA on 28 July 2007.

7.   An appeal against deportation was lodged on 9 August 2007 and this  was
    allowed on 3 October 2007 due to the UKBA  having  incorrectly  served
    deportation paperwork relating to the wrong conviction.

8.   A new Notice of a Decision to make a Deportation Order was made  on  10
    October 2007, but the prison did not convey this to the Appellant until
    21 December 2007.  On 25 January 2008 the Deportation Order was  signed
    and served on the Appellant as he failed to  lodge  a  further  appeal.
    However he submitted an out of time appeal on 1 February 2008.

9.   On 4 February 2008 the Appellant was convicted of  one  count  of  rape
    and three counts of  sexual  assault  and  sentenced  to  eight  years'
    imprisonment  and  three   terms   of   twelve   months'   imprisonment
    respectively, each to run concurrently.  He was also required  to  sign
    the Sex Offenders' Register for life.  The Appellant lodged  an  appeal
    against this conviction but this was refused by the Court of Appeal  on
    17 July 2008.

10.  On 25 February 2008 the Appellant submitted an  application  to  return
    to Nigeria under  the  Voluntary  Assisted  Return  Scheme.   This  was
    refused on 26 February 2008 due to  a  Deportation  Order  having  been
    signed against him.

11.  The appeal against the UKBA's decision to  deport  the  Appellant  took
    place on 30 May 2008 and was allowed on 4 June 2008.  At this point the
    Immigration Judge did not appear to have been aware of the  convictions
    for rape and sexual assault.

12.  On 6 April 2009 the Appellant was therefore served  with  a  Notice  of
    Liability for Automatic Deportation  questionnaire  and  the  completed
    questionnaire and  supporting  representations  were  received  by  the
    Secretary of State on 16 April 2009.

13.  On 30 June 20011 a supplementary letter was issued to  the  Appellant's
    wife  and  to  his  representatives  seeking  her  views  on  how   the
    Appellant's deportation would affect her and their children.

14.  On 14 December 2011 the Appellant's expired Togolese passport was  sent
    to the National Document Fraud Unit who confirmed on 27  December  2011
    that the passport was genuine.   As  such  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant held dual Nigerian and Togolese nationality.

15.  The Appellant lodged an appeal against his conviction in 2012  although
    the exact date of when the appeal was submitted is not known.  This was
    however refused by the Court of Appeal on 19 July 2012.

16.  A Deportation Order was signed on 15 November 2012 and  served  on  the
    Appellant together with a Reasons for Deportation Letter on 20 November
    2012.

17.  On 22 November 2012 the prison provided a copy of  a  letter  from  the
    Criminal Cases Review Commission addressed to the Appellant  confirming
    that the appeal  against  the  conviction  was  under  review.   On  22
    November 2012 the UKBA requested the Criminal Cases  Review  Commission
    to expedite their enquiries.

18.  When the Appellant's appeal came before a First-tier Tribunal panel  at
    Nottingham Magistrates' Court on 10 January 2013, it was noted that  he
    claimed that the decision to deport him from the United  Kingdom  would
    result in a breach of his Article 8 ECHR rights and those of  his  wife
    and children.

19.  The panel recorded that the Presenting Officer did not  seek  to  argue
    that the Appellant had not established a family and private  life  with
    his wife and children in the United Kingdom  and  that  the  issue  was
    therefore one of proportionality.

20.  The Appellant gave oral evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    which at the outset he adopted his witness statements of 5 January  and
    7 January 2013.  He pointed out that his children (then aged 16  and  9
    years' respectively) suffered from Sickle Cell Anaemia maintaining that
    prior to his imprisonment he used to assist his wife in  looking  after
    the children on a day to day basis, but that during his imprisonment it
    had of course been very difficult for his wife to care for the children
    on her own.

21.  Before coming to the United Kingdom,  he  had  worked  in  his  uncle's
    office and was also employed as a business manager. His elderly  mother
    remained in Nigeria and he had half-brothers and a sister  in  Nigeria.
    He had never visited Nigeria since his arrival in the UK on 26 February
    2000. His wife and children had been to Nigeria on two occasions whilst
    the Appellant was in prison.  His wife had half-brothers and  a  sister
    in Nigeria.

22.  The Appellant confirmed in his evidence that he  still  maintained  his
    innocence and that he was wrongly convicted of rape and sexual assault.



23.  The Appellant's wife also gave evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    panel adopting her witness statement of 6 January 2013.  She  confirmed
    that she was aware of the nature of the offences which had resulted  in
    her husband's imprisonment but that she continued to  support  him  and
    believed him to be innocent of the offences of which he was  convicted.



24.  In her evidence the Appellant's wife confirmed that  it  would  be  her
    intention to remain in the United Kingdom  with  her  children  if  her
    husband were to be deported.  It would not  be  possible  for  them  to
    relocate to Nigeria.  They would have no means of support  and  nowhere
    to live and additionally the boys' medical needs would not be  provided
    for.  The Appellant's wife confirmed that she had three brothers living
    in Nigeria and sent money every month for the benefit of her  husband's
    elderly mother.

25.  The panel took account of handwritten  letters  of  support  which  had
    been written by the Appellant's sons and they recorded that  they  also
    took account of other character references and letters of support which
    had been included in the appeal bundle.  They took note  in  particular
    of a letter from the Appellant  and  his  family's  Parish  Priest  and
    character references from officers at the Appellant's prison.

26.  At paragraphs 24 and 25 of their determination the panel  had  this  to
    say:

         "24. The Appellant is without doubt a serious  offender.   We  have
             noted from the NOMS1 Form that the risk  of  serious  harm  is
             assessed as high but the risk of reconviction is  assessed  as
             low.  We have no reason to disagree with this assessment.  The
             risk of harm would be to  female  children  and  young  female
             adults with whom the Appellant is placed in  the  position  of
             trust in the community.  The nature of this  risk  relates  to
             sexual assault, rape, grooming as well  as  actual,  emotional
             and psychological harm.


         25.  We have noted the  sentencing  remarks  of  His  Honour  Judge
             Issard- Davies.  The Judge referred to the Appellant's  victim
             as someone whom he had taken  into  his  house  when  she  was
             orphaned and friendless in Nigeria.  He then took advantage of
             her in breach of the trust which was placed  in  him  to  care
             properly and responsibly for her welfare.  The consequences of
             the Appellant's offending  to  his  victim  are  described  as
             incalculable.  They  have  already  provoked  her  to  attempt
             suicide  more  than  once.   Part  of  the  sentence  is   the
             requirement for the Appellant to remain on the Sex  Offenders'
             Register for life."

27.  The panel expressed a concern that the Appellant was  still  protesting
    his innocence.  They observed that because of the Appellant's continued
    denial of responsibility he had not become rehabilitated and  he  would
    thus not  have  been  afforded  the  opportunity  for  counselling  and
    treatment whilst in prison (paragraph 26).

28.  The panel reminded themselves  of  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Masih (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC) that in a case  of
    automatic deportation full account had to be taken of the strong public
    interest in removing foreign citizens  convicted  of  serious  offences
    which lay not only in the prevention of further offences on the part of
    the individual concerned, but in deterring others from committing  them
    in the first place.  Secondly  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals
    expressed society's  condemnation  of  serious  criminal  activity  and
    promoting public confidence in the treatment of  foreign  citizens  who
    had  committed  them.  The  panel  recorded  that  they  had   reminded
    themselves of this important guidance, when making their assessment  of
    proportionality for the purposes of Article 8.

29.  The panel recognised that this was not the  first  time  the  Appellant
    had found himself to be the subject of  deportation  proceedings.   The
    Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (AIT)  had  allowed  the  Appellant's
    previous appeal against the decision to make  a  Deportation  Order  in
    2007. On that occasion the offending related to serious dishonesty that
    the Tribunal balanced against the Appellant's family and  private  life
    and found that the Appellant and his wife were credible  witnesses  who
    enjoyed a loving relationship with their two  children.  The  Appellant
    was described as a "hands-on father". It was  however  noted  that  the
    Tribunal on that occasion, were  strangely  unaware  that  only  a  few
    months previously the Appellant had been convicted of rape  and  sexual
    assaults for which he had been sentenced to eight years'  imprisonment.



30.  The panel took account of the guidance in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39
    as it related to the need to take account of the Article  8  rights  of
    all family members who were likely to be affected by the decision under
    appeal, and they further adopted the five stage approach  advocated  by
    Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   Reference  was  made  to  the
    guidance given by the European Court of Human Rights.

31.  At paragraphs 28 and 29, the  panel  turned  their  attention  "to  the
    Appellant's children and their best  interests  and  wellbeing".   They
    continued:

         "28. We are of course aware of the requirements of  Section  55  of
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  which  requires
             the Respondent and the Tribunal to consider the best interests
             of the Appellant's two children as  a  primary  consideration.
             The guidance given in ZH (Tanzania) emphasises the  importance
             of British citizenship and the rights which  are  attached  to
             it."
         "29. .. that despite the Appellant's very serious offending and the
             nature of it, he still enjoys the support of his wife and they
             are in a close relationship. We are satisfied that family life
             exists between the Appellant, his wife  and  their  two  sons.
             Deporting the Appellant to Nigeria or Togo would constitute  a
             serious interference with the children's right to respect  for
             family life with their father".

32.  The panel noted that the Appellant's children were at  school  and  had
    lived in the United Kingdom all their lives. Although they had  visited
    Nigeria whilst the Appellant had been in prison on two  occasions,  the
    panel were satisfied that it would not be reasonable to  expect  either
    of them to relocate to that country. Both  boys  suffered  from  Sickle
    Cell Anaemia for which they were receiving treatment  and  the  medical
    evidence had been noted.

33.  At paragraph 31 of their determination the panel had this to say:

         "31. The best interests of children is not a  factor  of  limitless
             importance in  the  sense  it  will  prevail  over  all  other
             considerations.  It is, however,  a  factor  which  must  rank
             higher than any other.  It is  not  merely  one  consideration
             that weighs in the balance alongside other competing  factors.
             What  is  determined  to  be  in  a  child's  interest  should
             customarily dictate the outcome of cases such  as  that  which
             was before the court in ZH (Tanzania)."

34.  Whilst, if the Appellant were to be removed, it might be  possible  for
    him to maintain contact with his children from a distance, the lack  of
    physical and emotional contact for many years would have "a potentially
    serious, adverse affect" upon them.

35.  The panel at paragraph 33, further recorded that  they  had  noted  the
    guidance given in EB (Kosovo) where Lord Bingham had  stated  it  would
    rarely be proportionate to uphold an order for removal of a spouse,  if
    there was a close and genuine bond with the other spouse, and where the
    spouse could not reasonably be expected to  follow  the  removal  of  a
    spouse to the country of removal, and where it would  sever  a  genuine
    and subsisting  relationship  between  parent  and  child.   The  panel
    considered that they were not satisfied that it would be impossible  or
    unreasonable for the Appellant's wife to follow her husband to  Nigeria
    but that it would be unreasonable to expect their two sons to relocate.



36.  The panel reminded themselves of the guidance in MK (best interests  of
    child) India  [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC).  They  observed  that  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) and whilst considering the best interests of the child as an
    integral part of the Article 8 balancing exercise, their Lordships were
    clear that it was a matter which  had  to  be  addressed  first,  as  a
    distinct enquiry.

37.  The panel took account of the importance of considering  the  interests
    of children who were British nationals and referred to Sanade  (British
    children - Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC)  where  the
    Tribunal held that there was no justification for saying it would  only
    be in exceptional circumstances that removal would violate the family's
    protected  Article  8  rights  or  that  the  claim  itself   must   be
    exceptional.  Where the child or the remaining  spouse  was  a  British
    citizen and therefore a citizen of the European Union, as a  matter  of
    EU law it was not possible to require the family as a unit to  relocate
    outside the European Union or for the Secretary of State to submit that
    it would be reasonable for them to do so.

38.  At paragraph 35 the panel concluded:

         "35. We find this to be a difficult and finely balanced case but we
             have concluded that the best interests of the Appellant's  two
             children tips the balance in the Appellant's favour so far  as
             proportionality is concerned.  We find that it would be in the
             best interests of the Appellant's children for them to  remain
             in the United Kingdom with both parents and having  considered
             all  the  evidence  in  the  round,  we  conclude   that   the
             Appellant's deportation would  constitute  a  disproportionate
             interference with the children's right to respect  for  family
             life.  It is for that reason only that we  conclude  that  the
             appeal should be allowed".

39.  The Secretary of State made a successful application for permission  to
    appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal and their grounds in support
    were as follows:

         "1.  The Tribunal's finding on Article 8 are set out from paragraph
             24 of the determination. However it is respectfully  submitted
             that these findings are irredeemably flawed because they  fail
             to have regard to the Immigration Rules in making its  Article
             8 assessment.  In doing so it is respectfully  submitted  that
             the Tribunal misdirected itself in law.  In making a  decision
             on an application it is necessary for  the  decision-maker  to
             consider all the legislation relevant to that decision and  to
             give reasons for the way that it applies that  legislation  to
             the facts of the case.  In this instance the Tribunal  had  no
             regard at all to the  relevant  Sections  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  It  is  submitted  that  there  simply  cannot  be  an
             appropriate way for a sustainable decision to be made.


         2.   The Immigration Rules are a detailed expression of  government
             policy on controlling immigration and protecting  the  public.
             The Article 8 Sections of the Immigration  Rules  reflect  the
             Secretary of State's views to where the balance  lies  between
             the individual's rights and the public interest.  They reflect
             the broad  principles  set  out  in  Strasbourg  and  domestic
             jurisprudence.   Therefore,  when  a  Tribunal  considers   an
             individual appeal he should consider  proportionality  in  the
             light of this clear  expression  of  public  policy;  and  the
             Secretary of State would expect the Courts  to  defer  to  her
             view, endorsed by Parliament on how,  broadly,  public  policy
             considerations  are  weighed  against  individual  family  and
             private  life  rights,  when  assessing  Article  8   in   any
             individual case.  Failure to do so means that the decision the
             Tribunal made on Article 8 is incomplete and that it  is  also
             unsustainable as it failed to consider a key element in the of
             this case.


         3.   In  addition,  or  in  the  alternative,  it  is  respectfully
             submitted that the proportionality  assessment  is  flawed  in
             that it failed to take account of the full range  of  evidence
             before the Tribunal.  The index offence was  a  serious  crime
             (rape of a minor resulting in an eight  year  sentence)  which
             the Appellant still denies.   He  has  an  appalling  criminal
             history.  He has been  assessed  as  being  at  high  risk  of
             serious harm especially to female children  and  young  female
             adults, with the nature of that  risk  being  sexual  assault,
             rape, grooming and emotional and psychological harm.  With due
             respect to the Tribunal, these established findings  had  been
             noted but not considered in  the  proportionality  assessment.
             This assessment concentrates almost exclusively  on  the  best
             interests of the children.  While it is  questionable  why  it
             should be in the children's best interests to be exposed to  a
             drug dealing rapist, the proportionality assessment  makes  no
             attempt  to  seek  a  clear  balance  between  the   competing
             interests.  In particular, the Tribunal makes no  findings  on
             risk, deterrent or public revulsion.   Although  the  Tribunal
             found that this was a  finely  balanced  case  (paragraph  35)
             there is no evidence that this was the  case  as  there  is  a
             significant gap in the Tribunal's reasoning."

40.  In granting permission, Designated Judge R  C  Campbell  considered  it
    arguable that the panel may have inter alia,  erred  in  law  as  their
    determination did not show that the Secretary of State's case,  or  the
    public  interest  in  the  Appellant's  deportation,  featured  in  the
    proportionality assessment as relevant factors to  be  weighed  in  the
    balance.

41.  Thus the appeal came before us on 20 May 2013 when our first  task  was
    to determine whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error on a point of law.

42.  We clarified with the  parties'  representatives  and  they  confirmed,
    that were we to find that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    indeed contained an error or errors on a point of  law,  such  that  it
    required us to set their  determination  aside,  there  was  sufficient
    evidence before us upon which we could proceed to make a fresh decision
    in terms of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal.


 43. It is right to say that initially, Mr Jaisri sought to add  a  caveat
    having received an   indication from the Appellant's  wife  that  their
    eldest son might wish to give evidence on his father's behalf.  However
    on reflection, Mr Jaisri agreed with our decision that it would not  be
    appropriate to adjourn the hearing  of  the  appeal  for  this  purpose
    Indeed he confirmed  that  he  had  no  direct  instructions  from  the
    Appellant's elder son to that effect, or  such  instructions  from  his
    instructing solicitors. We were also of the view that it  was  unlikely
    that the Appellant's elder son would be seeking to persuade us that  it
    would be appropriate for his father to be removed to Nigeria  or  Togo.
    In any event and as recorded by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  was
    within the Appellant's bundle, handwritten letters of  support  written
    by the Appellant's sons.


44.   Having heard the parties'  respective  submissions  we  reserved  our
decision.

Assessment

45.  We have concluded that the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has been vitiated by errors on a point of law such that  it  cannot  be
    allowed to stand and must be set aside.

46.  In reaching that decision, we have taken account of  Mr  Jaisri's  Rule
    24 response upon which he relied  within  his  submissions  before  us,
    contending that the Tribunal did not make a  material  error  in  their
    approach to the application  of  Article  8  and  whilst  it  might  be
    accepted that the Tribunal did not apply the provisions of Appendix  FM
    in its consideration of Article 8, this did not affect  their  approach
    on the true application of Article 8 as articulated in MF (Article 8  -
    new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).



47.  It was submitted that  whilst  the  Tribunal  may  not  have  expressly
    specifically considered the Immigration Rules in the context of how the
    assessment of proportionality  should  be  approached  mindful  of  the
    Immigration Rules, this again was not  material  as  the  Tribunal  did
    consider within its deliberations (paragraph 24) the seriousness of the
    offence and (paragraph 26) society's revulsion of criminal activity.

48.  Further that the panel's determination had to be read as a  whole  from
    which it was clear that they had made findings at paragraph 24 and  had
    considered the judge's sentencing remarks that the Tribunal clearly had
    in mind as part of its reasoning process.

49.  The Tribunal had gone on to consider the weight to be attached to  this
    pursuant to the factors in Masih.  It was not a case  of  the  Tribunal
    simply reminding itself of the approach in that  the  Tribunal  towards
    the end of paragraph 26 were clear, that they had  reminded  themselves
    of the importance of this guidance when  making  their  proportionality
    assessment.

50.  The Tribunal  had  acknowledged  the  public  policy  consideration  of
    immigration control at paragraph 34.

51.    We would observe that Nagre  is  a  decision  of  the  Administrative
    Court and therefore not binding on the Tribunal. We note  that  in  any
    event, Sales J expressly approved  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in
    Izuazu (Article 8-new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC),  though  he  made
    what he described as "a slight  modification"  that  where  a  person's
    human rights have been  considered  adequately  under  the  immigration
    rules, there is no need to make a separate human  rights  decision.  In
    our experience, there will only be a very  few  cases  where  this  can
    properly be said and it is likely to be confined to those  cases  where
    the rules recognise that the removal would be contrary  to  a  person's
    rights under Article 8. Save for those unlikely cases,  an  appellant's
    rights will have to be considered in accordance with the  Human  Rights
    Act and that will almost always involve a separate consideration.

52.  It was notable that in his submissions before us,  Mr  Jaisri  candidly
    accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  have  had  regard  to
    Counsel's skeleton argument of the where at paragraph 8, reference  was
    made to the new Immigration Rules,  but  it  was  contended  that  they
    failed to appropriately consider the depth of private and  family  life
    and failed to take into account the  citizenship  of  the  child  of  a
    potential deportee and the rights afforded by way of  citizenship.   In
    that context, Mr Jaisri accepted that the Tribunal may  have  therefore
    erred in failing to take this into account but he  maintained  that  it
    did not affect their consideration of the  issues  in  this  appeal  as
    articulated  by  them.  Mr  Jaisri  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had
    recognised that the case was "finely balanced".

53.  Mr Avery placed reliance on the guidance of the Upper Tribunal  in  MF,
    in particular what was said at head note (viii)  of  that  decision  as
    follows:

         "viii.   However, as a result of the introduction of the new Rules,
             consideration by judges of Article 8 outside the Rules must be
             informed by the greater specificity which  they  give  to  the
             importance the Secretary  of  State  attaches  to  the  public
             interest. For example, the new Rules  set  out  thresholds  of
             criminality by reference to  terms  of  imprisonment  so  that
             Article 8 private life claims can only  succeed  if  they  not
             only have certain periods of residence but can also show their
             criminality has fallen below these thresholds".

54.  We have concluded that this is of course an  important  aspect  of  the
    decision in MF and one that with great respect  to  Mr  Jaisri  he  has
    overlooked in his contention that the panel's failure to  consider  the
    new  Immigration  Rules  within  the  context  of   their   Article   8
    considerations had no material affect on their  conclusions.  Not  only
    was this aspect of the guidance in MF overlooked, but indeed the First-
    tier Tribunal  failed  entirely  to  take  account  of  this  guidance,
    notwithstanding that MF was promulgated well before  their  hearing  of
    the present appeal.  We are satisfied, that had  they  considered  such
    guidance, not least head note (viii), but also paragraphs 42, 43 and 44
    of MF under the heading "New Rules and the public interest", they would
    have doubtless appreciated the following:

         "42. There is, however, at least one important respect in which the
             new  Rules  affect  the  second-stage  Article  8  assessment.
             Previously judges' understanding of the weight  the  Secretary
             of State attaches to the public interest side of the Article 8
             balancing  exercise  had  largely  to  be  gleaned  from   the
             submissions of the Secretary of State in  leading  cases.   It
             has fallen very much to the judicial system to  give  it  form
             and content.  In deportation cases involving foreign criminals
             S.32 of the 2007 Act gave clear  parliamentary  expression  to
             the particular importance the Secretary of State  attached  to
             their deportation: see MK (deportation -  foreign  criminal  -
             public interest) Gambia [2010] UKUT 281  (IAC);  AP  (Trinidad
             and Tobago) [2011] EWCA Civ 551  per  Carnwath  LJ;  Gurung  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department EWCA Civ  62.   Now
             more generally greater specificity is given in the  new  Rules
             as to what circumstances are  seen  to  attract  the  greatest
             weight in respect of the public  interest;  the  Secretary  of
             State has now herself  told  us  what  factors  she  considers
             relevant and what weight at the general level she attaches  to
             them.  In particular, in the context of deportation of foreign
             criminals, the new Rules set out thresholds of criminality (by
             reference to length of terms of imprisonment) so that  Article
             8 private life claims brought by foreign  criminals  can  only
             succeed (unless there are exceptional circumstances)  if  they
             not only have certain periods of residence but can  also  show
             their criminality has fallen below these thresholds.


         43.  That must and should properly inform our Article 8  assessment
             made in compliance with our S.6  obligations  under  the  HRA.
             Whereas previously it has been open to judges, within  certain
             limits, to reach their own view of what the public interest is
             and the weight to be attached to it, the scope for doing so is
             now more limited."

         "44. From the above it will be clear what we think is new about the
             Immigration Rules, but the degree to  which  these  new  Rules
             change our interpretation of the 'public interest' should  not
             be exaggerated.  Even under the old Rules it  has  never  been
             legitimate to treat  the  public  interest  in  a  narrow  and
             restrictive fashion: see N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA  Civ  1094,  OH
             (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694, UE  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
             975."

55.  In that latter regard, we drew to the parties' attention, the  guidance
    of the Court of Appeal in  AM  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1634  in  which  Lord
    Justices Elias and Ward, gave brief judgments in full concurrence  with
    that of Pitchford LJ who gave the leading judgment.  This was important
    guidance that again predated the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    but of which no account was taken by the panel.

56.  In AM his Lordship at paragraph 29, referred  to  the  opinion  of  the
    Court in N (Kenya)  that  the  public  interest  in  deterrence  was  a
    permanent  feature  of  the  legitimate  aim  being  pursued,   whether
    expressly relied on by the Secretary of State or not and  was  relevant
    to the appeal before their Lordships, notwithstanding that since  2007,
    the public interest was expressed in a statutory obligation to  deport.
    N (Keyna) had predated the automatic deportation of "foreign criminals"
    provisions in the 2007 Act.

57.  Reference was made to RU (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 65  where  Aikens
    LJ  had  said  inter  alia  at  paragraph  36,  that  by  statute,  the
    deportation of "foreign criminals" was deemed to be  conducive  to  the
    public good. Therefore, if a "foreign criminal" asserted  that  removal
    by a Deportation Order pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UKBA would be a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8(1)  rights,  both  the
    Secretary of State and any reviewing Tribunal must be obliged  to  take
    those  public  interest  factors  into  account  when  performing   the
    "proportionality" balancing exercise. In RU Aikens LJ continued:

         "40. At all events on an  appeal  from  the  SSHD's  decision  that
             Section 32(5) applies in a case where the  'foreign  criminal'
             has argued that  removal  pursuant  an  automatic  Deportation
             Order  would  infringe  his  Article  8(1)   rights   and   be
             disproportionate,  the  Tribunal  or  court   concerned   must
             recognise and give due weight to all the public policy factors
             identified in OH (Serbia).  It must acknowledge that the  SSHD
             is entitled, indeed obliged, to give due weight to  them.  The
             Tribunal or court must also acknowledge and give due weight to
             them when drawing the 'proportionality balance' under  Article
             8(2)".

58.  In AM reference was also made to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal
    in OH (Serbia) albeit under the pre-2007 Act Framework.  Further  their
    Lordships considered it:

         "Inevitable that in measuring proportionality the  public  interest
         in deterrence is  a  material  and  necessary  consideration.   The
         public interest is an important component of the balancing exercise
         required to test proportionality (for the purpose of Section  33(2)
         (a)) whether or not the Secretary of State expressly says so in her
         decision letter or in the Presenting  Officer's  submissions  to  a
         Tribunal."


    Pitcford LJ continued inter alia:


         "It is an indelible feature of  the  balancing  exercise  that  the
         decision-maker weighs the consequences of deportation  against  the
         full import of the legitimate aim to be  achieved.  Mr Saeed  with
         some skill, sought to persuade the court that we could  infer  from
         the express language used by the FTT that it had well in  mind  the
         public interest which the domestic cases identify.  I  accept  that
         this court should not readily conclude that a  specialist  Tribunal
         erred in law but also 'that it is for the Tribunal  to  demonstrate
         that it has applied the correct test when  striking  that  balance'
         (per Pill LJ in OH (Serbia) at paragraphs 27 and  32).   With  some
         regret I must conclude that no such inference is available. ... The
         emphasis in the FTT's self-direction  of  law  is  upon  the  harsh
         consequences of separating a family which may follow an immigration
         decision. It  drew  no  distinction  between  the  public  interest
         considerations arising in  immigration  decisions  (to  which  Lord
         Bingham was referring in Razgar and EB (Kosovo)) and in deportation
         decisions following the commission of serious crime.   As  Richards
         LJ held in JO (Uganda)  different  considerations  apply  when  the
         balance is to be struck against a separate and more powerful public
         interest.  For this reason I am unable to conclude that the FTT did
         have in mind both the existence and the breadth of  the  legitimate
         aim which the Deportation Order was pursuing."

59.   Upon  our   consideration   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   panel's
    deliberations on Article 8(2) proportionality in the present  case,  we
    come to the same conclusion for like reasons.

60.  We  are  also  mindful  that  in  AM  at  paragraph  34,  his  Lordship
    considered the question as to whether the FTT in  that  case,  made  an
    error of law, either by omitting consideration of material evidence, or
    by reaching a decision that  was  perverse  as  to  the  low  risk  for
    reoffending presented by the Appellant.  He continued:

         "It may well be that the Appellant was anxious to minimise, even to
         deny, his criminality before the FTT and  the  UT,  but  the  OASyS
         assessment had been made by a trained probation officer  whose  job
         it was to assess risk  and  in  my  view  was  not  lightly  to  be
         dismissed ...".

61.  We would pause there, because the  Tribunal  in  the  present  case  at
    paragraph 24 of their determination were clear that the  Appellant  was
    "without doubt a serious offender". They also noted the NOMS1 Form that
    the risk of  serious  harm  was  assessed  as  high  but  the  risk  of
    reconviction was assessed as low. They found that they had no reason to
    disagree with that assessment.  It was acknowledged that  the  risk  of
    harm would be to female children and young female adults with whom  the
    Appellant was placed in the position of trust in  the  community.   The
    nature of that risk related to sex and assault, rape, grooming as  well
    as actual emotional and psychological harm.

62.  In the course of our deliberations, we have taken a closer look at  the
    NOMS1 Form that went significantly further than the  observations  made
    by the  panel.   It  was  also  stated  that  the  high  risk  of  harm
    identified:

         ".. remains high due to the  offender's  continued  denial  of  any
         wrongdoing and his wife's collusion with him.  He  is  assessed  as
         presenting an ongoing risk of harm to the  victim  and  her  sister
         whom he has accused of making false allegations against him.


         There is also a risk to the general public of financial  loss  from
         fraud (deception)."

63.  These are matters surprisingly not identified by  the  panel  in  their
    determination.

64.  Further, under the heading "Risk of Reconviction", the  OGRS  predictor
    score was a risk of 24% in year one and 39%  in  year  two.   There  is
    nothing in the panel's determination to suggest that given the  extreme
    nature of the potential consequence of further offending,  there  still
    remained a disturbing risk.

65.  The Appellant had committed a very serious offence and although it  was
    open to the panel to give credit to his good behaviour in  prison,  the
    evidence before them was that the Appellant remained a danger to female
    children and young female adults with whom he was placed in a  position
    of trust in the community and as presenting an ongoing risk of harm  to
    the victim and her sister, apart from the risk to the general public of
    financial loss from fraud/deception.

66.  The report was clear that in consequence, the Appellant was subject  to
    Safeguarding Children restrictions and was  disqualified  from  working
    with children and required to sign on the Sex  Offender'  Register  for
    life.

67.  No reference was made by the panel  to  what  was  said  in  the  NOMS1
    report at Section 3(c) that on release it was:

         ".. likely that Mr Lawson will initially be placed in  an  Approved
         Premises if he is not immediately detained by the UKBA.   His  plan
         to return to his family will require review by his Offender Manager
         in consultation with other agencies such as  Social  Services.   He
         will need close monitoring and prohibitive  licence  conditions  to
         ensure  he  does  not  have  unsupervised  access  to  children  on
         release".

68.  We should add for the sake of completeness, that  reference  to  "OGRS"
    stands for "Offender  Group  Reconviction  Scale"  that  estimates  the
    probability that offenders with a given history of  offending  will  be
    reconvicted for any recordable offence within two years of sentence.

69.  We find that the panel failed to ask themselves and  consider  in  such
    circumstances, the nature of the harm that the  Appellant  might  cause
    upon release.  A risk assumed at 24% in year one and 39%  in  year  two
    does not despite the banding category of "Low"  seem  particularly  low
    not least when it is assessed that it could  rise  to  39%  within  two
    years.

70.  We would add that in the same report, predicted percentage scores  were
    given for OGP (OASyS General  Reoffending  Predictor)  and  OVP  (OASyS
    Violence Predictor) that provided scored predictors of  the  likelihood
    of general reoffending and violent offending over  one  and  two  years
    from the  beginning  of  supervision  or  release  on  licence.   Those
    predictions in relation to this Appellant were in terms of  OGP  a  16%
    risk in the first year rising to 26% in two years and in terms of  OVP,
    a risk of 5% rising to 10% in two years.

71.  That no reference to these matters was made by the panel  within  their
    determination raises a serious concern as to  whether  these  important
    factors  were  taken  into  account  at   all,   within   the   panel's
    proportionality consideration and the balancing exercise that they were
    required to carefully conduct.

72.  As was made clear by Elias LJ in AM it was:

         ".. plain from the domestic jurisprudence that a mere reference  by
         a Tribunal to the nature and seriousness of the  offence  will  not
         suffice to satisfy an Appellate Court that proper consideration has
         been given to all aspects  of  the  public  interest.   A  Tribunal
         cannot,  therefore,  act  on  the  premise  that  a   conscientious
         application of the Boultif criteria (as further explained  in  Uner
         and Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 508))  will  constitute  a  lawful
         application of the proportionality principle."

73.  Elias LJ also had this inter alia, to say:

         "41. The central question in this appeal is whether the  FTT  erred
             in law in its approach to proportionality.  In particular  did
             the FTT have in mind not only  the  risk  that  the  applicant
             might commit future  offences  but  also  the  need  to  deter
             foreign nationals from committing serious offences  by  making
             it plain that one of the consequences may well be deportation,
             as well as the legitimate need  to  reflect  society's  public
             revulsion of such crimes and to ensure that  the  public  will
             have confidence that offenders will be properly punished.


         42.   The  decisions  of  this  court  in  N  (Kenya),  OH  and  RU
             (Bangladesh) all emphasise the importance of a Tribunal giving
             full weight to these different aspects of the public  interest
             in the proportionality assessment.  They emphasise that it  is
             not a sufficient answer to the public interest  concerns  that
             the risk of future offending by the applicant himself is  very
             low. Indeed, where a serious offence has been committed,  then
             as Lord Justice Judge (as he was) pointed  out  in  N  (Kenya)
             (para 65), that will not even be the most important aspect  of
             the public interest.


         43.  .. If a Tribunal fails expressly to refer  to  these  factors,
             then in my view there will have to  be  very  cogent  evidence
             from which it can properly be inferred that the Tribunal  must
             have had these considerations in mind. It is not enough to say
             that a specialist Tribunal  must  have  been  aware  of  these
             authorities and should be assumed  to  have  given  weight  to
             these factors".  (Emphasis added)

74.  We have concluded for the above reasons, that the  Tribunal  failed  to
    give sufficient to those considerations.

75.  We would also  observe  that  within  their  deliberations,  the  panel
    appeared at paragraph 33 of their determination, to have taken  account
    of the guidance  given  in  EB  (Kosovo)  but,  as  observed  by  their
    Lordships in AM, such reliance  would  be  misconceived,  in  that  the
    observations of Lord Bingham to which the panel referred (that it would
    be rare for removal to be proportionate if there  was  a  close  family
    bond and that it was unreasonable to expect the family  to  follow  the
    family member being removed) was in the context  of  where  the  public
    interest related to the need  to  enforce  immigration  control.   Lord
    Bingham did not intend that observation  to  apply  in  cases  where  a
    person, as here, was being deported for a serious criminal offence. The
    Tribunal were in our view, wrong in law thus to refer to and rely  upon
    such guidance within their proportionality deliberations.

76.  We also  note  with  some  concern,  that  at  paragraph  31  of  their
    determination (see  above)  in  a  carefully  constructed  argument  in
    stages,  the  panel  attached  increasing   weight   to   the   primary
    consideration in terms of the best interests of the children.   Firstly
    they concluded that it was a factor which must  rank  higher  than  any
    other factor; then by increasing its significance  further  in  stating
    that it was not merely one consideration that weighed in  the  balance.
    Finally by stating that customarily it should dictate  the  outcome  of
    the case. We find that this was wrong. The best interests  of  children
    are a primary consideration which means it must be  treated  first  but
    not that it has an intrinsic additional weight by reason of it being  a
    primary consideration.  As Lord Hope made clear in ZH  (Tanzania),  the
    best interests of the children was not to be treated as  some  sort  of
    trump card.

77.  We nonetheless recognise that in accordance with their clear  statutory
    obligations, the First-tier Tribunal had regard to the  best  interests
    to the Appellant's children who would  be  adversely  affected  by  his
    removal. They were right to do so,  because  disrupting  the  lives  of
    children by removing their father is a very serious step on the part of
    the state.

78.  However the Tribunal were required to conduct a balancing  exercise  in
    which the interests of  the  children  and  other  factors  had  to  be
    considered against the desirability of excluding from the  UK,  foreign
    criminals who committed serious offences.

79.  This Appellant committed amongst other  things,  the  offence  of  rape
    which is always a very serious offence and which in his case, attracted
    a sentence of eight years' imprisonment.  Further, it  is  not  a  case
    where the evidence  suggested  that  the  Appellant  faced  up  to  his
    responsibilities and had reordered his life.  Indeed  he  continued  to
    deny his guilt.

80.  The NOMS report referred to his being at high  risk  of  harming  young
    female children or female adults even though it  also  reported  rather
    curiously that the risk of reconviction was low.

81.  We acknowledge that the First-tier Tribunal considered  very  carefully
    the rights of the children, but in so doing  we  find  that  they  lost
    sight of the fact that they were supposed to be conducting a  balancing
    act and we are satisfied that their findings were not set  against  the
    public interest and therefore we find that they erred in law.

82.  For the reasons to which we have above referred and without in any  way
    detracting from the panel's findings about the best  interests  of  the
    children, we find this is a case where the public interest required the
    Appellant's deportation from the United Kingdom.

83.  We find that the Tribunal had simply not shown proper  if  any,  regard
    to the public interest merely by identifying the need so to do.

84.  The importance of giving proper regard  for  the  public  interest  was
    fully considered in AM and mindful of that guidance,  we  cannot  infer
    from the skimpy reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal, that they did  in
    fact show the regard for the public interest that  AM  reminds  us  was
    needed.  Simply to refer  to  aspects  of  case  law  guidance  is  not
    sufficient.  The First-tier Tribunal may have reminded  itself  of  the
    need to have regard to  the  public  interest,  but  nowhere  in  their
    determination,  did  they  demonstrate  how  they  had  filtered   that
    consideration into the balancing exercise that they  were  required  to
    conduct.

85.  Quite apart from the NOMS report  and  in  particular  those  important
    aspects of it to which the Tribunal made no reference at all, there was
    before the panel  the  report  of  the  London  Probation  Trust  dated
    28 March 2012, where in common with the  NOMS  report,  the  view  was
    expressed that  the  Appellant  would  be  required  to  attend  for  a
    psychological assessment at the Bracton  Clinic  upon  his  release  as
    directed by probation.  He would be required to reside at  an  Approved
    Premises (AP-hostel) initially upon release for a period  of  at  least
    six months.

86.  Indeed the author of the report,  Ms  Sonia  Calliard  continued  inter
    alia:

         "I am not  happy  for  him  to  be  released  to  the  family  home
         immediately.  In my view the fact that this wife has stood  by  him
         increases the possibility of collusion which will heighten the risk
         he poses to young women or girls in the family  that  he  may  come
         into contact with.  The situation  with  the  hostel  accommodation
         would be continually monitored and re-assessed just before the  six
         month period elapses.  It cannot be assumed that Mr Lawson will  go
         straight back into the family home after six months."

87.  Ms Calliard also pointed out, that as the Appellant  was  a  Registered
    Sex Offender, he would be required to work with the protocols governing
    police management of the case.  He would be  subject  to  sex  offender
    registration on release from custody.  He would be required  to  report
    to the police within three days of release from custody.   There  would
    be Victim Specific licence conditions (exclusion zones and  non-contact
    conditions) as appropriate.  He would be forbidden from  contacting  or
    seeking to approach the victim of the offence.  He would  be  forbidden
    to enter the area where the victim lived.  He would be  forbidden  from
    undertaking work or other organised  activity  which  would  involve  a
    person under the age of 18, either on a paid or  unpaid  basis  without
    the prior approval of his supervising officer.

88.  Ms Calliard continued that  in  any  case  the  Appellant's  conviction
    precluded  him  from  certain  occupations   including   working   with
    vulnerable people.  She would seek to have a further condition included
    on his Licence which would  mean  he  would  not  be  allowed  to  have
    unsupervised contact with children under the  age  of  18  without  the
    prior approval of his supervising officer and Southwark Social Services
    Department.

89.  This in itself raises within us a concern, that although the  probation
    report was before the panel, no consideration would appear to have been
    given to it when they reasoned as to why  it  was  in  the  Appellant's
    children's best interests, for the  Appellant  not  to  be  removed  to
    Nigeria or Togo.

 90.  This is a case where the Appellant's children have  been  without  the
    presence of their father for approximately the  last  six  and  a  half
    years. The children will continue to benefit from  the  treatment  that
    they are receiving for their Sickle Cell Anaemia in the United  Kingdom
    and to enjoy all of the benefits including  that  of  education  as  is
    their right as British citizens.  They will continue to live with their
    mother as before.  They can as appropriate and  in  the  future,  visit
    their father in Nigeria as indeed they  have  visited  members  of  the
    family in Nigeria on two occasions in the past.


    91. The Appellant was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment  for  rape
    as well as other associated sexual offences. This  was  not  his  first
    criminal conviction and indeed his prior convictions are indicative  of
    his behaviour whilst in the United Kingdom.  We regret to say  we  have
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal failed to properly take  account
    of the other elements in the public interest and paid no more than  lip
    service to the Appellant's current offence and the public reaction  it.




    92. For the above reasons, we find that notwithstanding that perversity
    has a high threshold, that in the circumstances  of  this  appeal,  the
    Tribunal's reasoning was indeed, perverse.

93.  We have therefore concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  did
    involve the making of errors on a point of law such that their decision
    to allow the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds must  be  set
    aside.

94.  As we mentioned earlier in this determination, the parties agreed  with
    us that in such circumstances there was no  reason  why  we  could  not
    proceed on the evidence to proceed to make a fresh decision and  whilst
    we have taken account of the statements  of  support  from  family  and
    friends, and the family's Parish Priest and that of the prison officers
    at present dealing with the Appellant and whilst we  have  the  deepest
    sympathy for the situation  that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  children
    (whose handwritten letters of support we have considered) will now find
    themselves, we have concluded upon the most  careful  consideration  of
    the evidence in its totality, including the case law guidance to  which
    we have made reference and which we have applied against  the  backdrop
    of the Appellant's  particular  circumstances,  that  in  applying  the
    principle of proportionality, we consider that deportation is justified
    in support of the  legitimate  aim  of  the  prevention  of  crime  and
    disorder and the protection of public health and morals.

Conclusions

95.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on the point of law.

96.  We set aside the decision.

97.  We remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 30 May 2013




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
