
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01310/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 22nd July 2013                               |On 26th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     ADS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms O Ukachi-Lois, counsel, instructed by Okafor &
Co.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In view of the  fact  that  the  respondent  was  a  juvenile  when  he
    committed the offence leading to the decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order I make an order  with  reference  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant.

 2. This appeal comes before the Upper  Tribunal  following  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Osborne  on  29th
    May 2013.

 3. In order to avoid confusion I shall refer to the parties as  they  were
    referred to in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal
    in the First-tier Tribunal was an appeal against the  decision  by  the
    respondent, made on 7th December 2012, to make a deportation  order  in
    respect of the appellant, whereby the appellant would  be  deported  to
    Jamaica.  The decision followed the conviction of the appellant  of  an
    offence of robbery, in respect of which he was sentenced to  20  months
    in a Young Offender Institution at the Crown Court at Woolwich on  24th
    September 2012.  The offence was committed on 10th October  2011,  when
    the appellant was 17 years of age, he having been born  in  Jamaica  on
    20th May 1994.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom when he was 5
    years of age.

 4. The sentencing judge, His Honour Judge M Moore, described  the  offence
    thus:

         "You were 17 years old at the time and the  facts  can  be  shortly
         stated that you, along with a friend basically followed a group  of
         other young people/school children.  You followed them  until  such
         time as they had stopped.  You then basically  summoned  them  down
         and you in particular wanted to take various items from the  victim
         in this case,..., because victim he was.  You felt his pockets.  He
         tried to pull away.  His bag was taken and you said the  following:
         'I'm going to bore you'.  It was perfectly clear what  that  meant.
         Bore, shank, knife; they all tend to mean the same thing and judges
         are well aware of the language that is used on the street.  In  any
         event, items were taken to the value of �450."

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Melvin amplified the grounds of  appeal  by
    his written submissions and orally and I also received oral submissions
    from Ms Ukachi-Lois.

 6. There were a total of ten grounds of appeal all under  the  heading  of
    failing to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings on a  material
    matter.

 7. The first ground was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    appellant had been assessed as posing a  high  risk  of  harm  and  re-
    offending but failed to provide any reasons for its own findings as  to
    these risks.  The difficulty  about  this  submission  is  that  it  is
    perfectly apparent from reading paragraph 21 of the determination  that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  dealt  with  the  NOMS  (National   Offender
    Management Service) report, in which the  risks  were  set  out.   That
    indicated that the risk of serious  harm  was  at  a  high  level.   It
    contained an OASys (Offender Assessment System) risk  assessment  which
    showed that the appellant had a medium risk  of  reconviction  for  any
    recordable offence and general re-offending and a high risk of  violent
    offending.  The First-tier Tribunal quoted  from  the  NOMS  report  in
    paragraph 21 of its determination.  In paragraph 22 it then went on  to
    deal with reports relating to the appellant's education,  which  showed
    that he had been assessed  as  having  special  educational  needs  and
    reports from schools that he  had  attended  prior  to  being  excluded
    permanently in September 2008.  In paragraph 23  of  its  determination
    the First-tier Tribunal said it had no reason to doubt the accuracy  of
    the facts stated in the reports to which it had referred in  paragraphs
    21 and 22.  It said that they were prepared by officials in the  course
    of their employment, those officials having public duties  to  perform.
    There was no challenge to their accuracy.  The First-tier Tribunal said
    that it accepted the accuracy of the facts stated in them and that  the
    conclusions stated in them were justified at the time the reports  were
    written.  Given that there was no challenge by  the  appellant  to  the
    accuracy of the reports,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  need  to
    produce any reasons for accepting the conclusions as to future risk set
    out in the NOMS report.  I set out the reasons given by the  First-tier
    Tribunal  for  its  finding  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate, despite those risks, in paragraphs 34 and 35 below.

 8. In the second ground it was said that the First-tier  Tribunal  wrongly
    found  that  the  response  to  the  Request  for  Offender  Management
    Information, in other words the NOMS report, was completed earlier than
    2nd November  2012.   In  fact  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reached  a
    conclusion which was the opposite of that asserted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, namely that the undated NOMS report could not  have
    been earlier than 2nd November 2012.   That  was  expressly  stated  in
    paragraph 21 of its determination.  It could not  have  been  completed
    earlier than 2nd November because, as the First-tier  Tribunal  pointed
    out, it included the  statement  that  an  OASys  assessment  had  been
    completed on 2nd November 2012.

 9. The ground went on to assert that the report was actually completed and
    received by the Secretary of State on 7th January 2013.   When  invited
    to do so, Mr Melvin was unable to point to any  evidence  which  showed
    that the NOMS report was completed on 7th January 2013.  That date  was
    the date of an email from a probation officer to a  caseworker  of  the
    UKBA to which the NOMS report  was  attached.   The  probation  officer
    apologised for the delay.  What is evident is that the  NOMS  form  was
    sent to the probation officer for completion on 7th December 2012.  The
    ground criticised the First-tier Tribunal for stating that  Mr  Matthew
    Hawkins was the author of the report when in fact he was the caseworker
    who had requested the report.   Nothing  in  my  view  turns  on  this,
    notwithstanding that Mr Melvin did seek to argue that it showed lack of
    attention to detail on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. It was also asserted that in paragraph  40  of  its  determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that the report had  been  completed  without
    taking into account that the appellant was being mentored, whereas  the
    report was up-to-date and did take that into account.   Mr  Melvin  was
    unable to point to any passage in the report  which  acknowledged  that
    the  appellant  was  being  mentored.   It  is  apparent  from  reading
    paragraph 40 of the determination that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  said
    that the assessment was undertaken before Mr Brown became involved.  Mr
    Brown was a person, who had been appointed as a  mentor  and  advocate,
    funded by Southwark Council and who had been  asked  by  the  probation
    service to arrange housing for  the  appellant  in  the  event  of  his
    release.  In paragraph 26 of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal
    said that Mr Brown had been involved with the appellant for  4  months.
    The date of the hearing was 12th April 2013, so that Mr Brown had  been
    involved since approximately 12th December 2013.  This accords with the
    date of the appellant's licence, which was stated in the NOMS report to
    be due to run from 10th December 2012 to 9th October 2013.  It  appears
    that notwithstanding release on licence the appellant  was  transferred
    into immigration detention.

11. The third ground, namely that the First-tier Tribunal failed to provide
    adequate  reasons  for  issues  raised  in  the   NOMS   report   which
    demonstrated an increase in the appellant's future risk, namely that he
    had not accepted responsibility for his actions, whether he would still
    associate with negative peers and whether he had  addressed  his  anger
    management problems, is a  little  difficult  to  understand.   It  was
    submitted there was no evidence that the appellant had addressed any of
    these issues therefore increasing his risk of harm and re-offending  in
    the future.  The difficulty with this submission was that these matters
    were properly assessed in determining  the  risks  that  the  appellant
    presented in the NOMS report.  In paragraph 2b of  the  report  it  was
    said that the risk was  likely  to  be  greater  should  the  appellant
    continue to associate with negative peers and not make constructive use
    of his time.  In paragraph 5d it was said that the appellant's previous
    convictions depicted a history  of  violent  and  aggressive  behaviour
    towards other young males.  He had also  repeatedly  failed  to  comply
    with  past  sentences.   He  struggled  to  accept  responsibility  and
    resolutely displaced blame and  viewed  himself  as  a  victim  of  his
    circumstances  as  well  as  unfair  treatment   through   authorities.
    Moreover,  as  Ms  Ukachi-Lois  pointed  out,  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant, which does not seem to have been challenged, recorded by the
    First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 24(c) and (d)  of  its  determination,
    was that while at Feltham Young Offender  Institution  he  had  pursued
    further education and pursued a variety of courses, the most  important
    of which seems to have been a course in anger management.

12. In ground 4 it was submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant would follow his mentor's advice and guidance and no evidence
    his mentor had helped him address any of  the  issues  which  had  been
    mentioned above.  It would be  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  have
    pointed to evidence as he had not yet been released from  custody.   It
    appeared from Mr Melvin's submissions that what was  being  argued  was
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  seemed  to  have  placed  reliance  upon
    Mr Brown being the  turning  point  in  the  appellant's  life,  which
    expectation was unjustified.  Mr Melvin complained that there was  very
    little by way of evidence as to Mr Brown's status but he conceded  that
    the Secretary of State was represented at the hearing and therefore  it
    was open to the Home Office Presenting Officer to  have  questioned  Mr
    Brown about such matters.

13. It is apparent from reading the determination that Mr David Brown  gave
    oral evidence without having previously prepared a  written  statement.
    The First-tier Tribunal dealt with his evidence in paragraph 26 of  its
    determination.  His evidence was that he was to work as  a  mentor  and
    advocate assisting the appellant (if he were permitted to remain in the
    United Kingdom) under arrangements made and funded by Southwark Council
    and had been involved with the appellant for four months.  He had  been
    asked by the probation service to arrange housing for the appellant but
    when it became apparent that the appellant was not to be  released  all
    plans had to be "put  on  hold".   His  own  assessment  was  that  the
    appellant lacked social skills and was  easily  influenced.   His  past
    behaviour was attributable to his attempting to gain  acceptance  among
    his peers.  He  (Mr Brown)  believed  that  the  appellant  wished  to
    separate himself from his former friends.  He (Mr Brown) was  not  able
    to say whether he would in fact do so - primarily because he  had  been
    in custody at all times since.  It would not be possible to  say  until
    he was released into the community.  He (Mr  Brown)  believed  that  he
    would be able to assist the appellant in moving himself from his former
    friends and other bad influences.  There was no time limit on  his  (Mr
    Brown's) involvement.  He would be involved for as long as it  took  to
    turn the appellant around.  He would be  available  to  assist  at  all
    times.

14. In paragraph 27 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal said  that
    it considered Mr Brown to be an impressive witness.   He  appeared  to
    have a natural authority and to be readily able to relate  to  a  young
    man such as the appellant.  The First-tier Tribunal was in no doubt  of
    his willingness to assist the appellant and that if anyone was in  fact
    to assist and influence him, he (Mr Brown) had the stature, ability and
    authority to do it.

15. In ground 5 it was said that in paragraph 21  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had noted the appellant had allegations (made) of sexual abuse  against
    a pupil at school and his own  sister  which  remained  unresolved  and
    increased his risk if returned to his home.  It was submitted that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to make any findings in regard to this.

16. The position is that in paragraph 21(c) of its determination the First-
    tier Tribunal, quoting the NOMS  report,  said  that  the  warning  for
    sexual assaults (4th July 2008) had involved three  female  schoolgirls
    at the appellant's school  and  had  resulted  in  his  exclusion  from
    school.  Other assessments had suggested that  he  had  inappropriately
    touched his younger sister and a friend of hers.  It seems to  me  that
    as the First-tier Tribunal was quoting from the NOMS  report  it  could
    not be expected to resolve these allegations of sexual abuse, since  no
    evidence was adduced by the Secretary of State to enable it to  do  so.
    It is perfectly plain that  those  matters  were  properly  taken  into
    account in assessing the appellant's risk of re-offending in  the  NOMS
    report.  In paragraph 2b of the report it  was  said  that  whilst  the
    allegation of sexual abuse against pupils at school was some  time  ago
    as well as against his sister, this risk could  not  be  totally  ruled
    out, particularly given that it was unresolved.  While  this  risk  was
    not immediate, a return home could potentially increase the  risk.   In
    section 5 which dealt with the licence and bail information it was said
    that additional licence conditions were likely to be that the appellant
    should permanently reside at a probation-approved hostel and  not  have
    any unsupervised contact with any children under the age of 16  without
    prior approval of his supervising officer.  It is difficult to see what
    findings the First-tier Tribunal could have been expected  to  make  in
    this regard.

17. In ground 6 it was said that in paragraph 35 of its  determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had  not  re-offended  for
    eighteen months but failed to take into account  that  the  appellant's
    original sentence from October 2011 was revoked on 24th September 2012,
    due to him failing to comply with his sentence  requirements.   It  was
    submitted that the appellant had re-offended by failing to comply  with
    the conditions of his sentence and therefore the First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding that he had not re-offended for eighteen months was an error.

18. It is apparent from reading paragraph 35 of the determination that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made no such mistake.  In  dealing  with  the  time
    that had elapsed since the offence was committed  and  the  appellant's
    conduct during that period, the First-tier Tribunal said that the  last
    of the offences was committed  in  October  2011  and  therefore  about
    eighteen months ago, but thereafter the appellant failed to comply with
    the requirements of the Youth Rehabilitation Order which was imposed on
    him in May 2012, itself a further  criminal  offence.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal went on to say there had been no further offending  since  the
    failure to comply with the requirements  of  the  Youth  Rehabilitation
    Order but because the appellant had been in custody at all times  since
    then his opportunity for offending had been limited  and  therefore  it
    placed no weight on that.  Mr  Melvin  conceded  that  the  person  who
    drafted the grounds had misunderstood what the First-tier Tribunal  had
    said.

19. In ground 7 it was said that in paragraph 36 of its  determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant's  earlier  accident  or
    physical or psychological trauma was  the  substantial  cause  for  his
    offending in the past.  It was said that, as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    itself noted, it did not know anything about this incident or  what  in
    fact happened, it had failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  why  an
    incident that it knew nothing  about  would  have  such  a  significant
    effect.  The ground overlooks the passage in paragraph 2b of  the  NOMS
    report, where it was said that the  risk  was  likely  to  be  greatest
    should the appellant continue to associate with negative peers and  not
    make constructive use of  his  time.   It  was  said  that  should  his
    perceived status among his peers  be  threatened  that  was  likely  to
    escalate risk due to his felt need to  be  recognised  by  older,  more
    powerful individuals.  Should he be of no fixed abode or return to live
    with his family the risk was likely to be heightened.  It appeared  his
    traumatic upbringing and lack of boundaries at home may have entrenched
    his choice of lifestyle where he was likely to  have  felt  wanted  and
    accepted as well as gain a sense of power.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to rely upon the  appellant's  school
    reports because they  were  compiled  some  years  ago.   In  my  view,
    however, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take them into account
    because  they  showed  the  difficulties  which   the   appellant   had
    encountered in his development.  What the First-tier Tribunal  said  in
    paragraph 36 of its determination was this:

         "It is apparent from the school reports to which we  have  referred
         above in paragraph 22, and we are satisfied, that,

          a) from a comparatively early age, Mr S had serious developmental
             difficulties,

          b) that his difficulties  resulted  in  serious  misbehaviour  at
             school and seriously affected his willingness and ability both
             to learn and to accept the normal rules of behaviour,

          c) in consequence he did not obtain the benefits of education  or
             attain anything  approaching  what  one  would  normally  have
             expected a boy of his age to have achieved,

          d) the schools to which he  was  sent  did  not  fully  meet  his
             particular special needs, and

          e) although efforts to remedy the deficiencies in education  have
             been made whilst he has been in detention, those  deficiencies
             have not been made up.

         His diction is poor.  He is not an articulate speaker.  He appeared
         to us to lack self-confidence.  His  self-confidence  and  maturity
         are significantly less than that which we would expect to see in  a
         young man of his age.  His description of  himself  as  a  "Mummy's
         boy" is, we have little doubt, accurate.  Although he  is  but  one
         month short of his 19th birthday, in  terms  of  his  maturity  and
         mental development,  he  appears  significantly  younger  than  his
         calendar years.  Whether the reasons for the difficulties and their
         consequences  are  congenital,  the  consequence  of  some  earlier
         accident or physical trauma or psychological is  unclear  and  does
         not matter.  We have little doubt that whatever the cause  may  be,
         it was a substantial cause of his offending in the  past,  wretched
         as that history of offending is, of his bad behaviour in school and
         of the current risks as assessed in Mr Hawkins' report (see  above,
         paragraph 21) of future offending (my emphasis). In summary, Mr  S,
         although now an adult in years is significantly less than  that  in
         terms of his maturity.  We have the most substantial doubts  as  to
         whether, even though he has had the benefit of the courses which he
         undertook whilst in custody, he would be able to obtain, let  alone
         retain, employment in the United Kingdom.  We have  no  doubt,  and
         accept, that he would now be at a substantial disadvantage  on  the
         open labour market in the United Kingdom."

20. Although the ground did not specifically allude to it, Mr Melvin sought
    to argue that the First-tier Tribunal was not  entitled  to  reach  the
    view that the appellant would be at a disadvantage on the labour market
    in the United Kingdom since he  had  undertaken  a  number  of  courses
    whilst in detention.  In my view, for the reasons which the  First-tier
    Tribunal gave, it was  perfectly  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusions
    expressed in the passage of its determination quoted above.

21. Ground 8 criticised the First-tier Tribunal for stating in paragraph 38
    of its determination that the appellant would return to live  with  his
    mother if he were released and not deported and that he was emotionally
    and financially dependent upon her.  Reference was made to the  passage
    in the NOMS report to the effect  that  the  appellant  would  have  to
    reside at approved premises and not with his family and that if he  did
    return to live with his family his risk would increase.

22. In ground 9 it was submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons why his mother could not  send  him  financial
    support from the United Kingdom and that  there  was  no  evidence  the
    appellant was dependent upon his mother beyond  emotional  ties  either
    before his offending or afterwards.  His mother  had  failed  to  exert
    sufficient influence over him to prevent him from re-offending.

23. It was accepted by Ms Ukachi-Lois that the First-tier Tribunal had made
    an error in stating that the appellant would return to  live  with  his
    mother on release because it is perfectly plain that it  was  to  be  a
    condition of the appellant's licence that he should not live at home on
    account of the concerns which were mentioned in  paragraph  2b  of  the
    NOMS report.  The finding by the First-tier Tribunal  that  on  release
    the appellant would return to live with his mother was relevant to  the
    finding that the appellant enjoyed family life with his mother and  his
    sisters.  In paragraph 38 of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal
    said that if the appellant were not deported and released from  custody
    it had no doubt that he would return to his mother's home and live with
    her.  It said that in the light of its above conclusions,  both  as  to
    his present employability and as to his  general  development,  it  was
    satisfied that he would be  dependent  on  her,  both  emotionally  and
    financially, as well as on account of the fact that he  was  living  in
    her home.  His family life would not necessarily suddenly  cut  off  on
    attainment of  the  age  of  18  and  it  was  satisfied  that  in  the
    circumstances of the case  there  would  be  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his mother and his sisters.

24. Mr Melvin submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take account
    of the fact that the appellant had not  been  living  with  his  mother
    prior to his incarceration.  When asked to justify that proposition  Mr
    Melvin sought to do so by reference to paragraph 2b of the NOMS report,
    in which it was said that  males  were  at  risk  from  the  appellant,
    especially given the incident when a large group of males forced  entry
    into his home and trashed it in June 2011.  The reference to his  home,
    however, in my view does not indicate that that was  a  home  that  was
    different from his mother's.  That view of the position is borne out by
    what was stated later in the  paragraph,  which  was  that  should  the
    appellant be of no fixed abode or return to live with  his  family  the
    risk was likely to heighten.  That proposition was necessarily based on
    the fact that the appellant was at home when he committed the offence.

25. In my view, even if in the future the appellant were not to be able  to
    live at home because of the  terms  of  his  licence,  that  would  not
    prevent family life existing between himself and his mother and sisters
    for the other reasons which were given by the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    any event,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  went  on  to  say  that  if  the
    relationship did not in the appellant's case qualify as family life  it
    could not but qualify as private life and the question with  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal was concerned was whether the  appellant's  removal
    would involve a disproportionate interference with the right to private
    and family life.  Since the appellant had lived in the  United  Kingdom
    since July 1999 and did not wish to return to Jamaica, his  removal  in
    consequence of the deportation order would involve an interference with
    his private life.

26. In paragraph 10 of the grounds it was said that in paragraph 29 of  its
    determination the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  there  were  doubts
    about the truth and accuracy in the evidence of the appellant  and  his
    mother regarding the ties they had to Jamaica and there was no evidence
    that their family members did not reside in Jamaica.  In  paragraph  30
    of its determination, however, the First-tier Tribunal had  found  that
    the appellant did not have any ties to Jamaica.  It was said  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for   its
    conclusions.

27. Again in my view this involves a misunderstanding of what it  was  that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  actually  said.   In  paragraph  29  of  its
    determination the First-tier Tribunal said it would be less than  frank
    to say that it had no doubts as to the truth and accuracy of  what  the
    appellant and his mother had told it as to the absence of  friends  and
    relatives in Jamaica.  In paragraph 30, however, it said  that  despite
    its significant doubts as to the reliability and  truthfulness  of  the
    appellant and his mother on that point, it accepted that there were  no
    members of the appellant's family with whom he or his mother now had or
    had within the last (at least) seven years any contact and  who  would,
    if the appellant were removed to Jamaica, be willing and able to assist
    him.  The First-tier  Tribunal  then  set  out  six  reasons  for  that
    conclusion.   In  my  view  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted  perfectly
    properly in indicating the doubts that it had and then  indicating  the
    evidence which resulted in those doubts not succeeding in preventing it
    from reaching the conclusion it reached in relation to the  absence  of
    ties to Jamaica.  The grounds of appeal did not seek  to  suggest  that
    those reasons were perverse.

28. In his written submissions Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to apply the principles set out in the decision of  the
    Court of Human Rights in Maslov v  Austria  [2009]  INLR  47  correctly
    since it failed to appreciate that in that case the offences were  non-
    violent in nature.  In his written submissions and  also  in  his  oral
    submissions he submitted that the  appellant's  offences  of  stabbing,
    possession of an offensive weapon, a violent attack on a schoolboy with
    a metal pole and a violent robbery  demonstrated  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding that the appellant's offending was not in  the  very
    serious category, as required by Maslov, were  unsustainable.   In  his
    written submissions he also referred to the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  He was obliged to  concede,  however,  that  that
    decision of the Court of Appeal concerned automatic deportation and  it
    was significant that the provisions relating to  automatic  deportation
    contained in the UK Borders Act 2007 did not apply to persons under the
    age of 18, as to which  see  section  33(3).   He  accepted  that  that
    demonstrated that there was a difference between the public interest in
    the deportation of juveniles and the public interest in the deportation
    of adults.  In my view Mr Melvin was  right  to  make  that  concession
    because it is perfectly plain that the decision  in  Maslov  underlines
    that difference.

29. It is apparent that the First-tier Tribunal gave particular  regard  to
    the principles set out in the decision in Maslov.  In paragraph  60  of
    its determination it quoted paragraphs 71, 72, 73, 74  and  75  of  the
    judgment and in paragraph 35 it analysed the appellant's  situation  in
    relation to the factors identified in  paragraphs  71  and  73  of  the
    judgment in Maslov.

30. In paragraph 35(a) of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  dealt
    with the nature and  seriousness  of  the  offences  committed  by  the
    appellant.  It said it had set out earlier  the  circumstances  of  the
    offences which the appellant committed as described by the judge in his
    sentencing remarks.  It had no  reason  to  doubt,  and  accepted,  the
    accuracy of what he had said.  Not only  had  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    previously set out  the  description  by  the  judge  of  the  previous
    offences of the appellant but it also set out the previous findings  of
    guilt in paragraph 3 of its determination.  In paragraph 35(a) it  said
    the first of the offences (that committed on 9th October 2009) involved
    the appellant stabbing a  20  year  old  autistic  young  man  who  had
    learning difficulties with a  knife  (there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    injuries caused).  It is clear from the appellant's antecedent  history
    that the offence was not an offence committed with intent. It was dealt
    with by him being made subject to a referral  order  of  10  months  at
    Camberwell Green Juvenile Court.  The First-tier Tribunal recited  that
    both the two last offences, committed in 2011, involved the  threat  of
    the use of a knife.  In the earlier of the two the appellant kicked the
    victim of the offence.  The First-tier  Tribunal  said  they  were  all
    nasty and serious offences, particularly bearing in mind  the  use  and
    threats of violence and the repetition of  offending.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal went on to say that that said, however, and without  intending
    in any way to condone  the  offences,  the  sentences  which  had  been
    imposed on the appellant indicated that the courts which had dealt with
    him for those offences, taking his age into account, had not considered
    the offences to be "in the  very  serious  category".   The  First-tier
    Tribunal said it saw no reason  to  depart  from  the  views  of  those
    courts.

31. It is perfectly plain from reading the determination  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal applied the principles  set  out  in  Maslov  that,  when
    assessing the nature and seriousness of the offences  committed  by  an
    applicant, it had to be taken into account whether he or she  committed
    them as a juvenile or as an adult.  In paragraph 85 of its judgment the
    Court said it had made  it  clear  that  very  serious  offences  could
    justify expulsion even if they were committed by  a  minor.   The  fact
    that the applicant's offences, committed when he was a minor, were non-
    violent in nature with one exception, was one of the factors which  led
    the court to conclude that an  exclusion  order  was  disproportionate.
    Each case, however, must be considered on its own facts.   I  take  the
    view that for the reasons which the First-tier Tribunal  gave,  it  was
    entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  although  the  offences  were
    serious, nonetheless, taking into account all  relevant  circumstances,
    they did not fall into the very serious category of offences.

32. In paragraph 73 of its judgment in Maslov  the  court  said  that  when
    assessing the length of the applicant's stay in a country from which he
    or she was to be expelled and the solidity of the social, cultural  and
    family ties with the host  country,  it  evidently  made  a  difference
    whether the person concerned had already come to the country during his
    or her childhood or youth, or was even born there, or whether he or she
    only came as an adult.  In the appellant's case he came here at the age
    of 5.  In paragraph 74 of its judgment in Maslov the  court  said  that
    that  although  article  8  provided  no  absolute  protection  against
    expulsion for any category of aliens, including those who were born  in
    the host country or moved there in their early childhood, the court had
    already found that regard was to be had to  the  special  situation  of
    aliens who had spent most, if not all,  their  childhood  in  the  host
    country, who were brought up there and received their education  there.
    In paragraph 75 the court said that, in short, it considered that for a
    settled migrant who had lawfully spent all or the major part of his  or
    her childhood and youth in the host country, very serious reasons  were
    required to justify expulsion, that was  all  the  more  so  where  the
    person  concerned  committed  the  offences  underlying  the  expulsion
    measure as a juvenile.

33. Furthermore  in  paragraph  82  of  its  decision  the  court  said  it
    considered that  where  offences  committed  by  a  minor  underlay  an
    exclusion order, regard must be had to the best interests of the child.
     The court considered that the obligation to have regard  to  the  best
    interests of the child also applied if the person to  be  expelled  was
    himself or herself a minor, or if - as in the present case - the reason
    for the expulsion lay in offences committed when a minor.  In paragraph
    83 the court said that where  expulsion  measures  against  a  juvenile
    offender were concerned, the obligation to take the best  interests  of
    the child into account included an obligation to facilitate his or  her
    reintegration.

34. In paragraph 40 of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  set  out
    the reasons for its finding that the appellant's deportation  would  be
    disproportionate.  It included the fact that he was  still  a  juvenile
    when he committed the last of the offences, being aged 17 years  and  5
    months, and the fact that he was then and still was a very immature and
    callow young man who had the developmental difficulties to which it had
    referred.  The First-tier Tribunal said it expressly had regard to  the
    risks of future offending set out in the NOMS report but against  those
    risks set out a number of points, which included the fact that  if  the
    appellant offended again he was likely to  be  returned  to  the  Young
    Offender Institution to serve the outstanding balance of his  sentence,
    the fact that he was aware that should he offend again his past history
    and his having no continuing connection with Jamaica would not save him
    from deportation again and the fact that he would have the  benefit  of
    the assistance and guidance from Mr  Brown,  who  had  become  involved
    after the NOMS assessment had been made.  The First-tier Tribunal  went
    on to outline other factors relating to the age at which the  appellant
    had come to the United Kingdom, the fact  that  he  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom at all  times  since  his  arrival,  had  received  such
    education as he  had  here  and  had  no  continuing  connections  with
    Jamaica.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  reiterated  the  appellant's
    developmental difficulties and the fact that he was assessed as  having
    special educational needs which were not fully met.

35. The First-tier Tribunal then went on to consider the public interest in
    the appellant's deportation and expressed its view that it could see no
    sound basis for  thinking  that  not  removing  the  appellant  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case would impair public confidence in
    the treatment of foreign nationals who had  committed  serious  crimes.
    The First-tier Tribunal also pointed to the  fact  that  there  was  no
    reason to believe that if the appellant  were  removed  to  Jamaica  he
    would receive any assistance and/or guidance of the kind that would  be
    available to him from Mr Brown if he were permitted to  remain  or  any
    assistance and guidance at all.  It referred to a point relied upon  by
    Mr Melvin,  namely  that  the  emergency  accommodation  and  financial
    assistance referred to in the Secretary  of  State's  letter  might  be
    available but it did not consider that in his particular  circumstances
    it would be  sufficient.   It  expressed  the  view  that  without  the
    assistance and guidance which Mr Brown would give, and in  the  absence
    of any family or friends and any real prospect  of  finding  work,  the
    characteristics and factors identified in the NOMS  report  would  draw
    the appellant back into association with  criminal  gangs  and  violent
    criminal offending.

36. It  is  also  the  case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  examined  the
    appellant's position in the light of paragraph 399A(b) of  HC 395,  as
    amended, and reached the conclusion that the conditions set out in that
    paragraph were fulfilled in the appellant's  case.   Nonetheless,  that
    was not the sole basis upon which the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.

37. It is  apparent  from  reading  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that  this  was  a  very  carefully  considered  and  detailed
    assessment of the situation of the appellant and  the  requirements  of
    the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  The First-
    tier Tribunal paid full regard to the  public  interest,  the  relevant
    factors of which were set out in paragraph 14 of its determination.   I
    take the view that  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case,
    notwithstanding the risk to the public from the appellant,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to reach the conclusion that his deportation
    was not justified.  The contrary arguments advanced by the Secretary of
    State in my view amount to a criticism of the final conclusion  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and do not disclose an error of law.  It  is  clear
    from reading the determination that the First-tier Tribunal gave  clear
    reasons for its conclusions, so  that  the  reasons  challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State fails.   While  it  might  be  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal adopted a merciful and generous view to  the  benefit  of  the
    appellant and that a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal  might
    have reached a different conclusion, in my view it cannot be said  that
    the conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal reached was  one  which  no
    reasonable First-tier Tribunal could have reached.

38. In these circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed so
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed                              Dated


P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
