
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01176/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 26th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           MS ESTHER FARAJA NGWATA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant has appealed, with  permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chohan and Mrs R M
    Bray JP) dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision of 2nd
    May 2013 to make a deportation order in respect of her.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  11th
    February 2015.  She attended  without  representation  though  she  had
    previously been represented by solicitors.  She indicated, although not
    initially, that she required an interpreter.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not adjourn either to give her further time  to  obtain  new  legal
    representation or to arrange for an  interpreter.   It  is  noted  that
    after  the  Appellant  had  been  informed  that  there  would  be   no
    adjournment she "refused to answer any questions  and  simply  put  her
    head down and sobbed."

 3. There was  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Five distinct grounds were advanced and although  permission
    was initially refused it was eventually granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Taylor on 8th July 2015 on the basis that;

         "It is arguable that the judge did not act fairly in  refusing  the
         Appellant an interpreter.  If this ground is made  out  the  appeal
         will have to be reheard before a different constituted Tribunal."

 4. Permission having been granted the matter  was  listed  for  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal limited to a consideration as to whether  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for  legal
    error.

 5. In fact, there is not really very much more to say.  This is because Mr
    Mills, on behalf of the  Respondent,  very  fairly  and,  in  my  view,
    entirely  properly,  accepted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had to be set aside.  He observed that, following the decision
    in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC) the threshold for the determination of
    unfairness in proceedings had been set "fairly low."

 6. There is, it seems to me, in view of the approach taken  by  Mr  Mills,
    little point in my adding very much more.   This  was,  though,  it  is
    important  to  note,  an  appeal  which  was  by  no  means  free  from
    complexity.  Further, it was a matter of considerable importance to the
    parties.  The Appellant was facing deportation.  She had served a quite
    lengthy custodial prison sentence albeit one which had been reduced, on
    appeal, by the Court of Appeal.  She had claimed to  be  at  risk  upon
    return to her home country but her asylum claim had been  certified  by
    the Respondent under Section 72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  There was a suggestion,  albeit  seemingly  not  very
    much evidence of it, that there were ongoing family proceedings  within
    the UK which might have had relevance.  Against that background, it was
    clearly important that the Appellant was able to fully  participate  in
    the proceedings.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal was clearly satisfied that she had not told the
    truth with respect to how she came to lack legal representation and had
    not told the truth regarding her claimed limitations in the use of  the
    English language.  However, there was some reason to suppose  that  she
    might have some difficulties with English given that it appears not  to
    be her first language  (she  comes  from  the  Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo), that she had only been in the UK since  2010  and  that  at  an
    asylum interview conducted by the Respondent on 5th February 2013,  she
    had had the services of a Swahili speaking interpreter.

 8. I note Mr Mills' very fair and appropriate view and I conclude that, in
    these circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal  did  err  in  failing  to
    adjourn the proceedings so that the Appellant could have the benefit of
    an interpreter which would have enabled her to fully participate in the
    proceedings.  Whilst she did appear to have some command of English  it
    could not simply have been assumed that whatever command she  did  have
    would have been sufficient for her to have understood questions put  to
    her and to have effectively represented herself in proceedings of  such
    gravity and complexity.  Accordingly, I conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination did involve an error  of  law  and  that  that
    determination falls to be set aside.

 9. There was then some further discussion as to how matters might proceed.
     Both representatives considered  it  was  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal so that matters could  be  considered
    entirely afresh  in  that  forum.   Where  there  has  been  procedural
    unfairness such as to render a determination unreliable that does  seem
    to me to be, ordinarily, the proper course of action.  It also seems to
    me that, subject to a finding of  actual  legal  error,  that  was  the
    course of action anticipated by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Taylor.  I  have
    decided, therefore,  to  remit  with  appropriate  directions  for  the
    determination of this appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error of law and is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that the  decision  may
be re-made.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
