
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA013862014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2016                              |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       MR DECIO DAVID PEREIRA DA SILVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    The Appellant in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson promulgated on
    16th April 2016.

 2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I shall continue to refer to
    Mr Da Silva as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent in this Decision.

 3. Mr Da Silva is a national of Portugal.  The Secretary of State  made  a
    Decision  to  deport  him  under  the  EEA  Regulations  following  his
    conviction on 2nd October 2013 at Woolwich Crown Court for  arson  with
    intent to endanger life.

 4. Judge Monson noted that the Appellant was born on  10th  June  1993  in
    Madeira and came to the United Kingdom between 2002 and 2003 at the age
    of 9.  There is evidence in the  Respondent's  bundle  from  a  primary
    school and secondary  school  attended  by  the  Appellant  in  the  UK
    indicating that he was at school from the age of 9 through to  the  age
    of 16 when he left.

 5. Judge Monson then recited the  Appellant's  criminal  offending.   This
    started in March 2010 when he was cautioned  for  common  assault.   In
    April of the same year he was convicted of arson  and  sentenced  to  a
    referral order for ten months and fined.  In August of that year he was
    again convicted of common assault, two counts of destroying or damaging
    property, two counts of theft, public  nuisance,  wilfully  obstructing
    the free passage  on  a  highway,  causing  to  be  sent  by  a  public
    communication  network  a  false  message   to   cause   annoyance   or
    inconvenience, and three counts of committing an act  outraging  public
    decency.  He was sentenced on that occasion to a  youth  rehabilitation
    order of eighteen months, a supervision programme  requirement  for  22
    days and an unpaid work requirement of 80 hours.

 6. On 3rd March 2011 he was convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily
    harm, three counts of  endangering  persons  on  a  train  by  throwing
    missiles and four counts of destroying or damaging  property.   On  the
    same day he was  also  convicted  of  robbery.   He  was  sentenced  to
    concurrent detention and training orders of twelve months  on  each  of
    the eight counts.

 7. On 27th October 2011 the Appellant was convicted of failing  to  comply
    with the detention and training order and  returned  to  detention  for
    three months.  On  24th July  2012  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of
    handling stolen  goods  and  was  conditionally  discharge  for  twelve
    months.

 8. On 2nd October 2013 at Woolwich Crown Court he was convicted  of  arson
    with intent to endanger life and sentenced to 32 months' detention in a
    young offenders' institution.

 9. Judge Monson then set out the judge's sentencing remarks as follows:-

         "The position is that you are  20  years  of  age  and  I  have  to
         sentence you for an offence of arson, being reckless as to  whether
         life was endangered.

         That was an offence which occurred on 29th June 2012 at  4.30pm  in
         the afternoon when you started a fire in the  communal  lift  of  a
         residential block of flats and you caused  �500  of  damage.   Your
         method was to leave a brick wrapped in some material lighted in the
         lift.  Also, you had  subjected  the  material  to  an  accelerant;
         petrol was smelt.

         You  have  a  long  history  of  antisocial  behaviour  within  the
         immediate neighbourhood.  You were under the influence of  cannabis
         or alcohol at the time and indeed that seems to have been a  theme.



         You have previous convictions, including a conviction for arson, on
         26th April 2010 for which you received a ten month referral  order.
         You were 16 at the time that offence was committed.   That  was  an
         occasion when you set alight to paper and put it through a victim's
         letterbox.  That victim was 84 years of age.

         You also have convictions  of  ransacking  Beckenham  Golf  Course;
         indecent exposure and assault against  your  mother,  a  conviction
         relating to endangering the lives of persons on a  train,  criminal
         damage and assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm  on  a  trainee
         driver on a moving train.  This offence was committed in  April  of
         2010.  You were sentenced to a  detention  and  training  order  on
         3rd March 2011.  That offence related to you  throwing  stones  at
         trains, as  I  understanding  it,  from  reading  the  pre-sentence
         report.

         I have read the pre-sentence report on you and  also  the  addendum
         from the Probation Service and also the evidence from Mr  Beg,  the
         psychiatrist, who says you do not suffer from a mental disorder.

         However, there are worrying features to  your  previous  offending.
         You must understand that arson is a  serious  offence  ...  I  have
         adjourned this on a number of occasions to consider  the  issue  of
         dangerousness.  I shall not make a decision about that today but  I
         warn you that on the next occasion it is  highly  likely  that  you
         will be found dangerous.   Do  you  understand  the  position,  the
         pattern that is developing of an antisocial, criminal and dangerous
         behaviour?  It suggests that there may be escalation in  that  sort
         of behaviour from you.  Do you understand that?"

10. On 25th June 2014 the Secretary of State notified the Appellant of  his
    liability to deportation and the Appellant responded by  letter  saying
    that he had lived in the UK since 2002.  He could not speak  Portuguese
    or read or write it.  He had no family in Portugal  so  he  would  have
    nowhere to live.  His mum, sister and dad were all in London.   He  was
    also a father.  His son had been born on 28th August 2015 while he  was
    in prison.  He had gone to school and studied in the UK.  His childhood
    was in London.  That was all he knew.  His mother suffered from anxiety
    and severe depression and she was due to go to surgery  for  her  back.
    She had two slipped discs and she needed him to help her.   He  had  no
    family where he was born.

11. He also gave details of  his  girlfriend,  Nicole  Hart,  born  on  7th
    December 1995 and a British national.



12. Judge Monson then referred to the NOMS Report which was provided  based
    on information  taken  from  an  OASys  Report  of  March  2014.   That
    indicated the level of risk of serious harm to be high and the  factors
    were endangering members of the public and  domestic  violence  against
    his partner.  He had a number of rivals who had also placed his  family
    at risk.  Based on his antecedent history, the persons at risk were his
    mother, his girlfriend and child  and  members  of  the  public  (pizza
    delivery, train users, residents of flat).  It  is  recorded  that  the
    offender manager said that  he  assessed  the  Appellant's  pattern  of
    offending as reflecting very delinquent behaviour at the  time  of  the
    offences.  Concerns had been raised regarding his level of maturity and
    his compliance with both the previous YRO and DTO was poor.   Prior  to
    his period in custody he had been residing with his mother  and  sister
    and his partner.  So far as his education  was  concerned  he  had  not
    completed year 11 and his level of school attendance had only been  34%
    during that year.  He did attend college for  a  short  while  but  was
    excluded for making sexist and homophobic insults towards staff (he had
    called his teacher a faggot).  Concern had  been  expressed  about  his
    partaking in regular cannabis misuse and  binge  drinking  brandy.   He
    denied substance misuse whilst in custody and said that he had attended
    a drug awareness and drug misuse course whilst on remand.  It was  also
    noted that he was not leading a constructive lifestyle  leading  up  to
    the index offence and had  been  developing  a  concerning  passion  of
    dangerous and antisocial behaviour.  There is also  some  reference  to
    gangs.  That report assessed the Appellant's likelihood of reconviction
    as medium.

13. Judge Monson then set out the Secretary of State's reasoning as set out
    in her letter and then set out details of a previous appeal hearing for
    this Appellant which had been heard by Judge Burnett in the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Newport on 9th February 2015.  On that occasion the  appeal
    had been allowed under the Regulations and on Article 8 grounds.

14. The Secretary of State appealed that Decision  and  on  18th  September
    2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Warr set aside the Decision and  remitted  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.  Thus it was  that  the
    matter had come before Judge Monson.

15. Judge Monson then set out the evidence before him.  He  confirmed  that
    the Appellant had been released on licence in July 2014 and immediately
    taken into immigration detention.  The licence period  expired  on  9th
    November 2015 and he had been released from detention on 30th  December
    2015.  Since that date he had been living with his mother,  sister  and
    partner and their child at his mother's property.  Although the  couple
    had separated while he was in custody they were now back  together  and
    his girlfriend was working sixteen hours a week at McDonald's.  He told
    Judge Monson that he had bonded strongly with his  child  in  the  last
    three months that they had been together.  When asked about what he had
    done to address the risk of harm to others the Appellant said  that  he
    had improved while in custody.  He  had  got  a  kitchen  job  and  had
    learned to cook and had a catering certificate.  Whilst in  immigration
    detention he had done a cleaning job and also worked  in  the  kitchen.
    Furthermore he had a  qualification  as  a  barber  but  had  lost  the
    certificate.

16. Before Judge Monson he acknowledged that he had been given a  32  month
    sentence for a very serious offence and said that it was stupid of  him
    and it had made him grow up.  He was no longer taking cannabis and  had
    done a drug awareness course  in  prison.   He  was  rehabilitated  and
    trying hard to change.

17. He explained that  his  father  had  left  the  family  home  when  the
    Appellant was only 12 having slept with his niece and got her pregnant.
     He told Judge Monson that his father had gone back to Madeira and that
    he was not in contact with him.

18. The Appellant's mother then  gave  evidence  confirming  that  she  had
    worked as a cleaner until three years earlier when she had an  accident
    injuring her back.  She said that she  had  an  80  year  old  aunt  in
    Madeira and also her mother was there but she was  not  on  good  terms
    with her mother.  She had only been back to Madeira once five years ago
    for a court case.

19. Judge Monson then heard evidence from Nicole Hart  who  confirmed  that
    she had visited the Appellant whilst he was in prison  and  also  after
    she had had the baby.  She had been given  her  own  accommodation  but
    this  was  temporary  until  the  council  could  give  her   permanent
    accommodation.  Although she still had her own  accommodation  she  was
    living with the Appellant at his mother's house because  the  Appellant
    was on a tag and it was a condition of his bail that he  lived  at  his
    mother's address.  She described the Appellant as being her family  and
    she does not talk to her own family.

20. In his deliberations Judge Monson first of all considered the level  of
    protection appropriate to this EEA national for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations.  He was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  acquired  a
    right of permanent residence due to a lack of evidence about his mother
    being a qualifying person.  That notwithstanding he found that  he  did
    enjoy the second level of protection.  He  then  went  on  to  consider
    whether his expulsion  was  justified  on  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy.  He noted that the difficulty with the Appellant  was  that  he
    had only been at liberty for three months and also had been  unable  to
    produce any of the  certificates  as  evidence  in  completion  of  the
    enhanced thinking skills programme, victim awareness  course,  drug  or
    alcohol awareness  courses  or  of  engaging  with  CARATS  in  prison.
    However, the judge found the Appellant  to  have  given  credible  oral
    evidence that he had matured while in prison  and  now  recognised  the
    gravity of his previous offending.  The judge was  satisfied  that  the
    threat of deportation had had a salutary effect on him  and  noted  the
    relationship  with  Nicole  and  his  son   was   likely   to   promote
    rehabilitation.  He noted that he is now in  a  relatively  stable  and
    happy environment.  He acknowledged that the Appellant had been  living
    in the same environment leading up to his arrest and  imprisonment  but
    found the relationship to be  stronger  now  than  previously  and  the
    presence of the child was a key factor.  He also did not  consider  the
    Appellant to present any risk to members of his family.

21. However, although finding a significant improvement in the  Appellant's
    attitude since the  OASys  assessment  some  two  years  previously  he
    nevertheless found that the Appellant's expulsion remained justified on
    serious grounds of public policy.  Although he downgraded the level  of
    risk from medium to low the risk nevertheless remained and  found  that
    the Secretary of State had discharged the burden to establish that  the
    personal conduct of the Appellant represented a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  Having so found, the  judge  turned  to  the  question  of
    proportionality.  The judge applied the Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 test  and
    considered the best interests of the child as a primary  consideration.
    He found  at  paragraph  61  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his British  national  child  and
    that he is currently taking an active role in his  upbringing,  looking
    after him when his partner is at work.  His partner remains the child's
    primary carer and the judge noted that it was  not  suggested  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect his partner and the child to  follow  the
    Appellant to Madeira.  On that basis the  judge  found  the  effect  of
    deportation would be to largely sever the tie between father and  child
    which would be plainly contrary to the child's best interests.  In  the
    following paragraph the judge considered that it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect the mother to make the choice between taking  her  child  and
    following the Appellant to Madeira on the basis that she had  no  prior
    connection with Portugal, still less the island of  Madeira.   She  did
    not speak Portuguese and had only ever known life as a British national
    growing up in London.  The judge also noted that the  relationship  was
    not commenced at a time when the  Appellant's  status  in  the  UK  was
    precarious.

22. The judge then found as  a  result  of  his  long  residence  that  the
    Appellant's ties to Portugal had become very weak and noted  his  claim
    not to speak Portuguese.  The judge noted that  although  he  had  some
    relatives in Madeira it was likely there would be significant obstacles
    to his reintegration into society there.  In conducting  the  balancing
    act the judge found in favour of the Appellant and found deportation to
    be disproportionate.

23. The Secretary of State in challenging that  Decision  argued  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to give clear and cogent  reasons  to  support  the
    assessment of the risk of reoffending and  failed  to  give  clear  and
    cogent reasons why family life  could  not  reasonably  be  enjoyed  in
    Portugal.

24. I agree with the Secretary of State's  suggestion  and  find  that  the
    judge did err in law in his assessment of proportionality.  No adequate
    reasons are given as to why it would be unreasonable for this family to
    live in Portugal.  The judge has approached proportionality  as  though
    the Appellant were to be removed to a non-EU country whereas in fact he
    is to be removed to another EU country.

25. On  that  basis  I  found  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    unsustainable and set it aside.  The  Appellant  had  attended  without
    representation.  Indeed, he had not been represented before the  First-
    tier Tribunal either.  He informed me that he had not in fact  received
    a notice of the hearing  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  but  when  he  had
    telephoned the Home Office the previous day they had  informed  him  of
    the hearing which is why he had attended.  It is clear from the file he
    was not in fact notified by the Tribunal; the reason for which  is  not
    known.  However, to his credit  he  appeared  and  indeed  brought  his
    witnesses with him.  When I explained to him the reason I  was  setting
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal he expressed  an  anxiety
    to have the decision remade the same day as he had already been waiting
    a long time.  He was ready to proceed and his  witnesses  were  present
    and ready to give evidence.  He did request a short period of  time  to
    prepare and so I stood the matter down for one hour for that purpose.

26. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant,  his
    mother and his girlfriend.  His sister also appeared to  give  evidence
    but the Presenting Officer had no questions to put to her.

27. The Appellant confirmed that he had done  drug  and  alcohol  awareness
    courses whilst in custody but did not have any of the certificates.

28. At a previous hearing  the  Appellant  said  that  he  had  a  gambling
    addiction.  He agreed that he did but no longer did  so.   He  did  not
    have the money to gamble as he needed to support his chid.  He did  not
    attend any courses for that or counselling; he helped himself.

29. When asked if he had any GCSEs he said that he had obtained a C  in  PE
    and Ds in English, Maths, Science and IT.  He said that he had  done  a
    business enterprise course in prison but did not have a certificate for
    that, neither did he have a certificate for his  barber  qualification.
    He confirmed that he had no employment history but  said  that  he  was
    going for an interview for a job at  McDonald's  within  the  next  few
    days.

30. He has only been to Portugal once since he came to the UK. He  went  in
    2008 on holiday to Madeira.  He confirmed that he was  educated  up  to
    the age of 9 in Portugal in Portuguese.   He  said  that  he  had  some
    understanding of Portuguese but most of his language  now  is  English.
    He says he could understand Portuguese but cannot speak it  very  well.
    He agreed he had enough to get by.

31. He told us that if he had to go to Portugal his  family  would  not  go
    with him as they had nowhere to go.  He said that they had discussed it
    and his mother said that he would be homeless.  He also said  that  his
    girlfriend would not go with him either because she would not  be  able
    to speak the language.  She was raised in England, their child was born
    in England and he wants to  live  with  her  here  in  England  not  in
    Portugal.  He emphasised that he has been complying with everything  he
    was required to since being released from prison.

32. He explained that although his girlfriend has her own council property,
    which they are in the process of decorating, she currently stays at his
    mother's as that is where he has to live.  When questioned about family
    in Portugal he said he has  an  80  year  old  aunt  and  his  maternal
    grandmother.  Also his paternal grandmother is there but none  of  them
    will have him.  They have all said so.



33. The Appellant was then asked about his convictions.  With regard to the
    arson when he put lit paper through an 84 year old lady's letterbox  he
    said it was not him but he took the blame.  He then  said  that  he  is
    remorseful and if he could turn back time he would and would never  get
    into trouble again.

34. He was asked why he had thrown stones at a train driver and said  again
    that it was not him, he was there but he did not do it.  He  then  said
    the reason he got into trouble was because he needed to have his father
    around.

35. When he was asked what was to prevent him getting a job in Portugal  he
    said that he would miss his child and that he does not know anybody  in
    Portugal and that he will not have any help.

36. We then heard evidence from the Appellant's girlfriend.  She  gave  her
    address as being her own council property but confirmed that she was in
    fact staying at the Appellant's mother's.  Once he is no  longer  on  a
    tag they will move into her property together.  She confirmed that  she
    has no contact with her own family  although  her  sister  was  looking
    after the child today.  She said that normally she does  not  speak  to
    her sister and she does not talk to her parents.   She  confirmed  that
    the Appellant looks after her son when she is at work.   She  indicated
    the only language she speaks is English.  The only time  she  has  been
    outside of the UK is on holiday to Lanzarote in June of last year  with
    her family.  She then said that was the  last  time  she  had  had  any
    contact with her family.  She has never been to Portugal.  Her evidence
    indicated that her relationship with her family was  not  estranged  as
    she claimed.

37. She was asked what she would do if the Appellant were deported and  she
    said she loved him and if he goes she will be upset and  she  does  not
    have the money to visit him in Portugal.  She said they would  have  to
    separate if he was deported.  She confessed to having done no  research
    about Portugal but was certain that she would not be  able  to  survive
    there, she would not be able to get accommodation and she would not  be
    able to get a job.  She said there was nothing there except  a  lot  of
    trees.

38. Miss Hart confirmed that she and the Appellant got  together  in  2012.
    It was put to her that he was already getting into trouble when she met
    him and she said that no-one is perfect but he had improved a  lot  and
    in the last six months has done nothing wrong.  She said  she  did  not
    know anything about foreign national offenders being removed and it had
    never occurred to her that he might be subject to deportation.

39. When asked whether she thought he had been guilty of the  offences  for
    which he was convicted she said she had spoken to him and he said  that
    he did not do it and she  believed  that  he  had  not  done  it.   She
    concluded by saying the Appellant deserves to be in the UK  and  should
    not have to be deported for one mistake.

40. We then heard from the Appellant's mother.  She  confirmed  she  has  a
    married sister with two children in Madeira, an 80 year old auntie  and
    her mother.  She had not grown up with her mother and so was not  close
    to her.  She said none of her family would  be  prepared  to  help  the
    Appellant if he was removed to Madeira.  She said she had worked for  a
    short time when in Madeira as a cleaner but would not be able to advise
    her son on life in Madeira because she had not been there for  thirteen
    years.  She had last been to Madeira five years previously for a  court
    case and that was only for three or four days.  Prior to that  she  had
    been back once but could not recall the date.  She  confirmed  that  if
    her son was deported to Portugal she would remain in the UK.

41. In his submissions Mr Whitwell relied on the refusal  letter.   At  the
    outset of the  hearing  we  had  discussed  the  appropriate  level  of
    protection for the Appellant and he accepted that  the  Appellant  must
    have spent five years in education  and  would  thus  have  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.  On that basis it was  accepted  that  he
    had acquired the second level of protection.

42. Mr Whitwell stressed the history of offences which informs the level of
    threat that he poses and referred to  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks
    indicating the escalation and the gravity of the  offending.   He  also
    relied upon the Appellant's  oral  evidence  seeking  to  minimise  his
    involvement which he argued  heightened  the  risk.   The  NOMS  Report
    should be relied upon and clearly he represented  a  significant  risk.
    There was no evidence that he had done anything to address the level of
    risk and he had been unable to provide any certificates notwithstanding
    the fact that these proceedings had been going  on  now  for  some  two
    years.

43. The Appellant has not been in trouble since his release  but  that  was
    only six months previously and  of  course  he  had  these  proceedings
    hanging over him.  All his previous offending had taken place whilst he
    was living in the same home and with the same persons that he  is  with
    now.

44. His girlfriend has always known he was a foreign  national  and  should
    have known that as a foreign national, if he  continued  to  offend  he
    would face the prospect of deportation.  His partner's presence in  his
    life did not prevent his offending.  Portugal is a European country and
    as a European  country  will  have  provision  of  social  housing  and
    benefits.  No  evidence  has  been  adduced  that  these  will  not  be
    available to a Portuguese national living there.  He does not  have  to
    live in Madeira he can live anywhere in Portugal.  He asserted that the
    position of the family was a preference not to  live  in  Portugal  but
    there was no impediment to them doing so.  Although it is claimed  that
    the extended family in Madeira will not help him, even if  they  cannot
    offer him accommodation there is no reason to suppose  they  would  not
    offer him emotional support and advice.

45. The Appellant who had made abundantly clear throughout the  proceedings
    that his case is that he does not wish to be taken away from  his  son;
    he will never commit any more offences  and  he  has  his  friends  and
    family in the UK and nothing and no-one in Portugal.

My Findings

46. It is now accepted that the Appellant has acquired the second level  of
    protection under the EEA Regulations and can thus only be  deported  on
    serious grounds of public policy or public security.  The Appellant was
    convicted of a large number of offences seriously antisocial in  nature
    and several of which are themselves very serious offences.  He has  one
    conviction of arson which involving as it did placing lighted  material
    through the letterbox of an 84 year old  woman  is  extremely  serious.
    Throwing missiles at a moving train is also extremely serious  and  has
    potentially very grave consequences for all those aboard the train  and
    arson with intent to endanger life  is  one  of  the  most  serious  of
    offences.  As the judge pointed out  his  offending  has  escalated  in
    nature.  The NOMS Report and there is no evidence save the  Appellant's
    own oral evidence and assertions to indicate  that  the  assessment  or
    risk contained therein is not accurate, indicating that he is at medium
    risk of further offending.  The Appellant has had a great deal of  time
    to obtain evidence of any work he has  done  or  qualifications  gained
    whilst in prison and yet none has ever been produced.   Notwithstanding
    that he has kept out of trouble in the six  months  since  his  release
    from detention I am entirely satisfied that the risk level  remains  as
    indicated in the NOMS Report and that he is at least a medium  risk  of
    offending and the nature of the offending thus  far  would  indicate  a
    real risk of harm to others should be reoffend.  I have  no  hesitation
    therefore in finding that  his  deportation  is  justified  on  serious
    grounds of public policy and  public security.

47. That found the decision to remove him must also comply with  Regulation
    21(5) which reads as follows:-
         "(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-
               (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
         proportionality;
              (b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;
               (c)  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;
              (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
                  relate to considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
                  justify the decision;
              (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision."

48. Regulation 21(6) also provides that before taking a  relevant  decision
    on the grounds of public policy or public security  in  relation  to  a
    person who is resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must
    take account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
    and economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
    in the United Kingdom, the person's  social  and  cultural  integration
    into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's links  with  his
    country of origin.

49. The first question to be decided therefore is that  the  decision  must
    comply with  the  principle  of  proportionality.   Any  assessment  of
    proportionality requires a balance taken between the interests  of  the
    Secretary of State, in this case the interests  of  public  policy  and
    public security, the policy of removing foreign national offenders  and
    on the  Appellant's  side  any  factors  suggesting  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

50. It is important to note that the destination country in this case is  a
    member of the EU.  As such there are minimum standards  imposed  as  to
    health,  education,  housing  and  social  assistance.    No   evidence
    whatsoever has been adduced that this  would  not  be  available  to  a
    Portuguese national living in Portugal.  The Appellant himself is young
    and healthy.  He conceded that he has enough Portuguese to get  by  (it
    was the language he first learned to speak and was educated  in  up  to
    the age of 9).  It would no doubt be the first language of his  parents
    and the language he was brought up within the home.  There is no reason
    why the Appellant should not be able to secure employment  in  Portugal
    on the same basis as he could in the UK, namely unskilled.  Although it
    may be that his extended family members in Madeira would not be able or
    willing to accommodate him, they would be able to advise him on how  to
    obtain it for himself.

51. It is argued it is disproportionate because it would cause a  severance
    of his relationship with his girlfriend  and  child.   However,  I  was
    provided with no cogent evidence that there is anything  other  than  a
    preference for the family to wish to live in the United Kingdom.   Many
    thousands of EEA nationals including  UK  citizens  resettle  in  other
    European countries every year.  A British national is  able  to  access
    healthcare in other EEA countries.  I do not  find  that  it  would  be
    either  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to  expect   the   Appellant's
    girlfriend and child to settle with him in either Portugal or  Madeira.
    Whether they choose to do so is  a  matter  for  them  but  it  is  not
    sufficient to render the decision to deport disproportionate.

52. So far as the remainder of the Appellant's  family  is  concerned,  his
    mother does have a physical disability and until the  last  six  months
    the Appellant has offered her virtually no assistance,  indeed  he  has
    been convicted of assaulting her in the past.  She has her daughter  to
    assist her and  the  Appellant's  presence  is  not  essential  to  her
    wellbeing.

53. So far as Regulation 21(5)(b) is concerned the decision is justified on
    serious grounds of public policy and  public  security.   I  have  also
    found the Appellant represents an ongoing risk.

54. So far as Regulation 21(5)(d) is concerned there are no  other  matters
    indicating the decision is not justified  and  the  decision  is  quite
    clearly not made solely on the basis of the previous convictions but on
    the future risk that the Appellant represents.

55. So far as Regulation 21(6) is concerned there are no issues that  would
    prevent  his  deportation.   Given  the  nature  and  extent   of   the
    Appellant's offending he has clearly not integrated himself  culturally
    and socially into the United Kingdom as he has persistently broken  its
    laws.

56. For all of the above reasons I find the Appellant's appeal against  the
    deportation decision and the EEA Regulations  must  be  dismissed  both
    under the Regulations and on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  with
the result that the Appellant's original appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Date 13th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
