

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01795/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2014                                |On 26 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     AB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk of Counsel, instructed by Brar & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Holmes and Dr C J  Winstanley  dismissing  an  appeal
   against a decision dated 14 August 2013 to deport the appellant in  terms
   of section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The appeal was  brought  on
   the grounds of asylum, Article 3, and family life and  dismissed  on  all
   grounds.

2) The appellant claims to be a citizen of Sierra Leone  and  to  have  been
   born on 15 April  1979.   In  2008  he  pled  guilty  to  an  offence  of
   possession of a false identity document with intent and was sentenced  to
   a term of imprisonment of 12 months.  In January 2009 the  appellant  was
   notified of his liability to deportation.  Between his  guilty  plea  and
   his sentencing the appellant had claimed asylum and on 8 August 2013  his
   asylum claim was refused  by  the  respondent.   On  the  same  date  the
   respondent issued the decision to make a deportation order.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3) The First-tier Tribunal found  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  the
   alleged risk of persecution or serious harm he claimed to face in  Sierra
   Leone to be wholly lacking in credibility.  This  finding  has  not  been
   challenged in the application to the Upper Tribunal.

4)  The  challenge  to  the  Upper   Tribunal   concerns   the   appellant's
   relationship with a Miss LJ.  The couple claimed to have known each other
   since before the appellant was arrested in 2008 in respect of the offence
   of which he was later convicted.  It appears that they commenced a sexual
   relationship around the end of 2010.  LJ appeared to be unaware that  the
   appellant was in the UK illegally or facing  deportation  until  late  in
   2013.  The couple have a daughter, EJ, born in December 2013, who is both
   a British citizen and a citizen of Sierra Leone.

5) In the respondent's deportation decision of 14 August 2013, at  paragraph
   18, it was accepted that the appellant was "in a genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship with [LJ]".  It was further stated, at  paragraph  19  that,
   although the appellant claimed to have been in  a  relationship  with  LJ
   since 2008, they did not live together.  This was said to be  on  account
   of the appellant's religious beliefs,  which  forbad  him  to  live  with
   someone  outside  marriage.   The  respondent  nevertheless  noted   that
   according to the appellant, LJ  was  pregnant  with  the  couple's  first
   child.

6) The First-tier Tribunal noted the respondent's concession with regard  to
   the existence of the relationship between the appellant and LJ  and  made
   the following comments:

    "85.   The appellant says that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with [LJ] (dob [xx].7.89), and the  respondent  has
           not challenged this aspect of the claim directly,  although  for
           the reasons set out below,  and  having  heard  them  both  give
           evidence, and seen their demeanour  towards  one  another  on  4
           February 2014, we have very grave doubts as to the  true  nature
           and strength of this relationship as it stands today.


       86. We note that LJ continues to live  in  her  mother's  home.   We
           consider it significant that there is no evidence before us from
           either LJ's mother, or the aunt with whom the appellant is  said
           to live.


       87. Where the evidence of the appellant and  LJ  is  discrepant,  we
           have no hesitation in concluding that LJ is  the  more  reliable
           witness."

7) The Tribunal then went on to consider the evidence before it  about  this
   relationship.  The Tribunal, at paragraph 98 of the determination,  noted
   the appellant's evidence that he had not cohabited with LJ prior  to  the
   birth of the baby on 19 December 2013 but he claimed in evidence to  have
   done so since.  The Tribunal  nevertheless  noted  that  in  his  witness
   statement of 22 January 2014 the appellant had given his address as being
   in Gosforth whereas LJ's home was in Gateshead.   The Tribunal noted,  at
   paragraph 100, that the appellant's claim to have lived in LJ's home  for
   the last month in order to assist with caring for their baby  was  not  a
   claim that LJ supported.  Her evidence,  both  in  chief  and  in  cross-
   examination, was that the only people living in her home were her mother,
   her 8-year-old brother, herself and the baby.  The Tribunal rejected  the
   appellant's claim to be cohabiting with LJ.

8) The Tribunal went on to  consider  whether  the  appellant  and  LJ  were
   engaged to be married.  The appellant had claimed this at  his  screening
   interview in February 2009, although in his witness statement he  claimed
   that they became engaged in 2011.  The Tribunal noted, at paragraph  106,
   that in her witness statement LJ  claimed  that  she  and  the  appellant
   intended to marry in the event that the appellant was allowed  to  remain
   in the UK.  The Tribunal observed, at paragraph 107, that  it  was  quite
   plain once LJ had given her evidence at the hearing  that  the  appellant
   was extremely annoyed with her over the content of the  evidence.   After
   giving evidence LJ went to sit at the back of the court room but did  not
   attempt to sit beside the appellant.  There was no  eye  contact  between
   them and they did not speak to one another or acknowledge one another  at
   all.  They remained like that for the remainder of the hearing.

9) The Tribunal went on to consider the relationship between  the  appellant
   and his daughter EJ.  The Tribunal recorded at  paragraph  109  that  the
   appellant claimed in oral evidence to have played a significant  part  in
   EJ's life since her birth but neither his witness statement nor  that  of
   LJ had made this plain.   It  was  accepted  by  the  Tribunal  that  the
   appellant visits EJ at LJ's home from time to time, and probably assisted
   with caring for her when he does  so  but  his  claim  to  live  at  that
   property was rejected.  The Tribunal was not satisfied that he went there
   every day.  The Tribunal expressed doubts as to whether the appellant has
   a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  EJ  or  was  simply
   responding to legal advice as to how strengthen his Article 8 appeal.

10) The Tribunal, having considered the evidence, set out their  conclusions
   on family life, as follows:

    "112.   We are satisfied that the appellant has enjoyed a  longstanding
           relationship of friendship with  [LJ],  which  became  a  sexual
           relationship at about the end of 2010.  That sexual relationship
           has led to the conception, and recent birth of baby [EJ].


      113. Until  very  recently  the  appellant  had  deceived  [LJ]  into
           believing that he held immigration status in the UK.  He had not
           disclosed to her that he had been recommended for deportation by
           the sentencing judge in 2008 and he did not  disclose  his  true
           position to her until about the time baby [EJ] was  born.   That
           disclosure  has  in  our  judgment   seriously   damaged   their
           relationship.


      114. We are not satisfied that  the  appellant  and  [LJ]  enjoyed  a
           genuine and subsisting relationship akin to  marriage,  or  that
           they currently jointly hold any genuine intention to marry.   We
           accept  however  that  their  relationship  probably  was  of  a
           different quality  when  [EJ]  was  conceived;  the  appellant's
           deception had not yet come to light."

11) The Tribunal found that the pregnancy was not planned.  The  couple  had
   not been cohabiting when the baby was conceived or born.   Although  this
   was a borderline case the Tribunal accepted that there was "family  life"
   between the appellant and EJ from birth.  The Tribunal then  went  on  to
   consider EJ's best interests.  It was plainly in her best interests to be
   brought up in the UK and to be cared for by  her  mother.   The  Tribunal
   recognised that ordinarily it would be in the best interests of any child
   that even if they cannot be brought up by both  of  their  parents,  they
   should grow up enjoying contact with  both  parents  and  their  extended
   family.

12) The Tribunal found at paragraph 130 that the appellant did not meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 339(a).  This  was  because  even  if  all  the
   requirements of that provision were met, it  was  not  disputed  that  LJ
   could care for EJ in the UK in the event of the appellant's  deportation.
   The appellant did not qualify for any of the  exceptions  to  deportation
   under the Immigration Rules.

13) The Tribunal then went on to consider whether the appeal  might  succeed
   under Article 8 outwith the Rules and whether the question  of  delay  by
   the respondent in the decision making process might have any effect  upon
   the outcome of the appeal.  In this regard, however, the  Tribunal  noted
   that the appellant did not take LJ into his confidence and  tell  her  of
   his lack of immigration status and that he was already facing deportation
   at the time they entered  into  a  serious  relationship.   The  Tribunal
   further observed that if the appellant had not  attempted  to  rely  upon
   forged documents purporting to be issued by UNHCR the decision to make  a
   deportation order upon refusal of his asylum claim might have  been  made
   earlier.  The Tribunal found that the family life that the appellant  had
   established since his release from  detention  in  2009  was  established
   while he was deceiving LJ as to what his true immigration status was.

14) The Tribunal nevertheless found that the decision to make a  deportation
   order was an interference with the  right  to  respect  for  private  and
   family life.   The  appellant's  deportation  would  lead  to  his  being
   physically separated from LJ and EJ and being able to  play  very  little
   part in EJ's life as she grew up.  It was not suggested that it would  be
   reasonable to  expect  LJ  and  EJ  to  make  a  life  in  Sierra  Leone.
   Communication by letter or by electronic means would be a poor substitute
   for direct contact.   Nevertheless  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
   despite consideration of the best  interests  of  EJ,  did  not  disclose
   "exceptional circumstances" and the deportation of  the  appellant  would
   not be a disproportionate response to his offending.

Permission to appeal

15) Permission to appeal was granted on three main grounds.   The  first  of
   these was that it was arguably wrong for  the  Tribunal,  without  giving
   notice, to go behind a concession made by the respondent in  the  refusal
   letter accepting that the appellant and his partner were in a  subsisting
   relationship  and  to  base  an  assessment  of  their  relationship   on
   demeanour.  The second ground was that it was contended that the Tribunal
   relied in part on a lack of evidence from the partner's mother  but  this
   was a further arguable error because she had provided a statement,  which
   was in the respondent's bundle.  The third ground was that  the  Tribunal
   had arguably erred  in  their  assessment  of  proportionality.   In  the
   application for permission to appeal it was contended that  the  Tribunal
   did not give adequate reasons for its decision on this issue.

Submissions

16) At the hearing before me,  Mr  Schwenk,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
   argued that there was a clear and unequivocal concession on behalf of the
   respondent as to the existence of a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
   This was not challenged.  The  Tribunal  was  wrong  to  go  behind  this
   concession.  Mr Schwenk sought to rely on a decision of  the  Immigration
   Appeal Tribunal from 2000 in Carcabuk 00TH01426, which  was  approved  by
   the Court of Appeal  in  NR  (Jamaica)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  856.   If  the
   concession was  to  have  been  challenged  it  should  first  have  been
   withdrawn.

17) Turning to the issue of the couples' demeanour,  Mr  Schwenk  sought  to
   rely on a decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  in  Luwuzi  [2002]
   UKIAT 07186, in which the danger of relying on demeanour was pointed out.
    Mr Schwenk continued that the Tribunal made a third error in relation to
   the evidence of LJ's mother, when the Tribunal  stated  at  paragraph  86
   that there was no evidence from her.  It was pointed out that there was a
   letter reproduced at both N2 and  N4  of  the  Respondent's  bundle.   Ms
   Schwenk noted that this letter was brief but could have made a difference
   to the outcome of the appeal.  The Tribunal had considered the absence of
   evidence from LJ's mother significant and in so doing had made a  mistake
   of fact.

18) Mr Schwenk further pointed out that although the  Tribunal  referred  to
   not having evidence from the appellant's aunt in Newcastle, there  was  a
   letter from her at pages 133-134 of the appellant's bundle.  This  stated
   that the appellant used to live with his aunt  but  did  not  do  so  any
   longer.

19) Mr Schwenk submitted that the Tribunal had assessed  proportionality  on
   an incorrect factual basis.  The concession by the respondent should have
   been accepted. If it was accepted that the Tribunal had  made  errors  in
   the evidence then there should be a re-assessment  of  the  appeal  under
   Article 8 even though it had been  accepted  by  both  parties  that  the
   appellant would not qualify under the Immigration Rules.  In  support  of
   this proposition Mr Schwenk referred to the case  of  Haleemudeen  [2014]
   EWCA Civ 558.

20) In conclusion Mr Schwenk submitted that there were a  number  of  errors
   in the determination.  It was unlawful for the Tribunal to go behind  the
   respondent's concession.  It was not possible to say that if these errors
   had not been made, the outcome would have been the same.  It was  pointed
   out that there was also an issue of fairness and that the  mother  of  LJ
   might have been called as a witness had it not been for the concession.

21) For the respondent,  Mrs  Rackstraw  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had
   looked at the case very  carefully  and  made  a  careful  assessment  of
   credibility.  The concession as to the existence of  a  relationship  was
   set out very briefly and, given the appellant's history,  it  was  always
   likely the judge would have made different findings on the  existence  of
   the substantive relationship.  The appellant has a history  which  showed
   him to be unreliable and he had given evidence which was not genuine.  As
   was pointed out by the Tribunal at paragraph 80 of the determination,  in
   reliance upon the case of SS (Nigeria), it was for the appellant to chose
   what evidence to  place  before  the  Tribunal.   Although  the  Tribunal
   referred at paragraph 86 to not having any evidence before it from either
   LJ's mother or the appellant's aunt, this was not material.  The  letters
   from the mother and aunt were short  of  content  and  undated.   It  was
   pointed out that the letter from the aunt was dated 7  August  2011,  but
   Mrs Rackstraw submitted this wwas a considerable time ago.   It  did  not
   cover the period of the relationship.  Having regard to  the  appellant's
   circumstances  and  history,  the  reasons  given  by  the   panel   were
   sufficient.

22) In response Mr Schwenk submitted  that  if  the  concession  as  to  the
   relationship had been doubted, then the Tribunal should  have  asked  the
   respondent to  withdraw  the  concession  and  given  the  appellant  the
   opportunity  to  call  evidence  in  support  of  the  existence  of  the
   relationship.

23) It was put to Mr Schwenk that the concession was essentially limited  to
   the point in time when the respondent's decision was  made  and  did  not
   refer to a continuing state of affairs.  It could not be assumed  that  a
   particular state of affairs would  continue  months  or  years  into  the
   future.

24) In response Mr Schwenk again sought to rely on Carcabuk.   He  submitted
   that a concession related to a matter of fact and he acknowledged that  a
   concession about a past event could be undermined by  new  evidence.   He
   submitted that if there was a question about a concession in the  refusal
   letter then this ought to have been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
   parties.  He appeared further to submit that the task of the Tribunal was
   to determine the facts at the date of the decision appealed against.

25) Mrs Rackstraw pointed out that the Tribunal was only  able  to  consider
   the nature of the relationship once it had heard the evidence  of  LJ  so
   the concession could not have been withdrawn in advance of the hearing.

26) Mr Schwenk submitted that even at  that  stage  the  appropriate  course
   would have been for the Tribunal to ask the respondent  to  withdraw  the
   concession.  The appellant's poor immigration history did not address the
   issue of the  concession.   The  observations  about  the  need  for  the
   appellant to chose what evidence to provide, in terms  of  SS  (Nigeria),
   did not detract from the proper way in which the concession  should  have
   been addressed.

27) In relation to the letters from the appellant's aunt and the  mother  of
   LJ, Mr Schwenk submitted that this was not just a question of the content
   of the letters but a question of the Tribunal having been  influenced  by
   the  supposed  absence  of  evidence  from  these  individuals.   If  the
   appellant had been aware that the subsistence of the  relationship  would
   be in dispute then further evidence might have been called.

28) Mr Schwenk asked for a  further  hearing  to  determine  the  Article  8
   issue.  He confirmed there was no challenge to the determination  insofar
   as it addressed asylum and Article 3.  In terms of the Practice Direction
   he submitted that remittal would be the appropriate course.

29) At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination  on  the  question
   of whether there was an error of law in the determination  such  that  it
   should be set aside.

Discussion

30) Mr Schwenk's principal argument in relation to the concession  was  that
   once it was made the Tribunal should not  have  gone  behind  it  without
   giving the parties notice that they considered it would be appropriate to
   do so and asking the respondent to withdraw the concession.  I note  that
   the case of Carcabuk concerned two asylum appeals in which the respondent
   had accepted the  credibility  of  the  account  given  by  each  of  the
   appellants on which their  asylum  claims  were  based.   In  that  case,
   however, the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  stressed  the  importance  of
   identifying the precise nature of any so-called concession.  The Tribunal
   accepted that if it  was  a  concession  of  fact,  for  example  that  a
   particular document was  genuine  or  that  an  event  described  by  the
   appellant or a witness did occur, then the Tribunal should not go  behind
   it.  I note that although, as Mr Schwenk submitted, the Court  of  Appeal
   in NR (Jamaica) referred to the decision in Carcabuk, the  Court  pointed
   out that the Tribunal's  discretion  was  wide  and  that  a  significant
   feature of how that discretion should be exercised was by  having  regard
   to the question of  whether  or  not  there  would  be  prejudice  to  an
   appellant.  The Court also observed that in a case  involving  asylum  or
   human rights it was the position at the date of  the  hearing  which  was
   important.

31) The respondent had good reason to accept that the  relationship  between
   the appellant and LJ was genuine  and  subsisting  at  the  date  of  the
   decision on 14 August 2013.  This was because LJ was expecting a baby  of
   whom the appellant is the father.  That was the position as  it  appeared
   to the respondent in mid-August 2013.

32) When the appeal came before the Tribunal to make decisions  in  relation
   to the appellant's family life, the Tribunal was bound  to  consider  the
   strength and intensity of the relationship between the appellant and  LJ.
   The underlying premise of Mr Schwenk's submission was that a relationship
   must be either subsisting or not subsisting.  That is, however,  a  gross
   over simplification of the spectrum possible states of relationships.   A
   couple may be in a relationship but it may be one in which there is  very
   little  commitment  between  the  parties.   The  relationship   may   be
   relatively casual and the bond between the couple may be  weak.   At  the
   other end of the spectrum there  may  be  relationships  of  considerable
   strength and duration where the couple have shown a  commitment  to  each
   other over the long term.  Regardless of the respondent's view of whether
   the relationship between the appellant  and  LJ  subsisted  or  not,  the
   Tribunal was required to make its  own  assessment  of  the  quality  and
   strength of this relationship, and even  of  its  likely  durability.  In
   short, the Tribunal was required to make an assessment of the quality  of
   the appellant's family life with LJ.

33) Bearing this in mind, it is difficult to see how the appellant has  been
   prejudiced by the concession, if indeed such  it  was,  not  having  been
   formally withdrawn on behalf of the respondent.  The burden  was  on  the
   appellant to satisfy the Tribunal of the  strength  and  quality  of  his
   relationship with LJ.  The appellant completely failed to  do  this.   At
   the hearing he gave evidence, as did LJ, and there  were  inconsistencies
   in their evidence about the  relationship  between  them.   The  Tribunal
   preferred LJ's evidence to  that  of  the  appellant  and  gave  adequate
   reasons for so doing.  The Tribunal found the  relationship  between  the
   appellant and LJ was so weak as to be, in effect, no  longer  subsisting.
   This was a finding the Tribunal was entitled to make  upon  the  evidence
   before it.

34) It has been argued for the appellant that it was unfair for him  not  to
   have notice that the subsistence of the relationship was to be in  issue.
   As I have already pointed out, however, the appellant ought to have  been
   aware that the quality of his relationship with LJ was  bound  to  be  at
   issue before the Tribunal given the nature of the appeal, resting  as  it
   did to a material extent upon the alleged interference with  family  life
   arising from the appellant's proposed deportation.  The  appellant  ought
   therefore to have been aware of the need to provide evidence appertaining
   to this relationship.   Indeed, the appellant did provide  such  evidence
   in terms both of his testimony and that of LJ and the  evidence  relating
   to the birth  of  their  child.  In  the  event  this  evidence  was  not
   sufficient for the appeal to succeed but  this  was  to  a  large  extent
   because of the discrepancies between the evidence of  the  appellant  and
   the evidence of LJ as to the quality and nature  of  their  relationship.
   The Tribunal was entitled to take these  discrepancies  into  account  in
   making the findings which it did.  Indeed, there is very little, if  any,
   difference between the Tribunal finding that the relationship was genuine
   and subsisting but nevertheless very weak and unlikely to  continue,  and
   the Tribunal finding that the relationship was no longer subsisting.   In
   the event of either of these findings the relationship  would  not  weigh
   heavily in the balancing exercise under Article 8.

35) In short, I consider that the appellant had adequate notice of the  case
   he had to answer and indeed he sought to provide evidence  to  meet  that
   case but his evidence fell short.  I do not consider that  the  appellant
   was materially prejudiced, or that the hearing  was  conducted  unfairly,
   because the appellant was unable to show the quality of the  relationship
   with LJ on which he relied.  I do not accept that the Tribunal  erred  in
   law either in the findings  which  it  made  as  to  the  nature  of  the
   relationship between the appellant and LJ or that the Tribunal  proceeded
   unfairly in the way it reached these findings.

36) A further point relied upon by Mr Schwenk was the issue of  whether  the
   Tribunal had relied upon demeanour when they should  not  have  done  so.
   There is some force in Mr Schwenk's argument, in that demeanour can be an
   unreliable way of forming a judgment, particularly  where  witnesses  are
   from different cultures.  It is  the  case  that  at  paragraph  107  the
   Tribunal commented on the demeanour of the couple after LJ had given  her
   evidence.  The Tribunal had,  however,  already  pointed  out  that  LJ's
   evidence  as  to  whether  the  couple  were  cohabiting  was  completely
   different from the evidence of the appellant.  The appellant  claimed  in
   his evidence to have been cohabiting with LJ since the birth of the  baby
   in December 2013.  LJ's evidence was that he had been to her home quite a
   bit in the last few weeks.  Her evidence was that she was living with her
   mother, her brother and her baby but not with the appellant.  It is clear
   that the Tribunal's finding  was  not  based  upon  demeanour  alone  but
   principally upon discrepancies in the evidence of the appellant and LJ as
   to the nature and subsistence of their relationship.

37) I turn now to the letter from LJ's mother,  which  formed  part  of  the
   respondent's bundle.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
   Tribunal erred by stating there was an  absence  of  evidence  from  LJ's
   mother when this letter was before them.

38) There was a question at the hearing before me as to  the  date  of  this
   letter and it is indeed not dated.   It  appears  from  the  respondent's
   bundle, however, that it was submitted to the respondent with a  covering
   letter dated 15 August 2011 from the appellant's solicitors.  The  letter
   is therefore not a recent letter but was more than three years old at the
   date of the hearing.  It  refers  to  the  existence  of  a  relationship
   between the appellant and LJ and describes them  as  a  "loving  couple".
   Given when this letter was submitted, however, its significance is little
   more than historic, and it throws little  light  on  the  nature  of  the
   relationship at the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

39) Although it was not in the application for permission to appeal,  I  was
   referred by Mr Schwenk  to  the  letter  from  the  appellant's  aunt  in
   Newcastle, at pages 133-134 of the appellant's bundle.  I note that  this
   letter is dated 7 August 2011.  It therefore concerns past events  rather
   than the appellant's current circumstances.  The letter states  that  the
   appellant lived with his aunt and returned there after his  release  from
   detention until he was allocated accommodation by the  Home  Office.   Mr
   Schwenk's submission was that it was wrong for the Tribunal to  refer  to
   the absence of evidence from the appellant's aunt and wrong to  refer  to
   the appellant as still living with his aunt.

40) It would appear that the Tribunal was under  a  misapprehension  to  the
   extent that they may have thought that the appellant was living with  his
   aunt.  The address he gave in his  witness  statement,  however,  was  an
   address in Gosforth, whereas the address LJ gave in her witness statement
   was an address in Gateshead.  The Tribunal  was  correct,  therefore,  to
   observe that  the  appellant  and  LJ  had  given  different  residential
   addresses from each other in their witness statements.   As  far  as  the
   Tribunal was concerned, the significant point was that  the  couple  were
   not living at the same address but each gave different  addresses.   From
   this point of view it was immaterial whether  the  appellant  was  living
   with his aunt or not.

41) It has to be accepted that the Tribunal erred in stating that there  was
   no evidence before it from either LJ's mother  or  from  the  appellant's
   aunt.  Given that this evidence was, however, in the form of letters more
   than three years old, I think it is highly questionable  whether  it  was
   material to the Tribunal's decision.  The letter from LJ's mother says no
   more than the appellant and LJ were in a  relationship  more  than  three
   years ago.  As the letter is over 3 years old, it casts little,  if  any,
   light on the current state of that relationship.   The  letter  from  the
   appellant's aunt says nothing which would assist the appellant in showing
   the strength of his relationship with Ms LJ.  I do not consider that  the
   Tribunal's mistake in not having regard to these letters was material  or
   would have affected the Tribunal's findings in any material sense.

42) The remaining issue is  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  proportionality
   under Article 8.  I have already found that the Tribunal was entitled  to
   make the findings which it did in respect of the appellant's family life.
    Having made these findings, there was really little further the Tribunal
   could  have  said  about  proportionality.   The  Tribunal  referred   at
   paragraph 124 of the determination to the case  of  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
   EWCA Civ 1192 as establishing that the respondent has sought through  the
   medium of the Immigration Rules  to  consider  the  relevant  factors  in
   making a decision to deport and  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  them.
   Accordingly the appellant's position  under  paragraphs  396-400  of  the
   Immigration Rules formed  the  context  in  which  the  Tribunal  had  to
   consider the balancing exercise as to the proportionality of the decision
   to deport.  It was not disputed that  the  appellant  would  not  succeed
   under the specific exceptions to deportation in paragraphs 396-400.

43) The Tribunal considered  carefully  whether  there  were  factors  which
   would render the appellant's deportation disproportionate, such as  delay
   by the respondent in making the decision, or the best  interests  of  the
   appellant's child.  The Tribunal  gave  careful  consideration  to  these
   factors and found they would  not  outweigh  the  public  interest.   The
   Tribunal referred to the term "exceptional circumstances", which  appears
   in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.  It is apparent, however, from
   the context in which the  Tribunal  referred  to  this  phrase  that  the
   Tribunal was not applying any test of exceptionality but looking only  to
   the evidence and the facts in the context  of  this  provision.   On  the
   basis of the findings made by  the  Tribunal,  which  were  findings  the
   Tribunal was entitled  to  make,  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  was  wholly
   adequate to support their conclusion, namely that deportation  would  not
   be disproportionate.

44) Overall the determination by the Tribunal  is  a  thorough  and  careful
   document.  The two factual errors made by the Tribunal in respect of  the
   existence of documentary evidence from the appellant's aunt and from LJ's
   mother were of a minor nature and were not material to the outcome.  They
   do not justify the setting aside of the decision.  The other  matters  on
   which Mr Schwenk sought to impugn the decision do not amount to errors of
   law but were matters to which the Tribunal gave proper consideration  and
   reached appropriate findings and conclusions.

Conclusions

45) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

46) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make a direction for anonymity  and  I  continue
that order for the reasons given by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (pursuant  to
Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Fee  Award                          Note:  This   is   not   part   of   the
determination

As the appeal was dismissed no fee  award  can  be  made  nor  was  any  fee
payable.




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


