
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01044/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Sent           |
|on 5th August 2013                            |on 17th September 2013       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                 A M (IRAQ)
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Ficklin instructed by Howells Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of Judge Reed and Mr B D Yates  (hereinafter
        referred to as 'the Panel') who in a determination  promulgated  on
        22nd March 2013 dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  order
        for his deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom  made  pursuant  to
        section 32 (5) UK Borders Act 2007.


     2. Permission to appeal was  granted  and  the  matter  listed  for  a
        hearing to establish whether the Panel had made  an  error  of  law
        material to their decision.  The  application  is  opposed  by  the
        Secretary of State.   Following  the  issuing  of  notices  to  the
        parties a letter was received from the  appellant's  representative
        asking for the hearing of the 5th August 2013 to  be  adjourned  as
        Counsel, Miss Plimmer, who represented the appellant previously was
        appearing in Manchester  on  that  day.  The  representatives  also
        requested a change in venue.   A  party  has  no  right  to  retain
        counsel of their choice as a result of which  the  adjournment  was
        refused. It was not established that alternative counsel could  not
        be instructed in  sufficient  time  for  the  hearing  in  Bradford
        without causing any prejudice to the  appellant.  A  second  letter
        from the appellant's representatives acknowledged the  decision  to
        refuse to adjourn the 5th August hearing but repeated  the  request
        for the hearing to be changed  to  Manchester;  which  was  further
        refused by the Upper Tribunal on 16th July 2013.  As  a  result  Mr
        Ficklin was instructed and appeared on  behalf  the  appellant.  He
        more than adequately made detailed submissions on  the  appellant's
        behalf, based upon the grounds on which permission  to  appeal  was
        sought.   I  am  satisfied  that  notwithstanding  the  change   of
        representative the appellant has suffered no prejudice and received
        a fair hearing.



Background


     3. The appellant was born on 1st March 1972 and is a citizen of  Iraq.
        He is said to have arrived in the United Kingdom on  26th  February
        2003, illegally, and claimed asylum on  that  day.  His  claim  was
        refused on 7th April  2004  and  his  appeal  against  the  refusal
        dismissed on  28th  September  2004  by  then  Adjudicator  Coates.
        Application for reconsideration was dismissed on 5th April 2006 and
        on 17th July 2006 the appellant submitted a fresh claim for asylum.


     4. On 24th October 2007, following conviction after trial at Sheffield
        Crown Court in respect of one count of kidnapping and two counts of
        rape, the appellant was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment on  each
        offence to run concurrently and recommended for deportation by  the
        Sentencing Judge.


     5. On 6th November 2012 the respondent issued a certificate  excluding
        the appellant from the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
        from humanitarian protection under the Qualification  Directive  in
        addition to refusing the claim for international protection. It was
        found the appellant's deportation was proportionate and  would  not
        be a breach of his rights under Article 8 ECHR.


     6. In relation to the index offence, the appellant was arrested on 2nd
        May 2007 when attending to report for immigration matters  at  West
        Bar, Sheffield. It was  alleged  that  on  11th  February  2007  he
        kidnapped and raped a girl who was then only 14 years  of  age.  He
        was charged with three counts of (i) kidnapping with the  intention
        of  committing  a  relevant  sexual  offence  (ii)   Rape   (vagina
        penetration of the girl aged 14 without consent) (iii) Rape (vagina
        penetration of the girl aged 14 without consent).


     7. In his sentencing remarks His Honour Judge Keen QC stated:


          [A A M], you are 34 years of age and someone who has not  been  in
   this country        very long, but whilst you have been  here  there  has
   been no convictions or any       other difficulties  with  the  law,  and
   that is a matter for which you can claim and       will receive credit.


          Your jury has convicted you on  what  was  the  clearest  possible
   evidence. You       maintained your silence both in interview  and  until
   very shortly before the          commencement of this trial. That was  so
   that you could scheme and plot  your        case  in  order  to  try  and
   deceive this jury. It is your right to plead not guilty but          your
   behaviour both before and during this trial makes it clear to me that you
          have absolutely no remorse for what you subjected this child to.


          You took advantage of a na�ve, vulnerable girl who you knew to  be
   only 14        years of age.


          From the start this defendant had sexual  relations  with  one  or
   more of these       girls in mind. He drove off against the  girl's  will
   and kept her with him by false        promises of  taking  her  home.  He
   formed an intention to have sex  with  her,           regardless  of  her
   wishes, first of all  at  an  address  where  she  failed  to  co-operate
   and then he took her to a secluded dark  part  of  the  Northern  General
   Hospital       where he raped her twice and subjected her to other sexual
   indignities.  It is the          totality of the sentence with which I am
   concerned. On each offence therefore it       will be the  same  sentence
   to run concurrently, which is one of 10 years'              imprisonment.


          By the nature of this defendant's behaviour, it  is  clear  to  me
   that his continued      presence in this country must be to the detriment
   of its citizens and I am going        to recommend to the Home  Secretary
   that he be deported at the end of his              sentence.


          I certify that he has been  convicted  of  an  offence  under  the
   Sexual Offences Act           and  is  now  disqualified  for  life  from
   working with children.


     8. The appellant sought permission to appeal  from  the  single  judge
        which was refused.  The appeal was also refused  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal.


     9. The Panel considered all the evidence available to  them  including
        the OASys report which found that the appellant  presented  a  high
        risk  of  serious  harm  to  both  children  and  the  public   and
        highlighted    several    areas    of    concern    including     a
        manipulative/predatory lifestyle and recklessness  and  risk-taking
        behaviour which were found to be significant problems.  In Iraq the
        appellant had got drunk, had an argument with a friend,  and  ended
        up  slashing  his  friend  with  a  knife.   Aggressive/controlling
        behaviour was also said to present  significant  problems  and  the
        appellant was very rigid in  his  thinking  and  did  not  consider
        others. The Panel noted the passage in  the  report:  "very  bitter
        regarding conviction. Denies offence, will not undertake  any  work
        in relation to offending, as he says he is appealing. Some evidence
        of derogatory attitude towards victim/women. Says he is support/co-
        worker of Saddam Hussain.  Also  very  bitter  towards  police  and
        criminal justice system.  He commented on ETS  the  crime  in  this
        country is down to the government and poor education".


    10. I have noted within the bundle a copy of the letter dated the  15th
        February 2012 written by Gans & Co Solicitors to The  Registrar  of
        the European Court of Human  Rights  in  Strasbourg  in  which  the
        appellant  submits  an  application  for  appealing   against   his
        conviction based upon an alleged violation  of  Article  6  of  the
        ECHR.  For the purpose of these proceedings the Panel were  correct
        not go behind the fact the appellant is a convicted sex offender.



Discussion



    11. The determination is challenged on two grounds the first  of  which
        is that although the Panel made reference to HM and others (article
        15 (c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  00409  at  paragraph  34  (viii)  they
        failed to address the fact that the  appellant  does  not  have  an
        Iraqi passport.  The Grounds submit that in deporting the appellant
        the respondent will not comply with  her  policy  of  not  removing
        those without relevant documentation. As a person without either  a
        current or expired Iraqi passport the appellant will be at risk  of
        detention in the  course  of  BIAP  procedures  and  it  cannot  be
        excluded that detention conditions might give rise to a  real  risk
        of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR. It is  submitted  that  in
        such circumstances the risk the appellant faces is not academic.


    12. Mr Fickling also referred the Tribunal to the case  of  J1  v  SSHD
        [2013] EWCA Civ 279. This case  related  to  an  appeal  against  a
        decision of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission  (SIAC)  who
        upheld the Secretary of State's decision that the  appellant  could
        be deported to Ethiopia.  The  central  question  was  whether  the
        deportation would constitute a breach of Article 3 ECHR and whether
        SIAC were  entitled  to  conclude  that  assurances  given  by  the
        Ethiopian Government were satisfactory safeguards, even though  not
        all the arrangements for monitoring the return of those said to  be
        at risk were in place.

    13. Mr Fickling submitted this case was relevant as it  looked  at  the
        question of whether any risk of return should be  viewed  as  being
        academic.  In paragraphs 42 to 55 the judgment the  Court  examined
        the question to what extent SIAC were entitled to leave  issues  to
        be resolved by  the  Secretary  of  State  at  a  future  date.  In
        paragraph 55 the Court summarises the principles arising  from  the
        line of authorities they considered as follows:
          55. The principles which emerge from the above line  of  authority
   are the following:
              i)   In cases where the claimant seeks asylum or  a  right  to
      remain in the UK on human              rights grounds,  the  court  or
      tribunal must determine that claim on the basis  of            current
      evidence.
              ii)  Where the claim is based  upon  dangers  confronting  the
      claimant in their home             state, that determination  involves
      an assessment of what will happen, or what there             is a real
      risk of happening, in the future.
              iii)     In determining the claim the court or  tribunal  will
      take into account any undertaking           or assurance given by  the
      Secretary of State, in  so  far  as  it  is  relevant  to  the  issues
      under consideration.
              iv)  Such an assurance or  undertaking  cannot  cut  down  the
      legal protection to which              the claimant is entitled.
              v)   If the route or method of return is unknown, the court or
      tribunal may in appropriate            cases  leave  this  matter  for
      later  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   If   the   Secretary
      of State fails to address the matter properly, the  claimant's  remedy
      is by way of              making a fresh claim  or  bringing  judicial
      review proceedings.
              vi)  The court or tribunal cannot, however,  delegate  to  the
      Secretary of State  the                  resolution  of  any  material
      element   of   the   legal    claim    which    the    claimant    has
      brought before that court or tribunal for determination.


    14. This issue arises for in HM and others, (hereinafter referred to as
        HM2), the Tribunal held that if a person is  compulsorily  returned
        to BIAP without either a current or expired Iraqi passport, he  may
        be at risk of detention in the course of  BIAP  procedures  and  it
        cannot be excluded that the detention conditions might give rise to
        a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Such a risk is
        however, purely academic  in  the  UK  context  because  under  the
        current UK returns policy there will be  no  compulsory  return  of
        persons lacking such documents.


    15. I find there is a fundamental fact which distinguishes J1  and  the
        issues the Court were asked to consider in that  appeal  from  this
        case.  The issue before the Court  of  Appeal  related  to  whether
        terms  of  an  assurance  given  by  a  foreign   government   were
        sufficient, on the facts of the case under consideration, to  avoid
        any potential breach of Article 3 ECHR.  In  paragraph  59  of  the
        judgment the Court refer  to  what  are  described  as   the  'four
        yardsticks ' set out in the case of BB v Secretary of State for the
        Home Department (SC/39 /2005), 5th December 2006,  at  paragraph  5
        which are stated to be as follows;


              i.  The terms of the sureties must be such that, if  they  are
   fulfilled, the                   person returned will not be subjected to
   treatment contrary to Article                 3;


              ii. The assurances must be given in good faith;


              iii.     There must be a sound objective basis  for  believing
   that the                     assurances will be fulfilled;


              iv. Fulfilment of the assurances  must  be  capable  of  being
   verified.


    16. This deportation appeal is not an appeal in which the avoidance  of
        a potential risk is based upon the actions of the Iraqi  Government
        but rather upon a policy of the Secretary of State  not  to  return
        individuals to Iraq without  the  required  documentation.  Without
        such documentation he will not be returned  and  therefore  at  the
        date of  the  hearing,  based  upon  the  available  evidence,  the
        appellant was not facing a real risk of return to Iraq which  would
        give rise to a breach of his rights under Articles 3 ECHR. Any such
        risk was purely academic as it is a risk that would only arrives in
        the event the Secretary of State sought to return him without  such
        documentation which would be contrary to both current practice  and
        stated policy. The policy is therefore one in which the  terms  are
        such that, if they are fulfilled, the person returned will  not  be
        subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3. The  remaining  three
        yardsticks are also met by the respondent's policy and practices in
        accordance with that policy.  On  this  basis  the  challenge  must
        therefore fail.


    17. The documentation required to return an individual to Iraq includes
        either a valid passport or an approved travel document which can be
        obtained from the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom.


    18. It is clear from  reading  of  the  determination  that  the  Panel
        considered the situation on the basis of the evidence available  to
        them which includes that referred to by the Tribunal  in  HM2.   It
        was a claim based upon alleged dangers confronting the appellant in
        his home state at the point of return but, in assessing  what  will
        happen, as the appellant will not be returned  unless  he  has  the
        necessary paperwork there is no real risk of suffering alleged harm
        at the point of return.  The assurances of the Secretary of  State,
        representing policy with regard to returnees to Iraq, are  part  of
        the factual matrix and the evidence  the  Panel  were  required  to
        consider.  The policy does not deprive the appellant of  any  legal
        protection but rather enhances the legal  protection  available  to
        him as it recognises that  action  is  required  to  be  undertaken
        within the United Kingdom to minimise any risk to the appellant  on
        return to Iraq.  The appellant has a remedy  if  the  Secretary  of
        State attempted to return without the required  documents  as  that
        will be a decision susceptible to judicial  review,  including  the
        seeking of a mandatory injunction. This is not therefore a case  of
        an appellant being returned to a situation where there  is  a  real
        risk of harm as a result of the circumstances on return  which  the
        respondent is seeking to persuade a judicial body is academic based
        upon reliance on an assurance given by  those  whom  the  appellant
        will come into contact with at the point of return,  but  rather  a
        situation in which return will  not  take  place  if  such  a  risk
        exists. If the appellant  was  not  able  to  obtain  the  required
        documents then this may give rise  to  a  situation  in  which  the
        respondent is unable to return him as the risk will become real and
        not academic. The failure of the appellant to cooperate with  Iraqi
        authorities in obtaining the necessary documents is not, however, a
        reason to allow him to stay and grant him any leave.


    19. Mr Fickling's argument is that because at the date of  the  hearing
        the appellant has none of the required documents, he is at risk.  I
        do not accept this is determinative. This  would  mean  that  every
        Iraqi citizen who did not possess the required  documentation  will
        be entitled to a grant of international protection on the basis  of
        potential ill treatment at the point of return. In  cases  of  this
        nature the Tribunal are tasked with determining objectively, on the
        basis of existing circumstances in the  relevant  country,  whether
        there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that the individual will
        suffer persecution if returned  to  that  country.  It  must  be  a
        condition precedent that there is a likelihood that the  individual
        is going to be returned. The effect of  the  Secretary  of  State's
        policy is that until the necessary arrangements are  in  place  the
        condition precedent is not going to be fulfilled. This is more than
        a technical barrier being erected by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
        reduce the risk as it is a real and  tangible  policy  designed  to
        prevent such risk occurring.


    20. I find no merit in the first ground and reject the submission  that
        the risk on return sufficient to engage  Article  3  is  more  than
        academic in the circumstances of this appeal relating to  returnees
        from the United Kingdom to Iraq.


    21. The second Ground refers to a procedural obligation under Article 8
        by reference to the  case  of  RS  (immigration  and  family  Court
        proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 99218 as approved by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in Mohan [2012] EWCA Civ 1363.


    22. In Mohan the Appellant  was  being  deported  for  drugs  offences.
        Family proceedings had been instituted in relation to  his  contact
        with his children here. The Court of Appeal said that  the  general
        approach of the Upper Tribunal in RS and Nimako- Boateng (residence
        orders - Anton considered) [2012] UKUT 00216 (IAC) represented  the
        correct reconciliation of the  conflicting  concepts  of  automatic
        deportation and Article 8 in  immigration  and  family  proceedings
        (para 21).


    23. In RS  at paragraph 43 the Upper Tribunal held:


              43.        In  our  judgment,  when  a  judge  sitting  in an
       immigration appeal has to        consider whether a  person  with  a
       criminal record or  adverse  immigration         history  should  be
       removed   or   deported   when   there   are   family    proceedings
       contemplated the judge should consider the following questions:


                        i)   Is  the  outcome  of  the  contemplated  family
             proceedings likely to           be material to the  immigration
             decision?


                       ii)      Are there compelling public interest reasons
             to exclude the              claimant from  the  United  Kingdom
             irrespective  of  the  outcome                of   the   family
             proceedings or the best interest of the child?
                       iii)     In the case of contact proceedings initiated
             by an appellant in              an immigration appeal, is there
             any reason to believe  that  the            family  proceedings
             have been instituted to delay or  frustrate             removal
             and not to promote the child's welfare?


                       iv)      In assessing the above questions, the  judge
             will normally want              to consider: the degree of  the
             claimant's previous interest in and          contact  with  the
             child, the timing of contact proceedings and                the
             commitment  with  which  they  have  been  progressed,  when  a
             decision is likely to be reached, what materials (if  any)  are
                   already available or can be made  available  to  identify
             pointers           to where the child's welfare lies?


    24.  The  Panel  were  aware  of  pending  proceedings  and  record  in
        paragraphs 49 and 50 of their determination:


              49. We were urged to consider not only  the  broad  issues  of
   Article 8, but                   also a claim based upon  the  fact  that
   there are impending                           proceedings in  the  Family
   Court. The purpose of these proceedings is                  to enable the
   appellant  to  seek   a   change   of   his   licence   conditions   with
   a view to enabling him to live with his partner and  child  in  a  family
          unit.


              50. We have no way of predicting  what  the  decision  of  the
   Family Court                 will take. On the evidence before us,  there
   appears  to  be  a  genuine                    relationship  between  the
   appellant and his partner. We also accept                   that there is
   a   genuine   purpose   in   the   appellant    pursuing    the    family
   court case and we are  satisfied  that  the  proceedings  have  not  just
      been  instituted  delay  or   frustrate   removal.   However,   having
     considered all  of  the  evidence  and  submissions  with  considerable
     care and having borne in mind the best  interests  of  the  appellant's
          son, we come to the conclusion that even if the appellant were  to
   be                  allowed contact or even to reside with  his  son  and
   partner that there               are still compelling public interests to
   exclude the appellant from the                UK whatever the outcome  of
   the family  court  case.  We  say  this                      because  the
   appellant  is  a  convicted   child   rapist,   he   has   acted   in   a
   manipulative  manner,  is  lacking  in  remorse  and,  for  the   reasons
     stated above in paragraph 27 and 28, he still constitutes a  danger  to
          the community of the United Kingdom .


    25. I am satisfied this Ground has no arguable merit.  The  Panel  were
        clearly aware of the existence of proceedings which related  to  an
        application by the appellant to challenge  his  Licence  conditions
        which prevent him from living with  his  partner  and  child  in  a
        family unit. The Panel  considered  the  relationship  between  the
        appellant and his son and the arguments advanced in his  favour  in
        relation to this issue. The Panel found that even  if  the  Licence
        conditions were varied, on  the  facts  of  this  case,  there  are
        compelling public interest reasons to exclude the claimant from the
        United  Kingdom  irrespective  of  the  outcome   of   the   family
        proceedings or the best interests of the child.  The  challenge  is
        on the basis it  is  an  alleged  error  of  law  and  a  premature
        assessment to make but I find this has no arguable merit for,  even
        if the appellant were back living with his family, there  is  still
        the fact that this is an automatic deportation  arising  out  of  a
        horrendous offence for which  the  appellant  was  convicted  after
        trial. The evidence does not support a claim  that  a  sufficiently
        strong family life would exist even if the parties were cohabiting,
        or that the best interests of the child will be  determinative,  or
        that individually or cumulatively this is  sufficient  to  tip  the
        balance in favour of the appellant  - SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ
        550 refers.


    26. In conclusion, having given proper consideration to  the  facts  of
        this case and the evidence and submissions relied upon  in  support
        of the challenge to the determination; I find the appellant has not
        discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required standard to
        prove there is any material legal error  in  the  decision  of  the
        Panel. The findings they made were properly open to them  and  have
        not been shown to be  perverse,  irrational,  or  contrary  to  the
        facts, law, and evidence.


Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Panel's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13th September 2013









