

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01776/2014
                                                               DA/01777/2014
                                                               DA/01778/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                              |
|On 16 November 2015                   |                  On 4 January 2016      |
|                                      |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         STEPHEN CHUKUEMEKA UCHENDU
                           (AND CHILD DEPENDENTS)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Balroop, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order in relation  to  him  and  his  three  child
    dependents for whom he claims to be the sole carer. His children are  L
    (aged 10), V (aged 7) and S (aged 5). No appeal was lodged in  relation
    to the oldest child but the First-tier Tribunal was  satisfied  that  a
    notice of decision had been served and noted that,  by  agreement,  she
    would be treated as an additional appellant.

3.    The appellant claims that he entered the UK with entry clearance as  a
    visitor in January 1995. He overstayed the visa. On 08 December 2005 he
    was convicted of use of a false instrument (a passport in the  name  of
    Jonathan Able) and was sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  12
    months. On 22 September 2006 he was served with a notice  of  intention
    to make a deportation order. He appealed the decision  but  his  appeal
    was dismissed by the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  on  09  November
    2006. He subsequently made an asylum claim in  the  false  identity  of
    Jonathan Able. The respondent states that he did not claim to have  any
    dependents at the time. The respondent refused  asylum  in  a  decision
    dated 27 February 2007 and certified the claim as 'clearly  unfounded'.
    The appellant was subsequently listed as an absconder.

4.    On 11 April 2011 the appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK
    in his own name and listed his three children as dependents. He  stated
    that their mother was a Dutch national who had abandoned them and  that
    he was their sole carer. The respondent refused leave to  remain  in  a
    decision dated 16 June 2011. It was not until 18  June  2012  that  the
    respondent established that the appellant and his alias, Jonathan Able,
    were one in the  same  person.  On  29  May  2014  he  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain, which was refused in a decision  dated
    14 August 2014. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant met
    the requirements of the  immigration  rules  or  that  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances to justify granting leave to  remain  outside
    the rules.

5.    The Criminal Casework Directorate reviewed the application  for  leave
    to remain and treated it as an application to  revoke  the  deportation
    order. In a decision dated 01 September 2014 the respondent refused  to
    revoke the deportation order that was signed against him on 06 December
    2006 and made deportation decisions against the children by  virtue  of
    section 3(5)(b) and section 5(4) of the Immigration Act 1971.

6.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer ("the judge") allowed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 19 August 2015. He took into account the fact
    that the appellant was convicted of a serious criminal offence and that
    there was a presumption  in  favour  of  deportation.  The  judge  made
    reference to the public interest considerations  set  out  in  sections
    117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  He  also
    took into account the fact that the appellant had no lawful  status  in
    the UK [22].

7.    The judge went on to consider the points that  weighed  in  favour  of
    the appellant including his length of residence in the UK and the  fact
    that he was likely to have few ties remaining  in  Nigeria.  The  judge
    took into account the fact that all three of his children were born  in
    the UK. He noted that L was at an age when she  would  be  eligible  to
    apply for British citizenship. It was clear that the children were well
    settled in the UK [23-24].

8.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  exception  to  deportation
    outlined in paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules. The judge  noted
    that there was  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with all  three  children  and  stated
    that the only issue that he was required to determine  was  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect the three children to live  in  Nigeria
    with the appellant [25-26]. His findings in relation to that aspect  of
    the appeal were made in a single paragraph [27]:

           "Given that they have spent their  whole  lives  in  the  United
           Kingdom and in [L's] case, she is nearly ten years old  and  has
           progressed well in the only country to which not only have  they
           fully integrated but the only country to  which  they  have  any
           experience, then notwithstanding the presumption  in  favour  of
           deportation and the fact that the first  Appellant  committed  a
           serious offence in 2005 which has not been repeated, I find  the
           first Appellant has established on the basis of family life with
           three children  with  whom  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship and has lived in the United Kingdom in  respect  of
           his elder two children for  at  least  seven  years  immediately
           preceding the date of the immigration decision that it would  be
           unduly harsh for those  children,  particularly  the  older  two
           children, to live in Nigeria and it would be  unduly  harsh  for
           all the children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  the
           first Appellant that the first Appellant has established to  the
           relevant standard that  the  conditions  set  out  at  paragraph
           399(a) of the immigration rules has been made out."

9.    The respondent seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
           finding that it would be unduly harsh for the children  to  live
           with their father in Nigeria.

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons  as  to
           why the children could not be expected to return to Nigeria with
           their father and continue their family life there.

      (iii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give sufficient  consideration
           to the public interests considerations relating  to  deportation
           of foreign criminals.

Decision and reasons

10.   After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

11.   There are two slightly  divergent  decisions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    seeking to interpret the meaning of the phrase "unduly  harsh"  in  MAB
    (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 and KMO (section 117 -
    unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543. While the  decisions  disagree
    as to whether the assessment of the "unduly harsh" test should  include
    a  partial  proportionality  exercising   taking   into   account   the
    seriousness of the offending behaviour, what both decisions  agree  on,
    is that the test is  a  stringent  one.  Whether  the  consequences  of
    deportation will be  "unduly  harsh"  involves  a  considerably  higher
    threshold  than   the   consequences   merely   being   "uncomfortable,
    inconvenient,  undesirable,   unwelcome   or   merely   difficult   and
    challenging". The consequence for an individual will be "harsh" if they
    are "severe" or "bleak" and they  will  be  "unduly"  so  if  they  are
    "inordinately" or "excessively"  harsh  taking  into  account  all  the
    circumstances of the individual.

12.   While the decision in MAB (USA) was decided shortly before the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision it may not have come to the attention  of  those
    involved by the date of the hearing. Even if  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was not aware of the recent case law the plain wording  of  the  phrase
    "unduly harsh" makes clear that it is a stringent test. The main  focus
    of the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal decision  is  the  lack  of
    reasoning. I am satisfied that the relatively brief  reasons  given  by
    the judge in paragraph 27 of the decision  did  not  adequately  engage
    with the stringent nature of the "unduly harsh" test in the context  of
    the public interest considerations involved in  deportation.  I  prefer
    the reasoning of the Tribunal in MAB (USA). The partial proportionality
    exercise  suggested  by  the  Tribunal   in   KMO   (Nigeria)   is   no
    proportionality  exercise  at  all  for  the  purpose   of   a   proper
    proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8.  The  public   interest
    considerations  are  nevertheless  reflected  in  the  high   threshold
    required to satisfy the "unduly harsh" test.  The only reason given  by
    the First-tier Tribunal for concluding that it would be unduly harsh to
    expect the children to live in Nigeria was, in essence, their length of
    residence in the UK. No analysis was conducted as to what would  be  in
    the best interests of the children, what conditions they might face  in
    Nigeria, whether they would be able to access education there  and  how
    able they might be to continue their family  life  with  their  father.
    Even if the conditions in Nigeria were unlikely to be as favourable  as
    in the UK no findings were made as to  whether,  even  if  harsh,  such
    conditions would be unduly harsh within the meaning  of  the  stringent
    test contained in the immigration rules. For these reasons  I  conclude
    the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law
    and I set aside the decision.

13.   At the hearing it was suggested that I  could  go  on  to  remake  the
    decision without the need to set the matter down for a further hearing.
    However, on reflection I consider that it is  in  fact  appropriate  to
    remit the case for a further hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

14.   It is not common for a deportation decision to be made  against  young
    children as family members of a person  being  deported.  They  have  a
    right to appeal against the deportation decision in  their  own  right.
    The best interests of the children may conflict with the  interests  of
    their father and I am a little surprised that no thought has been given
    as to whether it might be appropriate for the children to be separately
    represented. A potentially prominent feature of the case,  which  could
    not be given any weight by the respondent or  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the appellant has singularly failed to produce any evidence  of
    the fact, is that the children may be Dutch nationals.

15.   The best interests and the legal position of the  children  will  need
    to be considered separately and in more detail.  It  is  probable  that
    paragraph 398 of the immigration rules and associated provisions do not
    apply  to  dependent  family  members  who  have  not  themselves  been
    convicted of a criminal offence. As such it is likely that  a  separate
    assessment of the children's Article 8 rights might  need  to  be  made
    from their  father  albeit  that  the  public  interest  considerations
    relating to deportation  may  not  produce  a  significantly  different
    assessment to the "unduly harsh" exception contained in rule 399(a) and
    section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002.  For these reasons I conclude that it
    will be necessary for more detailed findings to be made relating to the
    best interests of the children and that the appropriate forum for  that
    assessment is the First-tier Tribunal.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the case for a  further  hearing  in  the
First-tier Tribunal


Signed

 [pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Canavan
          Date 21 December 2015








