
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01668/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2016                 |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                           Sothilingam Yogeswaran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr William M Rees of Counsel instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tom Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 7th June, 1982.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  22nd
    July, 1999.  On 30th July, 1999 he claimed asylum.   His  asylum  claim
    was refused on 27th February, 2001 because, on 4th  December,  2000  he
    was asked to complete and return within fourteen days  a  Statement  of
    Evidence Form in support of his application.  He failed to do so.

3.   The appellant was served with form IS151A on 12th  February,  2001  and
    advised of his liability to detention and removal.  He lodged an appeal
    against that decision on 26th February, 2001.  On 12th  May,  2001  the
    appellant was granted temporary release and since January 2003  he  was
    recorded as an absconder.

4.   On 12th December, 2003 the UK Borders Agency  wrote  to  the  appellant
    informing him that they were withdrawing their asylum refusal  decision
    on 2nd February, 2001 since it was  clear  that  he  had  returned  his
    Statement of Evidence Form in time.  However, on  18th  May,  2004  his
    asylum  application  was   subsequently   refused.    The   appellant's
    subsequent appeal was dismissed and on 2nd December, 2004 he  exhausted
    his appeal rights.

5.   On 5th May, 2005 the  appellant  was  apprehended  by  the  police  and
    placed on reporting restrictions.  He failed to  report  on  20th  May,
    2005 but on 31st October, 2006 he was sentenced to a  28-day  custodial
    sentence for having breached his bail  conditions.   On  31st  October,
    2006 the applicant was transferred into immigration detention.

6.   Subsequently, on 23rd November, 2006  the  appellant  made  application
    for judicial review as he had been  recommended  for  deportation.   On
    20th December, 2006 this application was refused  and  on  21st  March,
    2007 the appellant was removed from the United Kingdom.

7.    On  16th  July,  2007  the  appellant  submitted  an  entry  clearance
    application as the spouse of someone present and settled in the  United
    Kingdom.  This was refused on 6th August, 2007 and on  28th  August  he
    lodged an appeal.   On  20th  August  the  following  year,  2008,  the
    appellant's appeal was allowed and on 12th November, 2008 he arrived in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled in the
    United Kingdom with a visa valid from 21st  October,  2008  until  21st
    January 2011.

8.   The appellant's first child was born on 15th October, 2009.

9.   On 6th January,  2011,  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the UK.  The appellant's application  was
    granted and he was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK on 20th
    April, 2011.

10.  On 2nd October,  2012  at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of two counts of attempted theft from the person  of  another
    and was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.  He appealed  neither
    the conviction nor the sentence.  On 28th February, 2012 the  appellant
    second child was born in the United Kingdom.  The appellant was advised
    of his liability to deportation on 27th December, 2012.

11.  The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E B Grant sitting at Hatton Cross.

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant dismissed the  appellant's  deportation
    appeal and dismissed his Article 8 appeal.

13.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that having made no findings as to whether or not the separation of the
    appellant from his children would be unduly harsh on either child,  the
    judge may have erred in law.  The judge noted that the appellant  would
    be deported to Sri  Lanka  but  made  a  finding  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  life  with  the  appellant's   wife
    continuing outside the United Kingdom in  India.   The  judge  made  no
    findings as to the  ability  of  the  appellant's  wife  to  visit  the
    appellant in India or whether it would be  open  to  the  appellant  to
    relocate to India.  It was also suggested that the judge  appeared  not
    to have fully engaged with the expert  opinion  in  the  psychologist's
    report.

The Hearing

14.  Mr Rees  criticised  the  determination  suggesting  that  it  was  not
    sustainable.  The judge simply failed to  make  a  finding  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh on the appellant's children for the appellant  to
    be removed.  She failed to apply the test in paragraph  399A(1)(b)  and
    consider whether it will be unduly harsh for either of the  appellant's
    children to live in the country to which the appellant was deported and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children or either of them  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  without  their  father  who  was  to  be
    deported.

15.  Such finding, it was suggested, was integral to any overall  assessment
    of proportionality in  respect  of  Article  8  under  or  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The approach taken by the judge  was  flawed.   The
    judge also erred in her assessment of paragraph 399(b).  The judge made
    a finding that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
    life between the appellant and his wife continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom through meetings in India but made no finding as to whether  or
    not there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    between the appellant and his wife in Sri Lanka (the country  to  which
    he was to be deported).  Lastly the judge failed to make  any  findings
    as to whether or not the appellant's wife has sufficient assets  to  be
    able to sustain the extensive visits envisaged for the minimum  of  ten
    years that the appellant would not  be  able  to  re-enter  the  United
    Kingdom whilst the deportation order is in force.  The  judge  has  not
    identified any evidence suggesting that it was open to the appellant to
    relocate to India in order to enjoy a degree of family  life  with  his
    wife.  He is not an Indian citizen.  Lastly the judge  only  refers  to
    the risk of offending made in the psychologist's report  but  does  not
    otherwise engage with the expert opinion given in the report.

16.  I heard lengthy submissions from Mr Wilding who urged me to uphold  the
    determination.   He  drew  my  attention  to  paragraph   22   of   the
    determination where First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant noted that it would
    not be reasonable for the appellant's wife  to  accompany  him  to  Sri
    Lanka and that his removal from the United Kingdom would  separate  him
    from his children.  However, she went  on  to  note  that  the  serious
    nature of the index offence, followed  by  the  appellant's  subsequent
    even more serious offending during which he was not an observer  but  a
    key organiser of a sophisticated crime involving a Lebanese loop,  that
    any interference resulting  from  his  separation  from  his  wife  and
    children would be proportionate and in pursuit of a legitimate aim as a
    prevention of disorder and crime.  She points out that in reaching this
    decision she has borne in mind the  psychological  report  of  Michelle
    O'Sullivan and the OASys Report.  The judge finds, therefore, that  the
    public interest outweighs the question of family life.  While she  does
    not expressly consider the unduly harsh test,  it  is  clear  that  she
    considered the relevant question and found  that  the  public  interest
    outweighed the Article 8 rights.  He suggested  that  it  would  be  an
    option for the appellant to visit India to see his wife should he  wish
    to do so.  He invited me to uphold the determination.

17.  In closing, Mr Rees again referred me to the  report  of  31st  August,
    2004 and criticised First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  for  not  having
    addressed it at all.  It should have been properly  evaluated  and  the
    judge should have demonstrated that she had  carefully  considered  it.
    The report goes into considerable  detail  concerning  the  appellant's
    history and his  problems  of  gambling.   The  Lebanese  loop  offence
    occurred, suggested Mr Rees, simply because of the appellant's gambling
    habits.  There was no evidence that the judge had  properly  considered
    the report  when  considering  the  question  of  proportionality.   He
    invited me to find that the determination was flawed and set it  aside.



18.  I reserved my determination.

19.  Dealing first with the psychological report,  the  first  page  of  the
    report says that the subject matter is "Immigration Tribunal - risk  of
    re-offending".  Paragraph 2.1 of the report says: -

         "I have been instructed to undertake a psychological assessment  of
         Mr Sothilingam upon the instructions of Raj Law  Solicitors.   This
         assessment was requested to consider the risk of  re-offending  and
         the possible role of Mr Sothilingam's gambling as a factor  in  his
         re-offending."

20.  It is true that the author sets out the methods of assessment  and  the
    appellant's background.  She also refers to the interview and  explains
    how she reaches her conclusion that the appellant currently  represents
    a medium risk of re-offending.  The purpose of the report  was  to  aid
    the judge by providing an assessment of the risk of the appellant's re-
    offending.  What the judge actually said at paragraph 22  after  having
    referred to the report is this: -

         "... since his offending appears to have been  driven  by  gambling
         addiction which he did not address after being released from prison
         after the index offence sentence concluded, despite already  having
         two children and a wife who depended on him,  I  am  not  satisfied
         that the appellant's claims that he will engage  in  rehabilitation
         and seek help for his addiction or that  he  will  be  successfully
         rehabilitated.  I appreciate that he has done an  addiction  course
         whilst  in  prison,  but  nonetheless  his  OASys  Report  and  his
         psychologist's report put him at a medium  risk  of  offending.   I
         accept the expert assessment and find that he does present a medium
         risk of  re-offending  and  that  his  removal  is  in  the  public
         interest.  The protection of  the  public  of  the  United  Kingdom
         carries greater weight than the appellant's right to a family  life
         with his wife and children and they to a family life  with  him  in
         the United Kingdom.  I find that the appellant's  right  to  family
         life and his family's right to family life with him do not outweigh
         the public interest in seeing him deported.  I find his deportation
         would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR."

21.  It is clear to me that there was nothing further the  judge  needed  to
    quote from the psychological report.  She had clearly read it.  It  was
    only directed to two matters,  the  risk  the  appellant  presented  of
    reoffending and his gambling addiction.  I find that there is simply no
    merit in the last challenge to this determination.  First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Grant very clearly has properly considered and engaged  with  the
    expert report.

22.  As  will  have  been  observed  from  the  quotation  above  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant has concluded that notwithstanding the  fact  that
    the appellant's right to family life with his wife and children will be
    ended his deportation would be proportionate.  It is  clear  from  what
    the judge says at paragraph 22 that the judge is fully aware  that  the
    appellant's removal will separate him from his children but nonetheless
    any such resulting separation is proportionate.  She went on to note in
    paragraph 24 that the appellant's wife does not wish to return  to  Sri
    Lanka having  been  granted  refugee  status  in  2001  but  stated  in
    paragraph 25 that the appellant's parents now live in India  where  the
    appellant went to stay with his wife's grandparents when he was removed
    in 2006 and that he was permitted by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  to
    travel to India.  She points out that the parties could, if they wished
    meet in India.

23.  As Lord Justice Sedley said in AD Lee v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 348 at paragraph 27:

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up for ever because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour.  That is what deportation does."

24.   The  third  challenge  raised  by  the  appellant  is  in  respect  of
    alternative findings.  The judge accepted that family life was going to
    end but suggested that if the parties wished  to  attempt  to  continue
    some form of family life then they could do so  by  regular  visits  to
    India.

25.  I do not believe there to be any merit in the  second  ground  for  the
    reasons I have already given.

26.  So far as the first challenge is concerned it is clear from  paragraphs
    18 to 22 that the judge did consider paragraph 399(A) and the fact that
    the appellant's conduct led to his separation from both children.   The
    youngest was so young when he was  first  imprisoned  and  subsequently
    imprisoned  following  his  re-offending  that  the  judge  thought  it
    unlikely that she would have any recollection of life with  her  father
    in the family home.  The appellant's son who was only 3  years  of  age
    when the appellant was sentenced may  have  some  recollection  of  his
    father having lived in the same home but to all  intents  and  purposes
    both children have been cared for by their mother.  She noted that both
    children had been taken to visit their  father  throughout  his  prison
    sentence and that the respondent accepted that the appellant does enjoy
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with each child  however,  it  is
    clear from paragraph 22  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the  public
    interest ultimately outweighed the appellant's right to a family  life.
    What the judge did, although not expressly considering the unduly harsh
    test, was to consider the relevant question in the assessment of public
    interest as opposed to the appellant's family life and found  that  the
    public interest outweighed his family life.  That was a finding open to
    the judge to make.  It is not perverse in the public law sense.  It may
    not have been the decision which I would have reached but that  is  not
    the test.  I am satisfied that the determination does not disclose  any
    error of law on the part of the Immigration  Judge  and  I  uphold  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against deportation is dismissed.

The appellant's Article 8 appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
