
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2015                                |On 29 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mr Kasru miah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty instructed by R Legal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I shall refer to Mr Miah as the claimant herein.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born 2 April 1964.  On 23  July
    2014 the Secretary of State made a  "Decision  to  make  a  Deportation
    Order" in  relation  to  the  claimant.   The  claimant  appealed  this
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal and, in a  determination  dated  19
    February 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands allowed such  appeal.



 3. It is prudent to initially set out the claimant's history in the United
    Kingdom.  The claimant arrived here on 4 May 1982, i.e. when he was  18
    years old, and was granted indefinite leave to  remain  at  that  time.
    From 1989 until  September  2012  he  accumulated  a  total  of  eleven
    convictions for nineteen offences which,  at  least  according  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, were of a relatively minor nature.  On  28  August
    2013  the  claimant  was  convicted  at  Southwark   Crown   Court   of
    "intimidating a witness or juror with intent to  obstruct,  pervert  or
    interfere with justice" as well as two counts of "commission of further
    offence during operational period of a suspended sentence  order".   He
    was sentenced to six months' imprisonment on the first count and  three
    months'  imprisonment  on  each  of  the  other  two  counts   to   run
    consecutively; totalling twelve months' imprisonment.

 4. On 27 January 2014 the claimant  was  convicted  of  "driving  a  motor
    vehicle  with  excess  alcohol"  and   sentenced   to   twenty   weeks'
    imprisonment concurrent to his existing sentence  of  28  August  2013.
    Just six weeks later, on 5 March 2014, the claimant was convicted of  a
    further offence, this time of "using  threatening,  abusive,  insulting
    words or  behaviour  with  intent  to  cause  fear  or  provocation  of
    violence", for which he was sentenced to twelve weeks' imprisonment, to
    run consecutively.

 5. It was in light of this further offending that the claimant  was  later
    served with the decision under challenge.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal "on human  rights
    grounds". The Tribunal's core conclusions are found in paragraphs 31 to
    35 of its determination,  which, for the sake of completeness, I now to
    set out in full:

         "31. I am aware that a restraining order is in place in relation to
             this appellant and his family.  However, it is clear that  his
             wife no longer wishes  the  restraining  order  to  remain  in
             force.  Effectively what the Magistrates Court  is  saying  to
             her is that as and until he  has  shown  that  he  can  behave
             himself under the terms of the restraining order they will not
             lift it.  Clearly they envisage a point  when  he  is  in  the
             United Kingdom and not in detention.  That is now a matter for
             me having taken into account all of  the  circumstances.   The
             Immigration Rules have much to say on this issue and in  cases
             such as this where the appellant claims that deportation would
             be contrary to the UK's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
             Human Rights Convention, the rules say that deportation  of  a
             person from the UK is conducive to the public good and in  the
             public interests if their offending has caused serious harm or
             they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a   particular
             disregard for the law.  So far as I am concerned he falls into
             the second part of that category.  However, the  Secretary  of
             State must then go on  and  consider  whether  or  not  either
             paragraphs 399 or 399A apply.

         32.  Paragraph 399 applies if a person has a genuine and subsisting
             parental relationship with a child under the age of 18 who  is
             in the UK and it would be amongst other  things  unduly  harsh
             for the child to live in the country to which the person is to
             be deported or unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom without the person who is to be  deported.  The
             same section deals with  the  issue  of  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen and again it
             would be unduly harsh for her to  live  in  Bangladesh  or  to
             remain in the United Kingdom without the person who is  to  be
             deported.

         33.  Paragraph 399A  would  apply  to  him  personally  if  he  was
             lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, socially and
             culturally integrated into the UK  and  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to his integration into the  country  to
             which it is proposed he is deported.

         34.  I  have  taken  into  account  everything  that  I  have  read
             including letters, Social Worker reports, court documents  and
             have reached the conclusion that it would be unduly  harsh  on
             his children for them to remain in the UK without him.   There
             is no suggestion that they would be  likely  to  join  him  in
             Bangladesh and my decision is not made  on  the  basis  of  it
             being unduly harsh to expect them to go with him  back  there.
             I am absolutely certain that they  would  not  do  so  in  any
             event.  However difficult he may have been over the years as a
             spouse, it is probably unduly harsh also to expect his wife to
             live in the United  Kingdom  and  to  bring  up  the  children
             without such support as she will ultimately get from him.

         35.  Nothing that I have said in reaching my decision should  leave
             the appellant in any doubt that is his  last  chance.   If  he
             does not take  this  opportunity  to  deal  with  his  alcohol
             problems then I have no doubt that the court which administers
             the restraining  order  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
             revocation of it and he will have blown any chance  whatsoever
             of reconciling himself with his wife and  family  and  getting
             back to some kind of normality.  I only  hope  he  takes  this
             opportunity."

 7. By way of a decision dated 19  March  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chambers granted the Secretary of State permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, thus the matter comes before me.

 8. Before identfying the Secretary of State's grounds of challenge and  my
    conclusions thereon I set out the content of the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules in order to  provide  a  context  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and

         ...

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other  factors  where  there  are
         very compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -



         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and,

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                  of his life; and

              (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is  proposed  he
                  is to be deported."

 9. Turning next to the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  -  these  can  be
    summarised thus:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that it  would  not  be
         unduly harsh to expect the claimant's children to accompany him  to
         Bangladesh by failing to undertake a qualitative assessment of this
         issue;

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give legally adequate reasons for
         its conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
         remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  their  father.  In   the
         alternative,  such  conclusion  is  irrational  on   the   evidence
         provided;

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that it would be unduly
         harsh for the  claimant's  wife  to  join  him  in  Bangladesh;  in
         particular for a failure to engage with paragraph EX.2 of  Appendix
         FM to the Rules;

     iv) The First-tier Tribunal erred in  concluding  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for the claimant's wife  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
         without him, such conclusion being irrational on the  face  of  the
         evidence before the Tribunal;

      v) The First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to sections 117B  and
         117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

     vi) The First-tier Tribunal took into account an irrelevant factor when
         determining the appeal on the basis that the claimant would, if  he
         remained living in the United Kingdom,  eventually  return  to  the
         family home (i.e. once  the  restraining  order  is  lifted);  and,
         finally,

    vii) The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  acknowledge  the
         pressing nature of the public interest;

10. It is apparent that the First-tier Tribunal made no finding in relation
    to the application of paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) of the Immigration Rules.
     This is clear from the terms of  paragraph  34  of  the  determination
    where the Tribunal state that: "there is no suggestion that  they  [the
    children] would be likely to join him in Bangladesh and my decision  is
    not made on the basis of it being unduly harsh to  expect  them  to  go
    with him back there."  (emphasis added).

11. The reasons for the First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to  consider  such
    requirement can be traced back to paragraph 32  of  the  determination,
    which contains an obvious misstatement of the terms of  the  Rule,  the
    connective "or" being used instead "and", between the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 399(a)(ii)(a) and 399(a)(ii)(b) of the Rule.

12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  clearly  not  entitled  to  allow  the
    claimant's appeal on the basis the he  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399(a) of the Rules, absent first finding  that  he  met  the
    requirements   of   both   paragraph   399(a)(ii)(a)   and    paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(b) thereof. The failure to make a finding in relation to the
    former amounts, in my conclusion, to an error of law in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination  capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

13. Ms Easty maintained that this being the only error found in  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination, the appropriate course should be to  set  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination aside and remit the matter back  to
    the same First-tier Tribunal judge to finish the job he started i.e. to
    make a finding in relation to paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) of the Rules.

14. I am not in agreement with this method of  disposal,  commended  by  Ms
    Easty.

15. In my conclusion the First-tier Tribunal's findings made in relation to
    paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) are so devoid reasoning, even when read in  the
    context of the determination as a whole, that the losing party, in this
    case the Respondent, is unable to properly understand why she has  lost
    on this issue.

16. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal identifies the relevant  documents  when
    coming its conclusions, there is no  qualitative  analysis  within  the
    determination of the evidence  contained  within  those  documents  and
    there is failure to identify which features of such  evidence  led  the
    Tribunal to conclude that it would be unduly harsh for the children  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without  their  father.  In  my  view  the
    Secretary of State is left  without  the  ability  to  understand  what
    aspects of the children's circumstances led to Tribunal to conclude  as
    it did.  The finding in this regard is also, therefore, flawed by legal
    error.

17. Furthermore, the same failure of reasoning also belies  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's conclusion that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    claimant's wife to live in the United Kingdom and bring up the children
    without the claimant's support (paragraph 399(b)(iii)  of  the  Rules).
    In the event, insofar as the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal
    pursuant to paragraph 399(b) of the Rules, and it  is  far  from  clear
    that it did make such a finding, that conclusion  is  plainly  unlawful
    absent a consideration of whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    claimant's wife to live in  Bangladesh  with  the  claimant  (paragraph
    399(b)(ii)) - a matter which required an assessment  of  whether  there
    are  in  existence  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those
    described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix  FM.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    undertook no such assessment.

18. In short I agree with Mr Bramble that this determination  must  be  set
    aside and that the re-making of the decision under appeal should be  de
    novo. In such circumstances, and given  the  significant  fact  finding
    which needs to be undertaken in order to re-make the decision, I  remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  afresh  in
    front of a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed.  The
First-tier Tribunal's determination is set aside and the appeal is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 16 June 2015
