
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01410/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 12 May 2015                       |On 11 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   A M H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jowett, instructed by Albany Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  Neither party invited  me
    to rescind the order and I continue it  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 14 December 1986.
     On 20 April 2010 he was convicted at the Cardiff Crown  Court  of  the
    offence of possession of a controlled drug (cannabis)  with  intent  to
    supply and was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 65  weeks.   As
    he was also in breach of a suspended sentence  order  imposed  on  26th
    January 2009, also for the possession of a controlled  drug  (cannabis)
    with intent to supply, the judge  partially  activated  that  suspended
    sentence  and  imposed  a   consecutive   term   of   thirteen   weeks'
    imprisonment.

 4. On 4 August 2010, the appellant was served with notice of his liability
    to automatic deportation as a foreign criminal under the UK Borders Act
    2007.   In  response,  the  appellant  raised   refugee,   humanitarian
    protection and Art 8 grounds.  On 8 July 2014, the Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's claim for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    and concluded that his deportation  would  not  breach  Art  8.   As  a
    consequence, the Secretary of State made a decision that s.32(5) of the
    UK Borders Act 2007 applied as none  of  the  exceptions  to  automatic
    deportation had been established.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 2 January 2015,  Judge  Knowles  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    That decision is not challenged by the appellant and I need say no more
    about it.  However, the judge allowed the  appeal  under  Art  8.   The
    judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a British citizen ("Ms P") which  had  continued  for
    seven years; they had become engaged to be married in November 2013 and
    had lived together  for  six  months.   Applying  para  399(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 as
    amended), it was accepted that it would be unduly harsh  for  Ms  P  to
    live in Somalia and the judge found that it would be "unduly harsh" for
    Ms P to remain in the UK without the appellant.  The judge went  on  to
    consider the issue of "proportionality" under Art 8 and concluded  that
    the  public  interest  reflected  in  the  appellant's  offending   was
    outweighed by his particular circumstances including  the  effect  upon
    his family life and the delay of four years between his being  notified
    of his liability to be deported in 2010 and the decision to  do  so  in
    2014.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
    First, the judge had  failed  properly  to  apply  the  "unduly  harsh"
    criterion in para 399(b) including  giving  adequate  reasons  why  the
    impact upon Ms P was  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals.  Secondly, the judge's finding under  para
    399 had infected his finding under Art 8 and so his assessment that the
    public interest was outweighed was flawed.

 7. On 27 January 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 9. So far as relevant, para 398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides  as
    follows:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation will be  contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  ...

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interests because they have been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than four years but at  least
             twelve months;

         (c)  ...

         The Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other  factors
         where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

10. Paragraph 399, so far as relevant provides as follows:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) ... applies if -

         (a)  ...; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person to be deported."

11. Paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM finds "insuperable obstacle" to mean:

         "The very significant difficulties which  would  be  faced  by  the
         applicant  and  their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
         together outside the UK and which could not be  overcome  or  would
         entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

12. The Immigration Rules provide a "complete code"  (see  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1192).  Having determined that an individual is  a
    "foreign criminal", the proper approach is to first decide whether  the
    individual can succeed under para 399 or  para  399A;  secondly  if  he
    cannot  then  to  determine  whether   there   are   "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above" those falling within para  399  and  399A
    having regard to the statutory factors that must be taken into  account
    under s.117B and s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (see Chege (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015]  UKUT  165
    (IAC)).

13. Having set out paras 398, 399 and 399A of the Rules  and  self-directed
    in accordance with MF (Nigeria), the judge dealt with  the  Appellant's
    claim under Article 8 at paras 81-87 as follows:

         "81. Dealing first with the appellant's family life,  it  is  clear
             that he has no parental relationship with a child in  the  UK.
             There is no dispute, however, that he does have a genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with Ms [P], a  British  Citizen.   On
             the evidence, their relationship has continued for 7 years and
             the appellant and Mrs [P] were engaged to be married  on  17th
             November 2013, the 6th  anniversary  of  the  start  of  their
             relationship.   I  note  that  the   appellant   was   granted
             indefinite leave to remain in the UK on 19th April  2007.   It
             follows that his relationship with Ms [P] was formed at a time
             when he was in the UK lawfully and his immigration status  was
             not precarious: Paragraph 399(b)(i) of the  Immigration  Rules
             refers.   It  appears  to  be  accepted,  on  behalf  of   the
             respondent, that it would be unduly harsh for Ms [P]  to  live
             in Somalia with the appellant.  Paragraph  399(b)(ii)  of  the
             Immigration Rules requires compelling circumstances  over  and
             above those described in Paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM.   That
             Paragraph refers to "very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner".  Ms [P]  is  a  British  citizen.
             She has lived all he  life  in  the  UK  and  knows  no  other
             culture.  She has never  been  to  Somalia  and  cannot  speak
             Somali.  She has a supportive family network in the  UK.   Her
             career is in this country.  Her entire life is  here.   In  my
             view, relocation to Mogadishu  would  entail,  for  her,  very
             significant difficulties which would result  in  very  serious
             hardship.  Paragraph 399(b)(iii) of the Immigration Rules also
             provides that it must be unduly harsh for Ms [P] to remain  in
             the UK without the appellant.  As I have indicated,  there  is
             no dispute that their relationship has lasted for 7 years.  On
             the evidence, the relationship is a  strong  one,  bearing  in
             mind  that  it  has  survived  the  appellant's  incarceration
             following his conviction on 20th April 2010.  The  couple  are
             engaged to be married.  Their relationship has the blessing of
             Ms [P]'s mother and sisters, albeit, for cultural reasons, his
             father and the wider  Somali  community  do  not  approve.   I
             accept that the appellant and Ms [P] moved in together some  6
             months ago.  I acknowledge the force in the point, made by the
             appellant himself, that, if the couple had done this merely to
             strengthen his case for remaining in the UK,  they  would,  by
             now, have married.  Given the strength  and  duration  of  the
             couple's relationship, I am satisfied that it would be  unduly
             harsh for Ms [P] to remain in the UK without the appellant.  I
             find that the family life considerations in Paragraph  399  of
             the Immigration Rules apply in this case.

         82.   I  am,  however,  not  persuaded  that   the   private   life
             considerations in Paragraph 399A apply.  It does not appear to
             be in dispute that the appellant has been lawfully resident in
             the UK for most of his life.  On the evidence, he  is  clearly
             socially and culturally integrated into the UK to  the  extent
             that he spends little time with the Somali community.  For the
             reasons to which I have already referred in dealing  with  the
             international protection issues, however, I am  not  satisfied
             that there  would  be  "very  significant"  obstacles  to  his
             integration into Somalia, at least not in Mogadishu.

         83.  My finding that Paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules applies
             and that the impact of the appellant's deportation on  Ms  [P]
             would be unduly harsh does not, however, mean that there is no
             public  interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation.   In   my
             judgment, there is a balancing exercise to be  conducted.   As
             the Court of Appeal made clear in LC, less  weight  is  to  be
             attached to the public interest but, in my view, it is not  to
             be disregarded entirely,  particularly  bearing  in  mind  the
             clear provision in Section 117C(1) of the 2002  Act  that  the
             deportation of foreign criminals is in  the  public  interest.
             In my view, important factors in the  balancing  exercise  are
             the seriousness of the appellant's offence and the risk of his
             re-offending.  Indeed, Section 117C(2) of the 2002  Act  makes
             it clear that the more serious the offence,  the  greater  the
             public interest in deportation.

         84.  I acknowledge the force in the submission that the appellant's
             offence does not stand our as a particularly  serious  offence
             of its kind.  In  his  sentencing  remarks  His  Honour  Judge
             Bidder made it clear that he was sentencing the  appellant  on
             the basis of clear evidence of small retail supply  of  drugs,
             stating that there was no evidence of a  lavish  lifestyle  or
             very substantial profits.  Although the  appellant  has  since
             expressed remorse for his offence, I  am  not  persuaded  that
             there was much evidence of remorse at the time of  sentencing.
             It appears that the appellant failed to learn his lesson  from
             a suspended sentence imposed for a similar  offence  and  also
             that he committed the later offence while  on  bail.   He  was
             described by the Learned Judge as "utterly  obstructive"  when
             arrested and left his plea of guilty  until  the  day  of  his
             trial.  That said, the Judge sentenced  the  appellant  to  65
             weeks' imprisonment,  which  was  sufficient  to  trigger  the
             automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.

         85.  As regards the risk of the appellant's re-offending, there  is
             no OASys Report before me.  Given the delay that  has  elapsed
             between the service of notice of the appellant's liability  to
             automatic deportation on 4th August 2010 and the  respondent's
             decision on 4th July 2014,  it  seems  doubtful  that  such  a
             report would be of much value now.  What there is, however, is
             clear evidence that, apart from an incident of criminal damage
             to a taxi window, for which a caution was administered on 14th
             October 2012, the appellant has kept out of trouble  with  the
             police, held down a job and is working voluntarily with  young
             people in the community as  a  football  coach.   Ms  [P]  has
             clearly had a positive influence on the appellant's  life.   I
             found her an honest and  credible  witness  who  answered  the
             questions put to her in an open and straightforward manner.  I
             have no reason to doubt her evidence that  the  appellant  has
             stopped using cannabis, which I acknowledge seems to have been
             the root cause of his offending behaviour.  Ms [P] clearly has
             a supportive family.  Her mother and sister appear to have  no
             concerns about her continuing relationship with the appellant,
             something I believe would be less  likely  had  the  appellant
             continued abusing drugs.  In the light of all the  evidence  I
             am persuaded that the risk of the appellant reoffending is low
             and that he has now learned his lesson as a  result  of  being
             sent to prison.

         86.  As regards the delay that has arisen in this case, as  I  have
             indicated a period of not far short of  4  years  has  elapsed
             between service of notice  of  the  appellant's  liability  to
             automatic deportation and the respondent's decision, which  is
             the subject of this appeal.  The cause of this  delay  is  not
             clear, although  there  is  a  reference  in  the  appellant's
             solicitor's letter dated 17th June 2014 to there  having  been
             an administrative error.  In my view, a  delay  of  this  kind
             does not sit well with the importance Parliament  has  decided
             should be attached to the public interest in  the  deportation
             of foreign criminals.  While I am not persuaded that,  on  its
             own, a delay, even of this magnitude, would render a  decision
             to deport disproportionate, it is, in my view, a factor to  be
             weighed in the balance, having regard to what was said in  EB,
             particularly bearing in mind that there is  no  evidence  that
             the appellant has contributed to the delay and the lack of any
             explanation whatever for it on the part of the respondent.

         87.  Having regard to the seriousness of the  appellant's  offence,
             the risk of his re-offending, the long delay  and  my  finding
             that the family life considerations in Paragraph  399  of  the
             Immigration Rules apply, thereby reducing  the  weight  to  be
             accorded to the public interest in deportation, I am satisfied
             that  the  appellant  qualifies  for  an  exception   to   the
             provisions of the 2007 Act relating to  automatic  deportation
             in that his removal from the UK in pursuance of a  deportation
             order would be disproportionate and would,  therefore,  breach
             his right to respect for his family life protected by  Article
             8 of the Human Rights Convention."

14. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    appellant's deportation would have an "unduly harsh"  effect  on  their
    relationship.  He relied upon what was said by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 at [27] that:

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up for ever because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour.  That is what deportation does ..."

15. He submitted that even if the appellant's deportation would be  "harsh"
    it had not been established that  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh".   The
    judge's  finding  was  inadequately  reasoned  and  that  infected  his
    decision under Art 8.

16. Mr Jowett, on behalf of the appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    applied the correct legal framework.  He submitted that in relation  to
    the issue of whether the impact upon the couple's relationship would be
    "unduly harsh" the judge had correctly applied the approach set out  in
    the respondent's own guidance, IDI, Chapter 13:  "criminality  guidance
    in Art 8 ECHR cases"  (28  July  2014).   In  particular,  he  drew  my
    attention to the section at para 2.5 headed "unduly  harsh".   At  para
    2.5.2 it is stated that:

         "When considering the public interest  statements,  words  must  be
         given their  ordinary  meanings.   The  Oxford  English  Dictionary
         defines "unduly" as "excessively" and "harsh" as "severe, cruel"."

17. Mr Jowett pointed out that at paras 2.5.3-2.5.5 the guidance requires a
    balancing of the impact upon the appellant's partner  with  the  public
    interest based upon the appellant's criminality in determining  whether
    the effect was "unduly"  harsh.   Paragraphs  2.5.3-2.5.5  are  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.5.3   The effect of deportation on a  qualifying  partner  or  a
                qualifying child must be considered in the  context  of  the
                foreign criminal's immigration and  criminal  history.   The
                greater the public interest in deportation, the stronger the
                countervailing factors need to be to succeed.  The impact of
                deportation on a partner or child can be  harsh,  even  very
                harsh, without being unduly harsh, depending on  the  extent
                of the public interest in deportation and of the family life
                affected.

         2.5.4    For example, it will  usually  be  more  difficult  for  a
                foreign criminal who has been sentenced more than once to  a
                period of imprisonment of at least 12 months but  less  than
                four years to demonstrate that  the  effect  of  deportation
                would be unduly harsh than for a foreign  criminal  who  has
                been convicted of a single offence, because repeat offending
                increases the public interest in deportation and so requires
                a stronger claim to respect for  family  life  in  order  to
                outweigh it.

         2.5.5    It will usually be more difficult for a  foreign  criminal
                to show that the effect of deportation on a partner will  be
                unduly harsh  if  the  relationship  was  formed  while  the
                foreign criminal was in the UK unlawfully or with precarious
                immigration status because his  family  life  will  be  less
                capable of outweighing the public interest that if he was in
                the UK with lawful, settled immigration status."

18. Mr Jowett submitted that the judge had fully  considered  the  relevant
    factors: at para 81  he  considered  the  nature  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his partner;  at  paras  83  and  84  he  had
    considered the seriousness of the appellant's offending  including  the
    sentencing judge's remark; at para 85 he considered  the  risk  of  the
    appellant re-offending; at para 86 he took into account  the  important
    factor that the respondent had delayed for almost  four  years  between
    notifying the appellant of his liability to be  deported  in  2010  and
    making the decision to deport him in July 2014.  Mr  Jowett  sought  to
    distinguish the case of Lee because the  appellant's  relationship  was
    not  a  short  relationship  and  the  delay  had  contributed  to  its
    development.  The  relationship,  as  the  judge  noted,  had  been  in
    existence for seven years and formed at a time when the  appellant  had
    indefinite leave to remain.  Mr Jowett  submitted  that  there  was  no
    error of law in the judge's decision; he had not failed  to  take  into
    account all factors and his decision was not irrational.

19. As Mr Richards acknowledged, Judge Knowles' determination is a detailed
    and comprehensive one.  It is not challenged that it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect Ms P to live in Somalia with the appellant.  The effect
    of  the  deportation  would,  therefore,  be   to   separate   probably
    permanently the appellant from Ms P.  The judge  took  into  account  a
    number or relevant factors:

      1) The relationship was a long-standing one of  seven  years  and  the
         appellant and Ms P were engaged to be married;

      2) the relationship was formed whilst  the  appellant  had  indefinite
         leave to remain and his immigration status was not precarious;

      3) the appellant and Ms P have cohabited for around six months.

20. All of those factors were relevant as to the "strengthened duration  of
    their relationship".  However, reading the determination as a whole,  I
    am satisfied that Judge Knowles also considered  in  assessing  whether
    the effect upon Ms P of the appellant's deportation  would  be  "unduly
    harsh", the seriousness of the appellant's offending as required by the
    respondent's own guidance which I have set out above.  Mr Richards  did
    not suggest that the judge should not have considered the nature of the
    appellant's offending.  As is clear from paras 83  and  84,  the  judge
    took into account the serious  nature  of  the  appellant's  offending,
    namely the possession with intent to supply a controlled  drug,  namely
    cannabis for which he was sentenced to 65 weeks' imprisonment.   It  is
    noteworthy that the offence did not relate to the most serious category
    of controlled drugs, namely class A and the appellant's sentence of  65
    weeks' imprisonment reflects that fact.  Further, the judge found  that
    the Appellant's risk of re-offending was at the "low end"  and  he  was
    clearly impressed by the evidence  he  heard  that  the  appellant  had
    "learnt his lesson" as a result of being  in  prison  and  enjoyed  the
    helpful support of Ms  P  and  his  family.   Finally,  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account the almost four years delay  between  the
    appellant being sent a notice  of  liability  to  deportation  and  the
    actual decision to deport him made in June 2014.  I did not  understand
    Mr Richards in his submissions, nor the grounds,  to  doubt  that  that
    delay was  relevant  in  assessing  the  legality  of  the  appellant's
    deportation in accordance with EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.   The
    delay was not explained and it undoubtedly contributed to  the  further
    development of the relationship between the appellant and Ms  P,  which
    the judge fully accepted as genuine, at a time when the  appellant  had
    indefinite leave to remain.

21. Whether the respondent's challenge is couched in terms of "adequacy  of
    reasons" or illegality or irrationality,  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    respondent has established that the judge was not entitled to reach the
    decision that he did for the reasons that he  gave.   The  reasons  are
    adequate, in the sense that the reader is able to  understand  why  the
    appellant  succeeded  in  demonstrating  that   the   effect   on   his
    relationship with Ms P if he were deported  would  be  "unduly  harsh".
    The Judge clearly had in mind the importance of the public interest  in
    deportation cases: at  para  80  of  his  determination  he  refers  to
    s.117C(1) and the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  LC  (China)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1310.   The  appellant's  offending,  albeit  involving
    controlled drugs, did not fall within the most serious  category.   The
    appellant had a genuine and long-standing relationship with his partner
    who could not be expected to live with him in  Somalia.   It  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect her to do so.  Although the Court of  Appeal  in
    Lee, noted that the effect of deportation  would,  in  many  instances,
    result in a split in  a  family,  that  case  does  not  establish  any
    proposition that such a split is always justified under Art  8  whether
    viewed through the lens of para 399 or 399A or  para  398.   Each  case
    turns necessarily upon the particular circumstances of  the  individual
    or individuals involved.  Here, the judge did consider  the  individual
    circumstances and, having due regard to the public interest, considered
    that the impact upon the appellant and Ms P would be "unduly harsh"  if
    he were deported such that she would have to remain in the UK and their
    family life would, in effect, cease.

22. In my judgment, the respondent has not established any basis upon which
    the judge  could  be  said  to  have  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 applying the relevant Immigration Rules,
    namely para 399(b).

Decision

23. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  That
    decision stands.

24. Accordingly the appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper  Tribunal
    is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
