
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02261/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 August 2018                             |On 26 September 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         THE HONOURABLE LORD BECKETT
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [V C]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public  to   identify   the
    respondent's (also called "the claimant's") children.  Breach  of  this
    order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.   We  make  this  order
    because the children are subject to orders of  the  Family  Courts  and
    there is no legitimate public interest in their identity.  This  is  no
    longer a protection claim  and  we  see  no  reason  to  anonymise  the
    identity of the respondent.

 2. The case has a complex history as is implied by the appeal concerning a
    decision of the Secretary of State as long ago as 21 October 2013.   We
    do not think it helpful to say too much about the earlier  events.   It
    will  not  illuminate  this  decision  and  could  easily  add  to  the
    confusion.  Suffice it to say that the appeal was successful before the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge   was
    dismissed by the Upper Tribunal but the Court of Appeal set aside  that
    decision.  There was a reserved judgment handed  down  on  30  November
    2017 and an order setting aside the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    dealing with costs and saying at paragraph 3:

         "The respondent's (VC's) appeal against the appellant's  (Secretary
         of State's) decision to make a deportation order dated  31  October
         2013 be remitted to the Upper Tribunal for that Tribunal to  remake
         the  decision  on  the  respondent's  appeal  pursuant  to  Section
         12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007,
         following, if appropriate, the hearing of further evidence."

 3. In short we are dealing with an appeal on human rights grounds  against
    a decision of the Secretary of State to deport him.  The  Secretary  of
    State was the  appellant  in  subsequent  proceedings.  Hereinafter  we
    identify the respondent as "the claimant".

 4. It is quite clear that the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds and because the decision  was  not  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules. The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its
    decision on 19 January  2014  which  was  before  the  changes  to  the
    statutory grounds of appeal introduced in October 2014. In his original
    Notice of Appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  the  claimant  relied  on
    discursive grounds in support of his  appeal  against  the  "non-asylum
    decision". We must consider the non-asylum appeal with reference to the
    rules in force at the date of decision.

 5. The claim brought on asylum grounds was  emphatically  rejected.   That
    part of the decision has never been challenged by the claimant.   There
    is nothing in the Court of Appeal's order that  revives  the  dismissed
    asylum claim.  We confirmed with the parties at the hearing that  there
    was no protection claim before us and  the  claimant  did  not  in  his
    submissions and  evidence  suggest  that  he  would  risk  serious  ill
    treatment in Sri Lanka although he made it plain that he had no wish to
    return there.

 6. For completeness we note that our file was linked to a file numbered DA
    00597 2013 that also related to this claimant.  It appears to relate to
    the same decision but in any event was withdrawn before the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 29 July 2013.  We mention it to confirm that  we  have  not
    overlooked  it.   We  are  satisfied  that  it  is  irrelevant  to  our
    deliberations.

 7. The Court of Appeal's judgment in this case is reported as Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967.

 8. The relevant rules are set out in the Secretary  of  State's  decision.
    There is no doubt that his deportation would be conducive to the public
    good because he has been convicted of an offence for which he has  been
    sentence to 12 months imprisonment. The rules permit a person liable to
    deportation to remain on human rights grounds only  when  there  is  "a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age
    of 18 years"  or  with  a  partner  and  other  conditions  apply  (see
    paragraph 399 of HC  395)  or  where  the  person  has  been  "lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life"  and  other  conditions  apply
    (see paragraph 399A) or there are "very compelling  circumstances  over
    and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

 9. The leading judgment of the Court of Appeal, by McFarlane LJ, concluded
    that at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing the claimant  could
    not be in a "subsisting parental relationship" with his  children.   It
    is quite obvious that the claimant's family life in the United  Kingdom
    has been profoundly unhappy.  It included a violent  relationship  with
    his wife and their children going into the care of local authority with
    a view to their adoption. Their mother, the claimant's  wife,  was  not
    allowed to see the children at all  but  the  claimant  had  some  very
    limited contact which clearly benefitted the children.

10. We set out below paragraph 42 of the Court of Appeal's  judgment  which
    clearly requires us to conclude that there was no  subsisting  parental
    relationship at the time the decision was made.  The Court said:

         "For the reasons put forward by Mr Cornwell, it was,  in  my  view,
         not possible for the circumstances of this case to come within  the
         requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the Rules.  On the basis of the
         Court of Appeal's analysis of the family history, [VC]  had  played
         only a minimal role in the care of  his  children  and,  even  when
         living at the family home, he  had  on  a  regular  basis  rendered
         himself unable to act as a parent as a result of heavy drinking and
         abusive behaviour.   By  the  time  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to deport him, any vestiges of a  'parental  relationship'
         with the children had long fallen away and  had  reduced  to  their
         genetic relationship coupled with the most limited level of  direct
         contact which was intended to cease  altogether  on  adoption.   Mr
         Cornwell is correct to stress the words 'genuine', 'subsisting' and
         'parental' within paragraph 399(a).  Each of these words denotes  a
         separate and essential element of the quality of relationship  that
         is required to establish a  'very  compelling  justification'  [per
         Elias LJ  in  AJ  (Zimbabwe)]  that  might  mark  the  parent/child
         relationship in the instant case as being out of the ordinary."

11. At paragraph 43 the court continued:

         "I am also persuaded that the [Secretary of State]  is  correct  in
         submitting that for paragraph 399(a) to  apply  the  'parent'  must
         have a 'subsisting' role in  personally  providing  at  least  some
         element of direct parental  care  to  the  child.   The  phrase  in
         paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) which requires  that  'there  is  no  other
         family member who is able to care for the child in the UK' strongly
         indicates that the focus of the exception established at  paragraph
         399(a) is upon the  loss,  by  deportation,  of  a  parent  who  is
         providing, or is able to  provide,  'care  for  the  child'.   This
         provision is to be construed on the basis  that  it  applies  to  a
         category of exceptional cases where the weight of public policy  in
         favour of the default position of deportation of foreign  criminals
         will not apply."

12. Finally the judgment anticipated the possibility of the claimant's role
    changing.  The proposal for adoption did not work out quite as  planned
    and the Court of Appeal explained at paragraph 12:

         "The circumstances at the  time  of  the  FTT  and  Upper  Tribunal
         hearings were that although no adopted placement  had  been  found,
         the local authority was still pursuing a plan for  adoption.   This
         court has now been told that the search for adopters did  not  bear
         fruit and, as a result,  on  1  October  2015,  the  placement  for
         adoption orders were revoked and replaced by  special  guardianship
         orders with respect to the two children in favour of  their  former
         foster parents.  Although there is  no  formal  order  for  contact
         between  the  children  and  [VC],  it  is  understood  that   some
         occasional contact takes place under the supervision of the special
         guardians.  It is accepted that this appeal falls to be  determined
         on the basis of the facts and plans for the children as  they  were
         at the time of  the  two  Tribunal  hearings.   If  the  appeal  is
         allowed, the case will have to be remitted for  redetermination  in
         the light of current circumstances."

13. That is now our task.  We have to apply Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  We are informed  by  Section  117C(1)
    that the deportation of foreign criminals is in  the  public  interest.
    We are also told at sub-section (2) that the more serious  the  offence
    committed by the foreign criminal the greater the  public  interest  in
    deporting of that criminal.  Nevertheless unless the criminal has  been
    sentenced to four years or more there are two exceptions recognised  by
    statute.  Exception 1 applies where  the  claimant  has  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life.  He  was  born  in
    1970 and entered the United Kingdom in 1998. He is now 48 years old and
    has lived in the United Kingdom for 20 years.  This  claimant  has  not
    been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life  and
    clearly does not apply.  Exception 2 applies where the claimant "has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying partner,
    or a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child, and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would
    be unduly harsh".

14. It is also possible that there may be "very  compelling  circumstances"
    which should lead to the appeal being allowed.

15. The papers show  that  the  claimant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    irregularly and claimed asylum in March 1998.

16. The claimant gave evidence before us.  We say immediately that we found
    him  an  extremely  candid  witness.   He  answered  questions   in   a
    straightforward manner and showed no tendency to exaggerate  his  case.
    Understandably,  because  he  was  representing  himself,  he  had  not
    produced any written evidence to support his case but when  pressed  he
    was able to substantiate some of his claims by reference to records  on
    his mobile phone.  This is an imperfect way of receiving evidence as it
    could not easily be copied for the file and was  not  disclosed  before
    the hearing but we  gave  the  evidence  the  weight  that  we  thought
    appropriate.

17. The claimant confirmed that he had no close personal  relationships  in
    the United Kingdom except with his daughters.  He had no life  partner.
    He was living in the United Kingdom supported by the charity  and  good
    wishes of his immediate family who sent him money.  He had been in  the
    United Kingdom since arriving in 1998.  He said  that  his  father  had
    died.  His mother lived in Sri Lanka and the family had had a farm.

18. He had not given a lot of thought to what he would have to  do  in  the
    event of his return.  He did not want to have to go back to Sri  Lanka.
    He had learned a lot and had tried to establish himself in  the  United
    Kingdom.

19. It would have been helpful to have had some independent evidence  about
    the claimant's relationship with his daughters.  Nevertheless  we  were
    impressed with his apparent candour and his failure to  exaggerate  the
    relationship even though he knew it would have been hard for us to have
    checked his claims.  He told us that he saw  the  girls  about  once  a
    month.  When pressed he produced conversations on his mobile phone  and
    these can be characterised as indicating that contact did  indeed  take
    place about once a month, but less rather  than  more  frequently,  and
    came about by his asking permission of the long  terms  foster  parent.
    The replies suggested that  the  carer  was  willing  in  principle  to
    facilitate contact but that she set the terms and the claimant politely
    complied.  We were shown photographs on the phone of the claimant  with
    his daughters and also with the carer and  the  carer's  grandson.   We
    appreciate that photographs can only show gestures at a moment in  time
    but it all confirmed the account of the girls being  genuinely  pleased
    to see  their  father  and  their  carer  regarding  the  occasions  as
    essentially congenial. Their carer would not readily facilitate contact
    if it was detrimental to the girls' welfare.

20. However the claimant also accepted that he paid no  governing  role  in
    the lives of the children.  He made no decisions about their  education
    for example and he paid nothing  towards  their  maintenance.   He  did
    spoil them with treats when he saw them, in accordance with his limited
    means, but that was the extent of his support.

21. As far as we are aware "parental relationship" is not precisely defined
    and may not be precisely definable.  We do realise that under the terms
    of Section 117C(5)  there  has  to  be  a  relationship  that  is  both
    "subsisting" and "parental".  The relationship is subsisting.  We  have
    no reason to think that it will not go on at least for the  foreseeable
    future, that the girls are fully aware of their father's  identity  and
    that his limited involvement  in  their  lives  is  positive.   It  has
    clearly not been a parental relationship for  some  time  and  we  find
    nothing in the change in local authorities'  plans  which  changes  the
    relationship to make it parental.  The claimant has no guiding role and
    contact remains infrequent even though we accept that it has increased.
     It follows that we are not persuaded there is  a  subsisting  parental
    relationship now for the purposes of the rules or Section 117C(5).

22. However even if we are wrong about this we would find the effect of his
    removal would not be unduly harsh.  The girls clearly know their father
    but they could have some contact  with  him  from  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  That would not be as good as seeing him but they  could  keep
    in touch and there is nothing before us to suggest that not seeing  him
    would have a particularly distressing or harmful effect upon them.

23. We do find that the best interests of the children  lie  in  preserving
    the status quo so that their father remains in the United  Kingdom  and
    continues to play a modest but meaningful part in their lives but their
    best interests are a primary rather than  determinative  consideration.
    This claimant cannot succeed in his appeal because of his  relationship
    with his children.

24. We do not suggest that there is a viable family business in  Sri  Lanka
    that could seamlessly absorb the claimant in the event of  his  return.
    However he has some contact with the country.  We have no doubt that he
    would find a way of managing but we do not suggest that this  would  be
    straightforward or easy.

25. The claimant had been in trouble for motoring  offences  and  had  been
    cautioned for battery.  As far as we are aware the only convictions for
    serious matters are the matters leading to  the  deportation  decision.
    It is not appropriate to say too much about the  offences  once  it  is
    apparent, as is the case here, that they are  sufficiently  serious  to
    attract deportation.  However sexual assaults are always serious and we
    are mindful that the more serious the offence the  greater  the  public
    interest in deportation.  The offences  were  all  committed  within  a
    short period of time whilst the claimant was very drunk.   Two  of  the
    offences involved his slapping the buttocks of a man and a  woman.   We
    do not trivialise or condone them in anyway by saying that they are not
    examples of the most serious kind of sexual assault. The third offence,
    against a woman, was a much more serious attack.  The  claimant  pushed
    her against metal railings and groped her and left her  distressed  not
    only by what had happened but by what  she  feared  might  happen.  The
    fourth offence involved grabbing  another  woman  by  her  breasts  and
    buttocks. The claimant declared in vulgar  language  his  intention  to
    have sexual intercourse with her.  The  offence  has  the  particularly
    unattractive quality of being committed against a victim  who  suffered
    from multiple sclerosis and had difficulty walking.

26. He was sent to prison for two concurrent terms of eight months and  two
    of twelve months.  He also had to sign the sex offender's order.

27. We asked ourselves rhetorically what reasons there  were  for  allowing
    him to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds. Clearly he
    had established a  private  and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    although it was all established when he was in the  United  Kingdom  in
    pursuit of an unmeritorious claim for asylum  or  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds or without any kind of leave at all.  Clearly  the
    claimant can speak good English. There is evidence that at least for  a
    short time he attended a local church. This does weigh in favour of his
    remaining because it shows some integration and  even  contribution  to
    the community but it does not count for much.

28. Other than his relationship with the children, which we have considered
    in more detail above, we find nothing weighty or potentially weighty in
    favour of his remaining.

29. We must consider the delay.  These offences are now more than ten years
    ago which is a long time but they happened and it cannot be  said  that
    the public interest in his deportation is diminished.  This  is  not  a
    case, as occasionally happens, where the Secretary of State  has  shown
    no interest in deportation which might imply that the  public  interest
    for some reason was not particularly strong.  Delay here has  been  the
    consequence of working out the appeal system.  It is not the claimant's
    fault that he was successful before the First-tier  Tribunal  but  that
    does not give him a right to remain in the United Kingdom.

30. It follows that there is nothing in his relationship with the  children
    that means deportation should be avoided for their  sakes  or  at  all.
    Neither can it be  said  that  the  conditions  in  Sri  Lanka  are  so
    difficult that he could not return there. There is nothing else in  the
    claimant's case.

31. We do, before making a final decision, just step  back  and  reflect  a
    little.  We do not know all the ins and outs of the  plainly  traumatic
    private and family life the claimant has experienced.  We do  recognise
    that he has been in the United Kingdom for many years.  He  is  clearly
    able to speak English because he  addressed  us  in  English  perfectly
    competently at the hearing.  We accept that he would be industrious  if
    that were open to him.  The fact is that Parliament  has  decided  that
    the deportation of foreign criminals is  in  the  public  interest  and
    there is nothing we can see that would justify any  different  decision
    in this case.

32. In short, although removing the claimant will interfere with  his,  and
    with his daughters' private and family  lives  the  removal  is  for  a
    proper purpose, lawful and proportionate.

33. We therefore dismiss the claimant's appeal under the rules and the law.



    Notice of Decision

    The claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    deport him is dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 September 2018              |

