
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02521/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2017                   |On 26 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (MAS).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 1  January  1972.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 April 2007  and  claimed  asylum
    the following day.

 4. As a result of his entry into the UK on a false passport the  appellant
    was convicted on 15 August 2007 of an offence of  possessing  a  forged
    document and sentenced to a period of one years' imprisonment.

 5. On 17 October 2007, the appellant was served with a notice  to  make  a
    deportation order under s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  on  the
    basis that his deportation was conducive to the public good.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision.  The appeal was heard  on
    12 February 2008 by which time the Secretary of State had  refused  his
    asylum claim.   The  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   However,  on  12  May  2008  the
    decision was set aside by the AIT and, following a fresh  hearing,  the
    appellant's appeal was again dismissed.

 7. On 17 April 2009, the Secretary of State  signed  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant with removal directions set  for  17  June  2009.
    The appellant's removal was temporarily  stayed  following  a  rule  39
    application to the Strasbourg Court.

 8.   Subsequently,   the   appellant's   representatives   made    further
    representations which the Secretary of State treated as an  application
    to revoke the deportation order of 17 April 2009.

 9. On 29 November 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  to  revoke  that
    deportation order.

10. The appellant then appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was
    dismissed on 16 September  2014  but,  on  15  April  2015,  the  Upper
    Tribunal set aside that decision and  remitted  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

The Current Appeal

11. The remitted appeal was heard by Judge Powell on 26 October  2015.   It
    is this appeal which is the subject of these proceedings.

12. In a determination promulgated on 30 October 2015, Judge Powell allowed
    the appellant's appeal under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

13. Judge Powell found that the appellant was from a minority clan and  had
    no family in Mogadishu.  As a consequence, the appellant was likely  to
    have to live in an IDP camp if returned to Mogadishu.  On the basis  of
    a concession made by the Presenting Officer  before  Judge  Powell,  in
    those circumstances, Judge Powell found that the appellant's return  to
    Mogadishu would breach Art 3.

14. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Powell's
    decision and permission was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Reid) on 17 November 2015.

15. On 1 December 2015, the appellant filed a rule 24 response  seeking  to
    uphold the Judge's decision.

16. The appeal was initially listed before me on 14 June 2016.  There  was,
    at that hearing, some dispute as  to  whether  or  not  the  Presenting
    Officer had made a concession before Judge Powell, as set out  in  para
    20 of his determination, namely that if the appellant were found to  be
    a member of a minority clan and without familial support in  Mogadishu,
    he would have to  live  in  an  IDP  camp  and  would  be  entitled  to
    protection on the basis of Art 3.

17. In order to resolve the issue,  I  adjourned  the  hearing  and  issued
    directions on 14 June 2016 that each of the parties  should  file  with
    the Upper Tribunal within fourteen days a witness  statement  from  the
    parties' respective representatives at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    as to what, if any, concession had been made by the Presenting  Officer
    at that hearing.

18. There then followed a delay in complying with the directions  and  some
    confusion that led to a late submission  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
    statement on 12 October 2016.

19. The appeal was again listed before me on  1  November  2016.   At  that
    hearing, I considered the Presenting Officer's witness statement  which
    indicated that the Presenting Officer had  no  direct  recollection  of
    whether he had made a concession but indicated that he did  not  accept
    that he knowingly made the concession as outlined in para 20  of  Judge
    Powell's determination.  The statement from the appellant's counsel  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing, Mr  Hodgetts  (who  properly  did  not
    represent the appellant at that hearing on 1 November 2016  before  me)
    was firm in its view that the concession had, in fact, been  made.   Mr
    Richards, who represented the Secretary of State (then as now) did  not
    seek to challenge the integrity of Mr Hodgetts  and  acknowledged  that
    there were good grounds for accepting  that  the  concession  had  been
    made.  In the course of the hearing, I indicated to the parties that  I
    was satisfied that the concession had been made as set out in  para  20
    of the judge's determination and I accepted Mr Hodgetts' clear and firm
    recollection of what had transpired at the hearing.

20. The appeal was again adjourned as the representatives  were  not  in  a
    position  to  refer  me  to  the  relevant  case  law  concerning   the
    circumstances, if any, in which the Secretary  of  State  could  in  an
    appeal withdraw a concession.  That appeared to be a live issue.

21. The appeal was listed finally before me on 24 January 2017.

22. At that hearing, Mr Richards accepted that the Presenting  Officer  had
    made  a  significant  concession  before  Judge  Powell  and  that  the
    Secretary of State no  longer  sought  to  argue  that  Judge  Powell's
    determination contained an error of law.  He did not seek to go  behind
    the concession.  Mr  Richards  accepted  that  Judge  Powell  had  been
    entitled to allow the appellant's appeal under Art  3  based  upon  the
    concession made by  the  Presenting  Officer.   He  accepted  that  the
    Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal should fail and  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

Decision

23. In those circumstances, the decision  of  Judge  Powell  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 (and Art 8) of the ECHR did not  involve
    the making of an error of law.  His decision to  allow  the  appeal  on
    those grounds stands.

24. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.





                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 26/01/2017



