
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02295/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 11 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                    m  j
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki of Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (a  panel  comprising  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Whalan and Mr P Bompas) promulgated on 1 May 2014 in which they  upheld
    the decision of the respondent that the appellant is a person  to  whom
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  applies  and  thus  must  be
    deported as a foreign criminal.

 2. While no order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal, I  am
    satisfied that such an order should be made, given the sensitive nature
    of the issues in the appellant's case.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran.   In  2010  he  was  a  university
    student in  Tehran  and  had  in  June  2009  supported  the  reformist
    candidate, Mr Moussavi, in the presidential elections.  He did  not  at
    that stage take place in the demonstrations against the victory  of  Mr
    Ahamadinejad but on 7 December 2010 took part in a Silent  Student  Day
    at which he was arrested, taken to Evin Prison where  he  was  detained
    for five months, and ill-treated.  He was  released  after  his  father
    paid a bribe for him to be released on bail  for  a  week,  the  family
    house being put up as surety.  After his release the appellant's father
    then arranged for him to be taken out of Iran  to  the  United  Kingdom
    where he arrived on 18 June 2011 using a false identity  and  passport.
    He was refused entry clearance and claimed asylum.  On 18 July 2011  he
    was convicted at Lewes Crown Court of possession of and use of a  false
    instrument, namely a passport  and  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment.  Since his arrival in the United Kingdom he has  been  in
    some contact with his family and has been informed that he  is  wanted,
    his mother having hired a lawyer to make inquiries.

 4. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter dated 9  October
    2013.  In summary,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account  of  being  detained  and  arrested  or  being  imprisoned  and
    tortured, although it was accepted he is  a  national  of  Iran  and  a
    student at Bushehr University, given the number of discrepancies in his
    claim.  She also drew inferences adverse  to  the  appellant  from  his
    failure to claim asylum in Italy en route to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    from his production of the legally obtained passport on arrival in  the
    United Kingdom.  The respondent considered that the appellant would not
    be at risk on return to Iran having left illegally and as he was not  a
    refugee, and none of the other exceptions set out in Section 33 of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007 apply to him, he should be deported to Iran.

 5. On appeal when the matter came before the Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 11 April 2014, they heard evidence from the appellant, as well
    as Ms Guity Sadighi-Keens; they also had before them a report from Anna
    Enayat of St Anthony's College,  Oxford  and  from  Richard  Thomas,  a
    barrister at Doughty Street Chambers.

 6. The Tribunal found:-

      i) that the demonstration described by the appellant  may  have  taken
         place and he may well have been contemporaneously aware of it;

     ii) that the conclusions set out  in  the  refusal  letter  arose  from
         errors in the translation process during the interview as described
         by Mrs Sadighi-Keens [39] and that they would proceed  to  consider
         his credibility afresh;

    iii) that the appellant was not credible because:-

          a) his alleged conduct in attending the demonstration was out  of
             character as he was not a man of active political sentiment or
             commitment and had engaged in no formal activity between  June
             2009 and December 2012 (sic) and was not an  activist  of  any
             conviction or involvement [40];

          b)  that  his   core   account   was   undermined   by   inherent
             implausibility with regards to his account of how  his  father
             was able to obtain bail, committing a very significant part of
             the family's entire assets and sacrificing  the  large  family
             home and his evidence was such that they did not believe  that
             the family  would  have  had  such  resources  or  would  have
             committed these to securing a week's bail;

          c) that the account was not corroborated by any formal witness or
             statement or documentary evidence  from  Iran,  not  accepting
             that it would be  practically  impossible  to  obtain  further
             evidence from Iran given the risk to the family;

     iv) the appellant was an economic migrant and although he may have left
         Iran illegally, he would not be at risk on return.

 7. The appellant sought leave to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) that the Tribunal had not made any findings as to  whether  he  had
         participated in the demonstration on 7 December; or, whether he had
         been arrested or not (5);

     ii) that the Tribunal had erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's
         account of release was inherently implausible as in doing  so  they
         had failed to take into account the expert evidence of Miss  Enayat
         or, in the alternative, say why they had rejected it;

    iii) that the Tribunal had erred in law in requiring  the  appellant  to
         provide corroboration;

     iv) failed to take into account  the  evidence  of  Richard  Thomas  in
         assessing the appellant's conduct with respect to Article 31 of the
         Refugee Convention.

 8. Miss Solanki submitted that the Tribunal's analysis of the  appellant's
    conduct was not rational and that rather than  forming  the  view  that
    this was not credible as a result of analysis had simply  applied  that
    as a descriptor to  the  evidence.   Mr  Harrison  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had given adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant's
    account of his participation in the demonstration was not credible.

 9. The Tribunal held that they did not believe the  appellant  would  have
    attended the demonstration because that is not the  kind  of  thing  he
    would have done. Properly  and  sustainably  to  have  reached  such  a
    finding, however, requires them to have reached findings regarding  his
    activities in the past, which they did not do. That conclusion is  thus
    not adequately reasoned.

10. Mr Harrison accepted  that  the  Tribunal  had  not  engaged  with  the
    evidence of Miss Enayat which  describes  in  some  detail  how  it  is
    possible through bribery to obtain bail in Iran even  in  circumstances
    such as those described by the appellant.  There is always a danger  in
    finding  that  what  goes  on  in  a  foreign  country  as  "inherently
    implausible" from the standpoint of the United Kingdom and  whilst  the
    Tribunal does refer to Miss Enayat's  evidence  [29  to  30]  and  that
    conditional release can be subject to bail and evidence as to how  bail
    can be obtained, they failed to explain in any way  why  they  rejected
    this evidence in coming to a conclusion that what  is  being  described
    was inherently implausible.  In so doing, they acted  irrationally  and
    unreasonably.

11. Whilst Mr Harrison submitted that  it  was  open  to  the  Tribunal  to
    conclude  that  the  appellant  should  have   provided   corroborative
    evidence. While there are circumstances in which it may  be  reasonable
    to expect evidence to be obtained  from  the  country  of  origin,  the
    conclusion here that it was correct so  to  do  is  predicated  on  the
    finding that the appellant's account was not credible. Given the errors
    in that analysis set out above, the adverse inferences from  a  failure
    to supply additional evidence are not sustainable.

12. In light of the above, I am satisfied that the Tribunal's findings with
    respect to the appellant's credibility are flawed and whilst  it  might
    have been open to them to draw  inferences  adverse  to  the  appellant
    pursuant to Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, to have done so, in that when that can  only
    be done as part of an overall process is not sufficient.

13. Viewed as a whole, the flaws in the  analysis  of  credibility  are  so
    fundamental as to make the findings unsustainable.  Accordingly,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
    making of an error of law and is set aside.  In the circumstances, none
    of the findings of fact can be preserved.

14. On that basis, and as there will need to be a  further  judicial  fact-
    finding exercise to be conducted, I am satisfied that the matter should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination on all
    issues.  Both parties were in agreement with this and that  the  matter
    should be remitted to Taylor House.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  at
       Taylor House

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
