
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02573/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                        MR JEVON AKEIM DANIEL RIGGAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant's:   H Foot of Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Jamaica.  On  6  December  2013  the
       respondent refused to revoke a deportation order made against him  in
       December 2011 in light of his history of criminal convictions.  On  1
       May 2015 First tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook  dismissed  his  appeal.
       The appellant challenges  that  decision  on  the  basis  of  lengthy
       grounds and seven were identified and amplified. It is unnecessary to
       identify any of these save for  ground 1,  which  contends  that  the
       judge failed to make findings on the issue  of  potential  Article  3
       risk to the appellant if he were excluded  under  para  339D  of  the
       Immigration  Rules.  Three  things  are  beyond  doubt.  First,   the
       appellant did raise before the First tier Tribunal Article 3  grounds
       claiming he would face risk on return by virtue of his homosexuality.
       Second, (which I will expand on in a moment) the First tier  Tribunal
       failed to address this issue satisfactorily. Third, on  23  September
       2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley stated that the finding made by  a
       previous  tribunal  that  the  appellant  was  homosexual  and  in  a
       relationship with a Mr T was "preserved". In  respect  of  this  last
       matter Mr Jarvis confirmed that the respondent did  not  seek  to  go
       behind that finding.

    2. As regards the First tier Tribunal judge's treatment of the Article 3
       basis of claim, the only paragraph where this is  addressed  is  para
       25.  There is more than one difficulty with this paragraph. First  of
       all, it appears in part to be a continuation of the judge's  separate
       assessment of whether the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules relating to private life under  Article  8,  rather
       than the issue of risk on return under Article 3. Second, insofar  as
       it identifies any reason for rejecting an Article 3-based  claim,  it
       is formulated in terms of the  benign  reaction  of  the  appellant's
       family in the UK, not of his family or wider community in Jamaica The
       closest the judge came to addressing the latter context was to append
       to his observation that UK family members had shown little hostility,
       the observation that "[t]here was no explanation  why  his  immediate
       family  in  Jamaica  would  not  respond  in  a  similar  way".   The
       unsatisfactory  nature  of  this  treatment  of  this  part  of   the
       appellant's claim was compounded by the fact that in the decision  by
       UTJ Chalkley it has been emphasized that there had been a failure  by
       the earlier tribunal decision with which he was concerned to consider
       the applicability of the country guidance given in DW (Homosexual Men
       - Persecution -  Sufficiency  of  Protection)  Jamaica  [2005]  UKAIT
       00168. (Also relevant of course should have been the decision  in  SW
       (lesbians - HJ and HT applied) Jamaica CG (2011) UKUT 00251 (IAC)  at
       least insofar as it  addressed  attitudes  towards  homosexuality  in
       Jamaica generally.

    3. Both parties agreed with me that for the above reason on its own  the
       First tier Tribunal had materially erred in law and that its decision
       should be set aside.

    4. Having heard from the parties I decided further that the  appropriate
       course was to remit this case to the First tier Tribunal. It will  be
       a matter for the next tribunal to determine the precise scope of  the
       appeal, but I would direct (1) that the appellant  be able  to  argue
       the ground seeking to challenge the exclusion decision; (2) that  the
       tribunal must address the issue  of  risk  on  return  based  on  the
       appellant's homosexuality (whether this is confined to Article  3  or
       also engages  international  protection  will  be  dependent  on  the
       outcome of the decision  on  the   exclusion  ground;  (3)  that  the
       appellant be able to argue the Article 8 grounds  but  this  must  be
       done by reference to the Immigration Rules at the  date  of  hearing;
       (4) in order to assist the next tribunal both parties are  to  adduce
       skeleton arguments setting  out  in  succinct  manner  the  principal
       points relied on and in the case of the appellant  careful  attention
       should be paid to reducing the ambit of the Article 8 grounds  relied
       on previously. For example, it is not open to the appellant to  argue
       that his Article 8 case should be considered outside the  Immigration
       Rules. He is a foreign criminal who falls under provisions in Part  8
       of the Rules that have been determined by  the  Court  of  Appeal  to
       represent, so far as Article 8 is concerned, a complete code.

    5. Subject to compliance with Tribunal directions which will  follow  in
       due course, it will be open to the parties to adduce further  country
       of origin evidence relating to male homosexuals in Jamaica.

    6. For the above reasons:

       The First tier Tribunal materially erred in law and its  decision  is
       set aside.

       The case is remitted to the First tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
       judge other than Judge Braybrook or Judge Chambers or Judge  Brenells
       or Mr A F Sheward, these four all being First tier judges who in  one
       way or another have  been  involved  previously  in  the  appellant's
       appeals.




                               Signed


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
