
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02049/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd February 2016                |On 1st June 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR AHMED ALI MAHAMOUD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Sam Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The respondent (hereafter the claimant)  is  a  national  of  Somalia
       whose home area before he left in 2004 was claimed  to  be  Qoryooley
       Distinct, South-East Lower Shebelle. He was born in October 1989  and
       came to the UK illegally in January 2004. In a determination in  2004
       an immigration judge found him to be a member of a minority clan, the
       Shekal, but dismissed his asylum appeal nonetheless. The claimant had
       been granted leave to remain from 3 July 2004 - 2 July 2007, but on 7
       July 2007 he had been arrested and on 6 December 2007  following  his
       plea of guilty he was convicted upon  indictment  of  an  offence  of
       wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and was sentenced  to
       a term of 6 years in a young  offenders  institution  less  160  days
       spent on remand. On 6  October  2009  the  appellant  (hereafter  the
       Secretary of State or SSHD) made  a  deportation  order  pursuant  to
       s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. Following further representations
       the SSHD made a decision on 19 September 2013 refusing to revoke  the
       deportation order. The SSHD had also  decided  to  certify  the  case
       under s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    2. The claimant appealed and in a determination  sent  on  5  June  2015
       First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Keane allowed  his  appeal  on  human
       rights (Articles 3 and 8) grounds.

    3. Several aspects of  the  judge's  determination  are  not  challenged
       before me. One is the judge's finding that the s.72  certificate  had
       not been made out because "I find that the presumptions in  s.72  ...
       are displaced" [14]. Another is that the judge concluded in light  of
       more recent DNA evidence linking the claimant and his brother who had
       been accepted as a member of  the  minority  clan  Ashraf,  that  the
       immigration judge's earlier finding made in 2004 about the claimant's
       clan status was to be reconsidered and the claimant  was  to  now  be
       treated as belonging to a different  minority  clan,  the  Ashraf.  A
       third aspect of  his findings, not actively challenged, is  that  the
       claimant would face a real risk of ill treatment if returned  to  his
       home area of Quryooley

    4. The SSHD's grounds challenged the judge's findings on both Article  3
       and 8. It must be said that the drafting of  her  grounds  betrays  a
       degree of muddle but before me both representatives were agreed  that
       their gravamen was the challenge to the judge's Article  3  findings.
       Since at [23] the judge allowed the Article 8 grounds of appeal  "for
       the same reasons" as those he had given for allowing it on Article  3
       grounds, the grounds stand or fall with the challenge to the latter.

    5. I am persuaded that the  FtT  judge  materially  erred  in  law.  The
       judge's principal reason for allowing the Article 3 appeal  was  that
       in light of the background and expert evidence and the recent country
       guidance decision  of  MOJ  &  Others[2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC),  the
       claimant's particular circumstances would place him at real  risk  of
       ill treatment  if  returned  to  Somalia.  At  this  juncture  it  is
       convenient to set out the country guidance given in MOJ &  Others  in
       full:

                              "COUNTRY GUIDANCE

         (i)  The country guidance issues addressed  in  this  determination
             are not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in AMM
             and others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
             Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445  (IAC).  Therefore,  where  country
             guidance has been given by the Tribunal in AMM in  respect  of
             issues not addressed in this determination then  the  guidance
             provided by AMM shall continue to have effect.

         (ii) Generally, a person who is "an ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
             associated with the security forces; any aspect of  government
             or  official  administration  or  any  NGO  or   international
             organisation) on returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of  harm
             such as to require protection under Article 3 of the  ECHR  or
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In  particular,
             he will not be at real risk simply on account of having  lived
             in a European location for a period of time  of  being  viewed
             with  suspicion  either  by  the  authorities  as  a  possible
             supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab  as  an  apostate  or
             someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised by living
             in a Western country.

         (iii)    There has been durable change in the  sense  that  the  Al
             Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is  no
             real prospect of a re-established presence  within  the  city.
             That was not the case at the  time  of  the  country  guidance
             given by the Tribunal in AMM.

         (iv) The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
             casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab  target  groups
             such as politicians, police officers, government officials and
             those associated with NGOs  and  international  organisations,
             cannot be precisely established by  the  statistical  evidence
             which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it is established
             by the evidence considered as a whole that there  has  been  a
             reduction in the level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
             largely due to the cessation of confrontational warfare within
             the city and Al Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
             carefully selected targets.  The present level  of  casualties
             does not amount to a sufficient  risk  to  ordinary  civilians
             such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.

         (v)  It is open to an  ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce
             further still his personal exposure to the risk of "collateral
             damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab  attack  that  was
             not targeted at him by avoiding areas and establishments  that
             are clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it
             is not unreasonable for him to do so.

         (vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab  for
             civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent returnees
             from the West.

         (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
             will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the
             city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.

         (viii)   The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
             changed.  Clans  now  provide,  potentially,  social   support
             mechanisms and assist with access to  livelihoods,  performing
             less of a protection function than previously.  There  are  no
             clan militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan
             based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for   minority   clan
             members.

         (ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             of the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but
             are not limited to:

                . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                . length of absence from Mogadishu;

                . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

                . access to financial resources;

                . prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self employment;

                . availability of remittances from abroad;

                . means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.

         (x)  Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.

         (xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.

         (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those
             who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to
             live in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)
             risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On the other  hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan   with
             no former links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards.

    6. There are several difficulties with the judge's  assessment.   First,
       he identified one of the main bases for his assessment as the  expert
       report of Dr Bekalo. Dr Bekalo, the judge wrote in [20]:

         "... had published publications which enable  him  to  pass  expert
         opinion on the subject matter of his report and identified  factors
         which would exacerbate the  risk  posed  to  the  appellant  if  he
         returned to Somalia (I particularly incorporate Section  2  of  his
         report into the decision)."

    7. Yet Dr Bekalo's report does  not  refer  to  MOJ  &  Others  and,  in
       contrast to the findings made  by  the  Tribunal  in  MOJ  &  Others,
       portrays Mogadishu and Qoriyooley Towns in 2014 as being  "under  the
       control  of  numerous  warlords  and  armed  groups,  including  more
       recently the Al-Quada affiliated insurgent groups called  Al-Shebab".
       Even assuming the expert were correct in describing this situation as
       obtaining in the Qoriyooley Towns, his opinion on  the  situation  in
       Mogadishu was palpably at odds with that found to  obtain  in  MOJ  &
       Others. If the judge was to depart from the findings in MOJ,  he  was
       obliged to identify relevant new evidence warranting a departure.  He
       did not do so.

    8. A second difficulty is that the  judge  appears  mistakenly  to  have
       considered the guidance given in MOJ & Others to be confined to those
       who had lived in Mogadishu before departure. The judge said that  the
       MOJ & Others considerations "are arguably inapt  in  the  case  of  a
       Somalian resident who has never lived in  the  capital..."   That  is
       incorrect. At (xii) of the head note the  Tribunal  stated  (emphasis
       added):

         "The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of  destitution.  On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards."

    9. This is perhaps not a fatal difficulty because the judge did go on to
       state in [22] that "if nevertheless applied"  the  guidance  in  that
       case "would point, individually and cumulatively, to the  utter  lack
       of practicality in the notion that one such as  the  appellant  might
       settle safely in the capital". However, this oversight is  indicative
       of an inattention to the breadth  of  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of
       evidence relating to conditions in Mogadishu in MOJ & Others.

   10. A third difficulty is that in  seeking  to  apply  the  risk  factors
       identified in MOJ and Others the judge at one point based himself  on
       a sweeping factual premise that was not  warranted  on  the  evidence
       before him. He stated  in  [22]  that  "Miss  Hersi  [the  claimant's
       girlfriend whom he had earlier found credible] said  that  she  would
       not provide financial support to the appellant upon  his  deportation
       from  the  UK".  This  was  one  of  what  the  judge  described   as
       "exclusively favourable findings of fact to  which  have  arrived  in
       respect of her  evidence."  He  continued:  "I  find  that  that  the
       appellant would not receive financial support from her  or  from  any
       other person". Yet on the evidence before the judge the claimant  had
       family members in the UK including  a  full  brother  whose  DNA  had
       helped establish his status as Ashraf.

   11. A fourth difficulty resides in the judge's finding that the  claimant
       would not have prospects of securing employment. Given  that  earlier
       he had recorded at [5] that whilst in prison the  claimant  had  been
       awarded certificates that equated to A-level, it  was  necessary  for
       the judge to explain on what evidence the finding that  the  claimant
       would not have prospects of securing employment was based.

   12. In my judgment these difficulties in the  judge's  assessment,  taken
       together, constituted a material error of law  in  failing  to  apply
       relevant country guidance and a failure to take into account relevant
       evidence and make proper findings regarding it.

   13. For completeness I should observe that whilst on its face the judge's
       assessment of the risks arising from the claimant's clan  association
       might appear tenable, it is not apparent to me that he  engaged  with
       the fact that the claimant was a member of the Ashraf  minority  clan
       and with the evidence relating to how members of that  clan  fare  in
       Mogadishu. All the judge said at [22] was that "[h[e lacks  ...  clan
       associations". But there are other  Ashraf  in  Mogadishu  and  so  a
       possible basis for association with them. At the same time, there was
       some evidence that this clan faces a situation of exploitation. Since
       a principal finding in MOJ & Others at (viii) of  the  head  note  is
       that:

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection
         function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,
         no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment,  even
         for minority clan members."

       it cannot be said  that  the  claimant's  minority  clan  status  was
       decisive, but neither can it be said that the judge showed sufficient
       awareness of this dimension to the claimant's claim

   14. For the above reasons the judge materially erred in law and in a  way
       necessitating that his decision is set aside. I  asked  both  parties
       what they would urge by way of method of disposal of the case were  I
       to find (as I have) that the judge materially erred in law. Both said
       they considered  the  case  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. Notwithstanding that I see no reason to  interfere  in  the
       judge's DNA-based findings that the claimant is an Ashraf, I consider
       that that effectively leaves a great many findings of fact that  have
       to be made and it would serve the interests of justice best  for  the
       case to be remitted to be heard afresh save for the  preservation  of
       the finding that he is an Ashraf.

   15. For the above reasons:

         the judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.

         the case is remitted to be heard  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Judge Keane.


Signed   Date 1st June 2016
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
