
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02053/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     m b
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  26  December  1978.   She
    came to the United Kingdom around 1981 when  she  was  approximately  3
    years old with her mother and sister.  She has lived  here  ever  since
    and has never returned to Ghana.  Her mother is now deceased.  She  has
    no relationship with her father and she only recently met him  when  he
    came to visit the appellant in hospital.  The  appellant's  father  now
    lives in the United States of America.

2.   The appellant attended school and college and completed  two  years  of
    an undergraduate law  degree  course  but  she  did  not  complete  her
    university education.  She made several unsuccessful attempts  to  stay
    in the United Kingdom.  On 24 March 2003  she  was  refused  indefinite
    leave to remain following an application submitted by her mother.   She
    had no right  of  appeal.   On  29  March  2009  Islington  Law  Centre
    submitted an application on her behalf for leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds, relying on  her  very  long  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and her significant mental health problems.

3.   On 14 March 2013 the appellant was served with a  notice  of  liability
    to deportation.  On 6 June 2013 she completed a questionnaire.

4.   On 15 October 2014 a deportation order was signed  in  respect  of  the
    appellant.  On 25 March 2015, in pursuance of a consent order made in a
    claim for judicial review, the respondent issued an amended  notice  of
    decision replacing an earlier decision letter dated 16 October 2014.

5.   The appellant's appeal against the decision to deport her was heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls on 2 September 2015 and dismissed by
    him in a determination promulgated on 9 September 2015.  Permission  to
    appeal the judge's decision was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew on 9 October 2015.

6.   FtTJ Andrew was satisfied that there were arguable  errors  of  law  in
    the decision in that the judge may have  failed  to  consider  all  the
    relevant evidence in relation to  the  treatment  the  appellant  would
    receive on her return to Ghana as a person suffering from mental health
    problems.  The judge failed to determine the risks there  would  be  to
    the appellant when informed of the  dismissal  of  her  claim  and  her
    removal from the United Kingdom and during such removal.  The judge may
    have assimilated the Article 3 test into that of Article 8.   There  is
    also an arguable error of  law  in  the  judge's  approach  to  Maslov,
    bearing in mind the length of time  this  appellant  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge may have erred  in  assessing  the  risk  of
    reoffending by failing to have  regard  to  the  social  worker's  oral
    evidence when coming to his conclusions.

7.   Mr Jorro relied on all  the  grounds,  in  particular  ground  1  which
    argued that the judge misdirected himself as  to  the  applicable  test
    arising under Article 3 where the state is  responsible  for  the  ill-
    treatment  and  in  so  doing  failed  to  consider  all  the  relevant
    circumstances.   Mr  Jorro  argued  that  on  this  ground  alone   the
    appellant's appeal should succeed.

8.   Mr Jorro relied on the appellant's circumstances  which  he  said  were
    exceptional.  She suffered  domestic  violence  at  the  hands  of  her
    stepfather, T, whom she blamed for destroying her relationship with her
    own mother and for causing her sister E's behaviour to change, becoming
    more angry, violent and controlling.   The  appellant  attributed  this
    period to the beginnings of the deterioration in her own mental  health
    which eventually resulted in a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia.

9.   Following her relationship with T, the appellant said that  her  mother
    met and married a man called CW but there was no friendship  or  warmth
    within the family.  During this time her elder sister had  a  baby  but
    did not regularly care for the child, leaving it with  the  appellant's
    mother who in turn left it with the appellant who was then only  13  or
    14 years of age.  Because of having to care for her sister's baby,  the
    appellant began to miss days at school.  She ran away from  home  after
    meeting a man called AK,  then  in  his  early  40s.   He  offered  her
    accommodation and she went to live with him for  two  or  three  years.
    She became pregnant  when  she  was  15  years  of  age,  although  she
    miscarried a couple of months later.  She became pregnant again but  it
    was during the pregnancy that she began to smoke crack cocaine with AK.
     On 15 August 1995 the appellant gave birth to a daughter who  died  on
    11 April 1996 when she was 8 months old.

10.  She enrolled at Waltham Forest College to study and  recalled  studying
    mathematics, English, history and psychology but she could not give  up
    drugs.   During  this  time  she  started  to  suffer   from   paranoid
    hallucinations.  She and AK split up a year after the daughter died but
    the appellant said she continued to use the benefits  she  received  to
    buy drugs from the people she had met while with AK.  She  became  good
    friends with a man  called  DD  who  was  a  drug  user  and  lived  in
    Stratford.

11.  The appellant went on to study at Queen Mary College London  University
    for a new law degree.  She continued to use drugs during these  studies
    and became paranoid about people knowing about this.  She  studied  for
    two and a half years but eventually the drug use became  too  much  and
    she abandoned the course.  During this time she remained in  occasional
    contact with her elder sister, E, but not with her mother.  During this
    time her sister C and her brother W were sent to Ghana by her mother.

12.  The appellant has three living children.  The  eldest  is  her  son  J,
    whose father is DA, a British citizen.  During this time she was unable
    to give up drugs of which DA was aware.  His son was born  on  15  June
    1999 and for about eight or nine months after the birth,  was  able  to
    live without drugs, although the cravings continued.  DA tried to  stop
    her from using drugs but she could not.  Eventually DA left when J  was
    about 1 year old taking J with him and went to live with his mother.  J
    has continued to live with his father ever since.

13.  The appellant gave birth to two further  children,  a  daughter  and  a
    son.  As she was taking drugs during the time of both  pregnancies  and
    births, both children were taken away by social services and both  have
    subsequently been adopted.  At the date of the  hearing  the  appellant
    did not know the whereabouts of her two children.  She  also  witnessed
    the death of DD.  The judge found the appellant's account of  her  life
    and circumstances to be a  credible  one.   The  facts  have  not  been
    challenged by the respondent.

14.  The appellant has criminal convictions.  She has spent time  in  prison
    and in mental facilities as a result of mental health orders.  She  was
    last sentenced at Snaresbrook Crown Court on 10 September 2012 to three
    and a half years for robbery.  Her conviction in  2008  resulted  in  a
    hospital order in a medium secure unit, the John Howard  Centre,  which
    led to improvements in her mental health and reliance  on  drugs.   She
    had been conditionally discharged into the community but her  condition
    deteriorated and she absconded  from  the  hostel  accommodation.   She
    remained in contact with her social worker who eventually persuaded her
    to go back to the hostel, following which she was recalled to the  John
    Howard Centre under the terms of the hospital  order.   It  was  during
    this time that she committed her last offence and  also  this  was  the
    last occasion on which she took any drugs.

15.  Following her last conviction,  the  appellant  remained  at  the  John
    Howard Centre where she was detained and  received  treatment  for  her
    schizophrenia and drug addiction.  In November 2012 she had improved to
    a sufficient extent that she was  transferred  to  Holloway  Prison  in
    January 2013 to complete her sentence.  She was released from  Holloway
    in October 2014 under the terms of a care package.  Initially she  went
    to a hostel called Leyton House but that was subsequently  burnt  down.
    She is now resident in [ - ] where she has available to  her  care  and
    assistance 24 hours a day.

16.  The judge accepted in light of the medical evidence that the  appellant
    has severe mental health problems and is schizophrenic.   She  has  had
    hallucinatory experiences and has attempted suicide on  more  than  one
    occasion.  Her condition is controlled in the UK through medication but
    the clear evidence is that she will relapse if deported.

17.  All of the material and reports before the First-tier Tribunal  are  to
    the effect that her criminal offending is related to  her  drug  taking
    although random drug testing shows that she has managed to remain drugs
    free since 2011.

18.  Mr Jorro relied on what the judge held at paragraph 46:

         "... Counsel argued that even if admitted to a psychiatric hospital
         in Ghana, the appellant would be at grave risk of ill-treatment, as
         evidenced by  the  report  of  Professor  Lawrence  and  the  other
         independent information.  Having looked at the evidence and bearing
         in mind the required standard of proof of a real risk,  I  conclude
         that that submission is supported by the evidence and I  find  that
         the appellant would be at risk of ill-treatment if she is  deported
         to Ghana".

19.  It was submitted that finding relates to the material set  out  in  the
    objective evidence to the effect  that  in  "prayer  camps"  (to  which
    people found in the community to be suffering from mental health may be
    transported by the police), patients are subjected  to  "chaining;  and
    forced fasting, prayers and incantation; being left out in the open and
    other ill-treatment.  In hospitals, patients may be subjected to: being
    left in  open  courtyards  all  day  in  inhuman  conditions;  lack  of
    treatment; overcrowding; electric shock therapy without consent  (using
    restraints) and without anaesthesia and not as a last resort,  lack  of
    and denial of food.  Importantly, these conditions  may  arise  as  the
    result of the position of a person being held upon a section. "

20.  The submission was that in these circumstances in which  the  state  is
    responsible or culpable for the harm that will arise, the rationale for
    the "exceptional circumstances" test in D and N is not applicable.

21.  Mr Jorro argued that the paradigm situation for the  appellant  if  she
    is removed to Ghana is that she is at real risk  of  inhuman  degrading
    treatment inflicted on her by people in authority.  This is a potential
    extension to the paradigm in D, a deathbed case, where there was no ill-
    treatment by other people.  In GS (India) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40
    there was no basis to assert that the state  was  responsible  for  the
    harm - the applicants had end stage kidney disease  and  asserted  that
    their decline amounted to  exceptional  circumstances  because  of  the
    speed and certainty with which they would die if returned, in  contrast
    to HIV/AIDS cases.  But there was no imposition of culpability asserted
    in respect of the countries of return.

22.  In MSS v Belgium and Greece [2011] 53 EHRR  2,  the  Greek  authorities
    were responsible for the harm inter alia as a result of the  fact  that
    asylum seekers who are subject to inhuman and  degrading  condition  in
    the reception facilities offered, were in that position as the  results
    of the Greek violations of legal duties arising under the EU Directive.
     In Sufi and Elmi v UK [2012] 54 EHRR 9, the court  expressly  declined
    to apply the  test  in  N  ("exceptional  circumstances")  because  the
    humanitarian crisis in Somalia derived from the indiscriminate  methods
    of warfare conducted by  the  parties  to  the  conflict  resulting  in
    widespread displacement.  Accordingly and having regard to these  cases
    the court in GS (India) concluded that circumstances in which departure
    from the Article 3 paradigm (intentional acts constituting  torture  or
    inhuman degrading treatment - GS at paragraph 39) was  justified  aside
    from D and N were, where (paragraph 62)

         "... the common factor is that there exist very pressing reasons to
         hold that impugned states responsible for the claim's plight".

23.   In GS itself  there  was  no  basis  to  assert  that  the  state  was
    responsible for the harm, the applicants had end stage  kidney  disease
    and asserted that their decline amounted to "exceptional circumstances"
    because of the speed  and  certainty  with  which  they  would  die  if
    returned in contrast to HIV/AIDS cases.  But there was no imposition of
    harm of culpability asserted in respect of their countries  of  return.
    Thus contrary to the finding  of  the  FTT  in  this  case,  Laws  LJ's
    analysis helps to mark out the circumstances in this case  as  distinct
    from those in the HIV or kidney cases.

24.  Consequently it was argued that the judged erred  in  law  in  applying
    the "exceptional circumstances" test at paragraph 50.

25.  Mr Staunton in reply relied on paragraph 49 where the judge  considered
    the background information to which he had been referred, including the
    report of Professor Lawrence.  The objective evidence  makes  it  clear
    that the government of Ghana has been taking steps in recent  years  to
    expand the provision of mental health services, to reach  more  of  the
    population and to put in place  mechanisms  to  tackle  the  abuses  in
    prayer camps identified by the UN Special Rapporteur and  Human  Rights
    Watch.  Although the judge found that the reach of those changes is  as
    yet, limited, he found that the evidence shows  a  willingness  on  the
    part of the government of Ghana to take necessary steps.  Therefore, he
    argued that the judge did not err in finding that there is available to
    the appellant a system of medical help for her  mental  illness  which,
    whilst it is nowhere  near  as  good  as  that  available  in  the  UK,
    nevertheless does not amount to the deliberate application  of  inhuman
    and degrading treatment.  He also found that the judge did not  err  in
    law in paragraph 50 when he found that  whilst  there  are  substantial
    concerns about the continuing health of the appellant in Ghana, it  has
    not been shown on the facts in this case that  those  concerns  are  of
    such a serious and exceptional nature  that  they  would  constitute  a
    breach of Article 3 as required by the decision in N.

26.  Following consideration of the submissions, I find myself in  agreement
    with Mr Jorro.  The judge found at  paragraph  46  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk of ill-treatment if she is deported to Ghana.  The ill-
    treatment the appellant would suffer has been highlighted above by  the
    reports from Professor Lawrence, the UN Special  Rapporteur  and  Human
    Rights Watch which the judge set out at paragraph 45.  The report  said
    that treatment used by 97% of  the  population  of  Ghana  with  mental
    health problems is through prayer camps and other informal, traditional
    treatment arrangements.  The UN Special Rapporteur particularly set out
    the forms of conduct, which include the chaining up of inmates,  forced
    fasting and treatment by prayers and incantations which continued until
    the leader of the institution was satisfied  that  the  individual  was
    "healed".  The Special Rapporteur noted  that  the  residents  of  such
    institutions could be delivered there by their families  or  placed  by
    the police if found on the streets acting in a confused and  aggressive
    manner.  The conditions in the psychiatric  hospitals  visited  by  the
    Special Rapporteur were still overcrowded, despite  reductions  in  the
    number of patients and many  patients  were  left  in  open  courts  in
    inhuman conditions.  The hospitals were underfunded and did not provide
    essential medication as the stock had ran out in the first half of  the
    year of visit.  The  Special  Rapporteur  described  the  treatment  of
    patients  as  "inadequate"  and  was  gravely   concerned   about   the
    application of electric shock therapy which was administered  with  the
    use of restraints, without adequate  anaesthesia  and  not  as  a  last
    resort.   The  reports  by  Human  Rights  Watch  set  out   the   same
    information,  particularly  the  chaining  of  residents,  and   forced
    seclusion, lack of shelter and denial of food.

27.  It was in the light of the objective  evidence  that  the  judge  found
    that the appellant would be at risk of ill-treatment if she is deported
    to Ghana.  I find that the ill-treatment would be perpetrated by people
    in authority.  They would be responsible for the care of the  appellant
    and the ill-treatment that she would suffer if she is removed to Ghana.
     The judge considered that the government of Ghana was putting in place
    mechanisms to tackle the abuses in prayer camps identified  by  the  UN
    Special  Rapporteur  and  Human  Rights  Watch,  but  he  came  to  the
    conclusion that those changes are limited.  Indeed, the judge  did  not
    refer to  what  these  mechanisms  were  and  whether  they  have  been
    effective in eradicating the ill-treatment meted out  to  mentally  ill
    patients by people in authority who have the responsibility  of  caring
    for these patients.

28.  I find that this is not  a  case  where  the  appellant  has  to  prove
    exceptional circumstances. I find that the appellant has established in
    light of the objective evidence that she would suffer ill-treatment and
    inhuman and degrading treatment at the hands of people in authority and
    this is sufficient to allow her appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

29.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

