
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02062/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th January 2016, 19th July 2016 |On 22nd December 2016                |
|and 29th September 2016              |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     OM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Laurence Lupin
solicitors
For the SSHD: Ms J Anderson, instructed by the GLD


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant or Mi or Ma or Z or Z in this determination.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. There has been a convoluted history to this appeal.  On  12th  January
      2016 I heard an appeal by OM against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal refusing to allow her appeal against a decision to  revoke  a
      deportation order on Article 3 grounds and an appeal by the  Secretary
      of State against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the
      appeal on Article 8 grounds against the decision  refusing  to  revoke
      the deportation order. I concluded, for the  reasons  set  out  in  my
      'error of law decision' a copy of which is annexed as  Annex  A,  that
      the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law in so far as  the  assessment  of
      exceptional circumstances for the purposes of  paragraph  398  of  the
      Immigration Rules is concerned; I set aside the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal in so far as it related to that decision. I  found  that
      the First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  law  in  its  findings  with
      regards to Article 3 and I did not set aside that element of the First-
      tier Tribunal decision.


   2. There then followed an application by OM to appeal my  'error  of  law
      decision' to the Court of Appeal. That application  was  heard  in  an
      oral hearing on 19th July 2016 and refused for reasons set out  in  an
      interlocutory decision promulgated on 10th August 2016 and reported as
      VOM (Error of law - when appealable) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 00410 (IAC)


   3. On 29th September 2016, relevant documents to  which  I  was  to  have
      regard were  identified  and  I  was  provided  with  two  bundles  of
      authorities and skeleton arguments. I did not hear  oral  evidence.  I
      heard submissions from both Mr Khubber and Ms Anderson and reserved my
      decision.

   4. On 27th October 2016 I gave directions that both parties had leave  to
      make written submission in the light of AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA  Civ
      1012. I made similar directions following judgment in Makhlouf  [2016]
      UKSC 59 and Hesham Ali [2016]  UKSC  60.  Both  parties  made  written
      submissions and I  have  taken  these  into  account  in  reaching  my
      decision.


   5. The essential submission by Mr Khubber is  that  the  refusal  of  the
      respondent to revoke the deportation order is a breach of OM  and  her
      children's rights under Article 8 because she meets Exception 2 (s117C
      (5) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  paragraph  399(a)
      Immigration  Rules)  and/or  the  public  interest  does  not  require
      deportation because of the  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
      above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 of s117C of the 2002 Act.


            Brief summary of immigration history and criminality of OM


   6. OM is a Nigerian Citizen born on 25th November  1970.  She  claims  to
      have arrived in the UK on 18th November 2003  travelling  on  her  own
      passport with child S who was born in Nigeria in July 2000.  There  is
      no record of her lawful entry. Child S has since returned  to  Nigeria
      on a date unspecified.


   7. On 24th November 2003, UKBA were informed that  S  had  received  non-
      accidental injuries in the UK; S became the subject of an interim care
      order on 3rd December 2003.

   8. On 29th January 2004 OM claimed asylum, such application being refused
      and her appeal against removal on asylum grounds was dismissed on 28th
      July 2004. No attempt was made by the SSHD to remove the appellant and
      she did not leave the UK.


   9. On 24th August 2004 OM was charged with inflicting an act  of  cruelty
      on child S and bailed to appear on 7th February 2005.  She  failed  to
      appear.


  10. On 14th July 2005 OM had a child Ma; Ma is now a British Citizen.


  11. On 27th September 2007 OM was remanded in custody having been  charged
      with possession of a false/improperly obtained identity  document  and
      on 12th December 2007 she was convicted and  sentenced  to  9  months'
      imprisonment.


  12. On 7th March 2008, the UKBA was informed that child Ma had become  the
      subject of an interim care order.


  13. OM was convicted of the  child  cruelty  offence  that  she  had  been
      charged with in 2004, on 7th April 2008 and sentenced  to  12  months'
      imprisonment on 21st July 2008 with a recommendation that  she  should
      be deported at the end of her sentence. She was also  sentenced  to  3
      months' imprisonment to run concurrently for the  earlier  failure  to
      answer bail.


  14. On 5th August 2008, a decision to make a deportation  order  was  made
      (s3(6) Immigration Act 1971);  her  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum
      grounds on 5th December 2008 but allowed on Article 8 grounds  on  the
      basis that she should not be removed from the UK pending resolution of
      the on-going care proceedings regarding child Ma.


  15. On 19th June 2009 OM had submitted further representations  on  asylum
      and human rights grounds. These were refused and there  then  followed
      judicial review proceedings challenging the refusal  of  the  UKBA  to
      treat the  representations  as  a  fresh  claim  under  paragraph  353
      Immigration Rules (and a claim relating to  her  detention).  On  24th
      February 2010 permission to apply in the judicial  review  proceedings
      was refused.


  16. On 31st August 2010 (after the  application  for  leave  to  apply  to
      revoke the Placement Order and for  contact  had  been  made  but  not
      decided) OM applied for the Facilitated Return  Scheme  to  return  to
      Nigeria. That was not processed because of the ongoing proceedings.


  17. On 25th November 2010, a deportation order was signed.


  18. On 7th December 2010, an application to revoke the  deportation  order
      together with a request for leave to remain was made. That application
      was refused and certified under s94 Nationality Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002 on 13th January 2011 as being clearly unfounded so  that  the
      appellant could only appeal after she had left the UK.


  19. On 4th December 2012, the certification was quashed in judicial review
      proceedings.


  20. Following submissions, the UKBA took a decision dated  26th  September
      2013 to refuse to revoke the deportation order for reasons set out  in
      the accompanying letter of the same date.


  21. OM's appeal against the decision to refuse to revoke  the  deportation
      order was dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  under
      Article 8 ECHR in a decision promulgated on 1st August 2014.


  22. For the reasons set out in the interim decision of the Upper  Tribunal
      dated 5th February 2016 a material error  of  law  was  found  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  the  decision  was  set
      aside in so far as paragraph 398 Immigration Rules was  concerned  but
      it was also concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  a
      material error of law in so far as its findings relating to Article  3
      ECHR are concerned.


            OM


  23. OM has three birth children: S, Ma and Z. S, date  of  birth  13  July
      2000, was the victim of the index offence. He was placed  with  foster
      carers after his emergency admission  to  hospital  on  22nd  November
      2003. He did not return to OM's  care  and  subsequently  returned  to
      Nigeria, it seems to his father.


  24. Ma was born on 14th July 2005. Her father is a Nigerian citizen who is
      now in Nigeria. Ma is now, following registration, a British  Citizen.
      She was placed in the care of the local authority  on  26th  September
      2007, aged just 2. See below for more details


  25. In November 2013 OM started living with Mr O  (Nigerian  citizen)  and
      his child Mi (born October 2004, Nigerian citizen), his child from  an
      earlier relationship; he then moved to hostel accommodation with child
      Mi and then they resumed living together with OM in mid-April 2014. Mr
      O and child Mi had discretionary leave to remain in the UK  until  7th
      July 2016. An out of time application for further leave to remain  has
      been submitted by him  and  Mi  but  there  is  no  decision  on  that
      application  at  the  moment.  Z  has  not  been  included   in   that
      application. OM and Mr O ceased living together either  on  1st  April
      2015  (according  to  the  chronology  provided  by  the   appellant's
      solicitors and report by M Rudnicka - senior  social  worker  -  dated
      19th September 2016) or in January  2016  (according  to  the  outline
      submissions on behalf of the appellant). Mi has lived with Mr O  since
      23/24 January 2016; OM has not seen her since then.


  26. 1st May 2014, child Z, of whom Mr O is the father, was born.


  27. OM gave evidence at her appeal against refusal of asylum heard on 14th
      July 2004. She was represented by counsel  instructed  by  experienced
      immigration solicitors. She claimed at the hearing that S  was  living
      with her although it seems that he had not lived with her  since  22nd
      November 2003. Her asylum claim was found to be neither plausible  nor
      credible. There was no evidence put to the Tribunal that she  had  any
      mental health problems.


  28. At her appeal against  the  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order,
      promulgated  on  5th  December  2008,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
      provided with medical evidence of OM's mental state but noted that the
      medical evidence was far from complete. Her appeal  was  dismissed  on
      asylum grounds and under paragraph 364 Immigration Rules  but  allowed
      on Article 8 grounds to the extent that  she  should  not  be  removed
      pending the resolution of care proceedings relating to Ma, then listed
      in the Family Court.


  29. Dr Shade Olajubu prepared a psychiatric report  for  the  purposes  of
      OM's sentencing at the request of Snaresbrook Crown Court. He had been
      actively involved in her treatment since his initial contact with  her
      at HMP Holloway on 6th February 2008. He  recorded  that  the  school,
      head teacher and teacher she identified as  being  implicated  in  the
      injuries caused to S did not exist and that she had given as her  home
      address, an address that did not exist. He  records  that  during  her
      care prior to  detention  she  had  failed  to  attend  mental  health
      appointments given to her. He  records  that  when  reviewed  on  15th
      January 2008 she appeared to believe that the  child  cruelty  charges
      against  her  had  been  dropped,  possibly   because   S   had   been
      'repatriated' to Nigeria. Supervised contact with Ma was also recorded
      as having resumed. He records that she said she pleaded guilty because
      that was what she was advised  to  do;  that  she  did  not  want  her
      daughter Ma taken permanently into care and wanted Ma cared for by her
      partner if she was not permitted to care for her. Dr Olajubu  assessed
      her fitness to plead and concluded there was

                  "nothing in her account of events, or  in  the  indictment
                  papers to suggest acute concerns about  her  mental  state
                  during the period in which the injuries are said  to  have
                  been inflicted, or subsequently at the hospital,  or  when
                  interviewed by the police.  I  note  that  [OM]  has  poor
                  coping mechanisms, within the context of  her  personality
                  difficulties.  It may be that her ability to  cope  during
                  the period of the alleged offences was adversely  affected
                  by her difficult psychosocial circumstances at  the  time,
                  resulting   in   affective   instability   and   impulsive
                  behaviours apparently directed at her  son.  However,  her
                  observed behaviour in prison appears to suggest that  risk
                  of harm is primarily directed towards the self, as opposed
                  to others at times of distress."

  30. Dr Olajubu records that during the interview  he  observed  that  "her
      condition appears to be grossly intact". He concludes that her overall
      presentation

                  "against a background of unstable mood is in keeping  with
                  an   Emotionally   Unstable   Personality   Disorder...the
                  presence of both impulsive and borderline  traits...likely
                  that during periods of extreme distress...also experiences
                  quasi-psychotic symptoms in keeping with this  personality
                  structure."

            He concluded that her mental illness or disorder was  not  such
            as to warrant treatment in the healthcare wing or  transfer  to
            hospital.


  31. Dr Katona interviewed OM for about two hours on 23rd  April  2009.  He
      agreed with Dr Olajubu's diagnosis of recurrent  depressive  disorder.
      He  concluded  that  in  his  view  she  had  the  capacity  to   give
      instructions but that her

                  "extreme   behavioural    responses    to    stress    and
                  disappointment mean that great care will need to be  taken
                  in  minimising  the  distress  she  might  experience   in
                  response to lengthy discussions and  (more  fundamentally)
                  of court appearances."

            He offered the view that transfer to hospital under s48  Mental
            Health Act 1983 would not be appropriate and her mental  health
            needs could be met within the community.


  32. Dr Katona interviewed OM again for about an  hour  on  16th  September
      2009 He concluded that her mental state had deteriorated  considerably
      since he last saw her and that she was experiencing considerable  side
      effects from the medication she was receiving. He expressed  the  view
      that OM would benefit from a s48 transfer and that  the  very  limited
      contact she was having with Ma was contributing to  the  deterioration
      in her mental state.


  33. On 10th October 2009 Dr Katona concluded  that  OM  was  incapable  of
      conducting proceedings; she was unable to understand the  implications
      of her possible removal to Nigeria but that she  may,  with  intensive
      treatment regain substantial improvement and that she was, at the date
      of his report, able to discuss her case at a very  simple  level  with
      her solicitors.


  34. On 27th February 2010 Dr Katona interviewed OM for about  1�  hrs  and
      concluded her health had  continued  to  deteriorate;  that  the  very
      limited contact she has with Ma was an important  contributor  to  the
      deterioration and recommended transfer under s48.


  35. In July 2010 Dr Katona referred to his assessment  on  10th  July  and
      stated that her mental state had changed  little  since  his  previous
      assessment of her capacity to conduct proceedings.


  36. On 26th September 2012 Dr Katona  stated  that  OM  was  incapable  of
      conducting proceedings relating to  judicial  reviews  of  immigration
      appeals  and  alleged  unlawful  detention;  that  she   had   limited
      understanding of her legal situation in relation to her  claim  to  be
      allowed to remain in the UK; that her prospects for improvement remain
      poor; that she has expressed the view that she wishes to remain in the
      UK and to have access to Ma.


  37. Dr Agnew-Davies, in her letter dated 20 January  2011  refers  to  the
      reduction in self harming incidents over the previous 6 months,  which
      were considered to be related to a six-session  cognitive  behavioural
      contract. She also expressed the view that

                  "geographical or psychological separation from [Ma]  would
                  almost  certainly  precipitate  a  suicide   attempt   and
                  heighten risk of further attempts".

  38. In her report dated 1st October 2012, Dr Agnew-Davies  refers  to  the
      losing of hope of continuing contact with her daughter (Ma) is a major
      risk factor of suicide for OM. She also refers to OM reporting to  her
      that she was the victim of serious abuse from the father of S and that
      a return to Nigeria would exacerbate her fear. She took the view  that
      to suggest the possibility of renewed contact with  S  would  put  her
      safety at great risk and exacerbate the risk of rapid deterioration in
      her mental health on return to Nigeria. Dr Agnew Davies also  stressed
      the loss of assistance of her support network would increase her acute
      fears.


  39. A further report by Dr Agnew-Davies (9th July 2014) records that OM is
      suffering  from  previously  undiagnosed  complex   PTSD,   that   her
      psychiatric profile was consistent with serious  and  sustained  prior
      sexual and physical abuse, that she did not consider OM would be  able
      to access adequate medical facilities in Nigeria, that if returned  to
      Nigeria  she  would  experience   further   trauma   and   significant
      deterioration in her mental health. The report is written whilst OM is
      living with Mr O and is predicated upon that continuing. Nevertheless,
      it records that the removal of OM to Nigeria either  with  or  without
      her child would be extremely serious and damaging to the mental health
      of both her and the child. In the latter part of the report Dr  Agnew-
      Davies refers to S and that reunion would be  unlikely  to  be  wholly
      positive even assuming it could occur. She refers  to  OM  being  ill-
      equipped to respond to questions asked by him about the separation and



                  "..should she find that he has been  harmed  in  any  way,
                  this is likely to precipitate a significant  deterioration
                  in  her  mental  health  as  her  fears  would  have  been
                  confirmed and she would not only become preoccupied by her
                  inability to protect  S  and  the  ensuing  harm  (as  she
                  already is) but is at risk of  catastrophizing  about  the
                  fate of her children in the UK".

  40. HHJ I Bing said

                  "...there  is  no  realistic  option  of  a  non-custodial
                  sentences. Even without those clear reports  a  persistent
                  abuse of a young child with a whip or a belt causing those
                  number of wheals  would  really  inevitably  mean  that  a
                  custodial sentence  would  have  to  be  passed.  This  is
                  because great pain and suffering  has  been  caused  to  a
                  young child.


                  I do take into account  the  troubled  history  that  you,
                  yourself, have had  and  of  course  have  regard  to  the
                  opinion  of  the  psychiatrist  that  you  suffer  from  a
                  recurrent depressive disorder and  an  emotional  unstable
                  personality disorder. I also have regard to the fact  that
                  you are apparently  a  good  and  loving  parent  to  your
                  younger child M..


                  ...having regard to the fact that there was a late plea of
                  guilty the sentence of the court on count 2 is 12  months'
                  imprisonment.


                  .....I also recommend, because it is not conducive to  the
                  public good that you remain in this country  such  is  the
                  seriousness of the offence, that you be deported."





            Child Mi and child Z


  41. The local authority evinced child protection concerns over  child  Mi.
      Mi was subject to a Child Protection plan under the category  risk  of
      physical abuse between 23rd December 2013 and 8th October 2015. Z  was
      subject to a child protection plan under the category risk of physical
      abuse between 20 January 2014 to 8 October  2015.   An  agreed  family
      plan was put in place that OM would never be alone with  either  child
      Mi or child Z or any other child. In July 2014, the  indications  from
      Coram Children's Legal Centre (OM's legal  advisors  during  the  care
      proceedings) were that there were no longer child protection  concerns
      but child Mi and child Z will remain subject  to  a  'child  in  need'
      plan.


  42. Between April 2015 and 23/24 January 2016 (after Mr O  had  moved  out
      but before he had adequate accommodation)  it  seems  that  OM  looked
      after both children. After 23/24 January 2016 Mi moved to live with Mr
      O and OM cared for Z alone.


  43. OM is the sole carer for child Z who  does  not  appear  to  have  any
      contact at all with her father. There is some reference in the  papers
      to Mr O asserting that he is not the father of Z.


  44. Although there was reference, by  a  social  worker,  to  OM  possibly
      applying for parental responsibility for Mi, she has made  no  attempt
      to do so and there was no evidence she had made any attempt to arrange
      to see Mi after January 2016.


        Child Ma


  45. On 25th June 2009, the  Principal  Registry  of  the  Family  Division
      ordered that child Ma be placed in the care  of  Tower  Hamlets  local
      authority and leave was given to place the  child  for  adoption.   In
      August 2010 OM applied to the Family  Court  for  leave  to  apply  to
      revoke  the  Placement  Order  on  child  Ma  and  for  contact;  that
      application was refused on 9th November 2010.


  46. On 8th December 2010 OM had a 'farewell' meeting  with  Ma.   Ma  was,
      however, not adopted and it has now been concluded that Ma will remain
      in long term foster care with her current foster  carers.  On  30  May
      2013, the family court ordered supervised contact between OM and Ma  4
      times a year.


  47. There has been intensive social work involvement with Ma who has  been
      in the care of the local authority since she  was  2  years  old.  The
      reports conclude that Ma is a bright, outgoing, well  established  and
      stable young girl with a loving relationship with her foster carer and
      who enjoys her contact with  OM.  The  expert  reports  refer  to  the
      difficulties that Ma will have if OM is deported and in particular  to
      what is described as her 'fractured'  background  which  could  easily
      result in instability - this child was removed from her  mother  at  a
      very young age, did not see her for some considerable time because she
      had been put for adoption and thought that her mother had in fact left
      the UK, was then reintroduced and is now having supervised contact  (6
      times a year since 9th April  2015  with  6-weekly  telephone  contact
      after 24th September 2015) with possibly an expectation  that  contact
      will become unsupervised eventually.


  48. Expert reports refer to the 'devastating effect' that OM's deportation
      would have on Ma and the extensive work that has done with this  child
      to ensure that she has been able to cope with  her  removal  from  her
      mother aged 2, subsequent lack of contact  and  then  re-emergence  of
      contact.


  49. The respondent asserted that there was 'letterbox contact' between Ma
      and her father; the applicant asserted that was not the case: there
      was a reference in the local authority records to her father wanting
      to send her things but there was no ongoing contact.

Legislative framework




  50. Part 5A Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  in  so  far  as
      relevant to this appellant reads as follows:


                  Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations


                  117A Application of this Part


                  (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is
                  required to determine whether a decision made under the
                  Immigration Acts-


                  (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                  family life under Article 8, and
                  (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.


                  (2) In considering the public interest question, the court
                  or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


                  (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and
                  (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.


                  (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question"
                  means the question of whether an interference with a
                  person's right to respect for private and family life is
                  justified under Article 8(2).


                  117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable
                  in all cases


                  (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
                  in the public interest.


                  (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                  interests of the economic well-being of the United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
                  who can speak English-


                  (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                  (b) are better able to integrate into society.


                  (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                  interests of the economic well-being of the United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                  persons-


                  (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                  (b) are better able to integrate into society.


                  (4) Little weight should be given to-


                  (a) a private life, or
                  (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


                  that is established by a person at a time when the person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


                  (5) Little weight should be given to a private life
                  established by a person at a time when the person's
                  immigration status is precarious.


                  (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to
                  deportation, the public interest does not require the
                  person's removal where-


                  (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
                  (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom.


                  117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases
                  involving foreign criminals


                  (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.


                  (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                  criminal, the greater is the public interest in
                  deportation of the criminal.


                  (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not
                  been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                  or more, the public interest requires C's deportation
                  unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.


                  (4) Exception 1 applies where-


                  (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,
                  (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and
                  (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.


                  (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and
                  subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a
                  genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh.


                  (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four
                  years, the public interest requires deportation unless
                  there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
                  those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.


                  (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                  taken into account where a court or tribunal is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                  to the extent that the reason for the decision was the
                  offence or offences for which the criminal has been
                  convicted.


                  117D Interpretation of this Part


                  (1) In this Part-


                      "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention
                  on Human Rights;


                      "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age
                  of 18 and who-
                      (a)    is a British citizen, or
                      (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a
                  continuous period of seven years or more;


                      "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
                      (a)    is a British citizen, or
                      (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within
                  the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section
                  33(2A) of that Act).


                  (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


                  (a) who is not a British citizen,
                  (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
                  offence, and
                  (c) who-


                  (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                  least 12 months,
                  (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                  serious harm, or
                  (iii) is a persistent offender.


                   .....


    Consideration


  51. OM submits she has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
      qualifying child and the effect of her deportation on the child  would
      be unduly harsh (s117C(5) 2002 Act and  paragraph  399(a)  Immigration
      Rules).She submits that if she did not meet these criteria  there  are
      very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
      paragraph 399(a) such that the deportation order should be revoked. OM
      relies, in particular, upon the separation from her child  Ma  and  Z,
      that this is reflected in  the  complex  and  lengthy  involvement  of
      social services in relation to contact between OM  and  Ma;  that  the
      family court concluded that it would be in the  best  interest  of  Ma
      that there be face to face contact and that the deportation of OM from
      the UK would undermine the careful structured contact  that  has  been
      facilitated and developed, to the  serious  detriment  of  Ma  in  the
      future.


  52. Relevant to the balancing exercise and to the weight to be attached to
      the public interest in deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  are  the
      nature and seriousness of the offence and the need  to  deter  foreign
      criminals from committing serious offences. The degree of the strength
      of public interest in deportation is relevant, and  although  it  will
      always be strong, in some cases it will be stronger than  others.  The
      risk of re-offending must be considered as does  the  need  to  ensure
      public confidence in the deportation process.

  53. OM arrived in the UK in 2003 and has never been lawfully present.  She
      has committed crimes of child cruelty and  fraud  and  absconded  from
      bail. It is accepted that she is suffering from mental illness and her
      mental health has deteriorated  as  time  has  gone  on.  It  Is  also
      accepted that her risk  of  re-offending  is  low  and  that  risk  of
      violence, such as it is, is more likely to be  self-  directed  rather
      than at anyone else.

  54. Although it was originally submitted by the Secretary of State that OM
      did not have a  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  Ma,  it  was
      conceded at the hearing  on  29th  September  2016  that  it  was  now
      accepted that she did. OM retains parental responsibility, shared with
      the local  authority.  That  responsibility  is  exercised  either  by
      consent or with the authority of the  family  court.  OM  cannot  take
      decisions relating to Ma's welfare, contact  arrangements  and  so  on
      without the agreement of the local  authority  or  the  order  of  the
      court. Although OM retains shared parental responsibility of Ma she is
      not, and has not been since Ma was aged 2,  her  primary  or  sole  or
      joint carer. Ma does not live with OM, has not done so since  she  was
      aged 2 and Ma is not financially or materially dependent upon OM. They
      have limited supervised contact. There is no suggestion that  Ma  will
      in the future return to live with OM. Of course, it  is  in  the  best
      interests of Ma that she continues to have the supervised contact with
      OM and telephone contact, as directed by the court who  reached  their
      decision on what those interests were in the context of  the  evidence
      before them and on the basis that  the  child's  best  interests  were
      paramount. The assessment of whether the effect on Ma would be  unduly
      harsh is informed by OM's offending - the more serious the  crime  the
      'harsher' must be the effect.


  55. The reports on Ma refer to the 'devastating effect' the deportation of
      OM will have on Ma. The reports do not say what that effect would  be.
      To date Ma has benefitted from the very good social support and foster
      care she has received. There is no suggestion that such support  would
      neither continue nor be provided  if  OM  were  to  be  deported.  The
      reports do not identify at all, other by  than  using  such  words  as
      'devastating', what it is anticipated would happen to Ma or how and in
      what way she would suffer. She has already sustained  interference  in
      her young life caused by the criminal actions of  her  mother.  It  is
      plain from the reports that the long-term foster carer with  whom  she
      now lives is the  stable  basis  of  her  emotional  as  well  as  her
      material, financial and physical  life.  She  visits  her  mother  and
      spends some supervised time with her. The evidence about those  visits
      includes requests by OM for the child to behave in a particular way or
      arrange her appearance in a manner  that  she  considers  appropriate.
      Whether that is appreciated or accepted by the child is  difficult  to
      say from the evidence but there is little indication that Ma wishes to
      have a different type of relationship with OM other  than  visits.  It
      appears from the evidence that all  of  Ma's  material  and  financial
      needs are met by her foster carer. There is no indication that contact
      by telephone would cease or that Ma would be prevented  from  visiting
      OM in Nigeria. Ma has already travelled widely with her  foster  carer
      and  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  local  authority  would  not
      facilitate travel by Ma to Nigeria in a similar fashion for supervised
      contact - albeit it may  not  be  in  the  same  format  as  currently
      undertaken. Although OM refers to  the  need  for  Ma  to  retain  and
      develop  her  cultural  identity,  it  is  not  apparent   that   such
      development is not occurring in the absence of OM during the extensive
      time that OM is not and has not been with Ma.  The  awareness  of  the
      local authority and Ma's foster carers of the need  to  enable  Ma  to
      explore her identity is not in doubt and there was no suggestion  that
      such needs were not being facilitated now  or  would  not  be  in  the
      future. The suggestion in the evidence before me that OM wishes to  be
      the person who can provide this is plainly understandable and a matter
      to be considered but there is no evidence that Ma is not receiving the
      tools she requires either during OM's absence from her life on a  day-
      to-day basis or would be deprived of such assistance in the future.


  56. It  was  submitted  that  OM's  mental  health  would  deteriorate  on
      deportation to Nigeria and she would  no  longer  have  the  necessary
      support and this would itself interfere with her ability  to  maintain
      contact with Ma. The evidence to this effect  is  limited  to  reports
      from the experts that this is what they consider would happen. On  the
      other hand, no consideration appears to have been given to the  extent
      or possibility that other  support  networks  could  be  organised  or
      encouraged. OM appears to have managed  over  the  last  13  years  to
      obtain increasing levels of support as she needs it. There is  nothing
      to suggest that Social  Services,  who  are  aware  of  the  telephone
      contact that currently takes place,  would  not  facilitate  continued
      contact. Ma is aware of her Nigerian heritage and whilst of course  it
      is the case that awareness of  that  heritage  is  very  important  it
      cannot seriously be suggested that a meeting with OM every  couple  of
      months is the only way in which this can be  maintained.  Ma's  foster
      mother and social services are very aware of the need for Ma to retain
      and develop her cultural identity.

  57. Whilst of course it must be the case that the deportation of  OM  will
      have an effect on Ma - she will no longer have the 6 supervised visits
      per year - it cannot be said, based on the evidence  before  me,  that
      the absence of what is in effect one  visit  every  couple  of  months
      would be unduly harsh. It cannot even be said that it would be  harsh.
      This child went many months without seeing OM and although there was a
      'farewell' meeting which then ceased to  be  a  farewell  meeting  and
      there has now been further contact, the removal of the limited contact
      that exists when considered in the context of the overall stability of
      her life and the emotional and material care provided  by  the  foster
      carer and social services clearly does not justify a finding that  the
      effect of OM's deportation would be harsh. It is to be  recalled  that
      OM was convicted of serious child cruelty offences against  her  young
      son as well as of document fraud offences.

  58. The deportation of OM would also likely result in the cessation of bi-
      monthly contact between Ma and her half-sister Z. It was not submitted
      that Z would remain in the UK. It  is  not  clear  from  the  evidence
      before me whether Z accompanies OM on all the contact visits  or  what
      the nature of the relationship is other than there being reference  in
      the expert reports  to  the  development  of  a  relationship.  Social
      Services will be aware of the relationship between Z  and  Ma  and  of
      course as they facilitate visits for Ma then so Ma  will  develop  her
      relationship with Z. A relationship can develop with Z from visits  by
      Ma to Nigeria; obviously different to that which would develop through
      6 supervised visits a year but nonetheless a relationship. There is no
      suggestion in the evidence that one type of relationship  is  less  or
      more harmful compared to another. Ma would not be living with Z and OM
      in any event and thus the relationship  would  be  one  consisting  of
      contact rather than day-to-day living. The age  gap  is  not  such  as
      would be likely to result in any particularly close  relationship  for
      many years to come.

  59. Dr Agnew Davies refers to OM's anxiety about  re-establishing  contact
      with S and her fear that he would have come to harm, although it  must
      be remembered that OM was convicted of a child  cruelty  offence  with
      one offence to remain on file. It is not evident from Dr Agnew Davies'
      reports whether she has taken account in her consideration of  Ma  and
      the effect of separation, whether Ma is  aware  that  her  mother  was
      convicted of a child cruelty offence against her half- brother. Nor is
      it  apparent  from  the  social  work  reports  of   the   unspecified
      'devastating effect' that separation would cause whether Ma  is  aware
      of the conviction and if she were what effect that would have  on  her
      in terms of her future relationship with OM. It is not speculation  to
      suppose that she is likely to ask, at some time, why she does not live
      with her mother.

  60. OM was convicted of serious child cruelty against a young  child.  She
      has been in the UK unlawfully for the whole of her  time  in  the  UK,
      some time of which she spent absconding from bail. She  has  committed
      document fraud. The public interest in her deportation given not  only
      the length of her sentence but also the nature  of  the  offences  for
      which she has been convicted, is high. As against this is  the  effect
      of her deportation on Ma, the child Z leaving the UK with her. She has
      no meaningful relationship with the child Mi or her former partner. As
      set out above, it cannot be said that the effect on Ma will be  harsh,
      let alone unduly harsh. There  can  be  continued  telephone  contact.
      Although there was no evidence that visits by Ma to her  mother  could
      be facilitated in the future, there was no evidence  they  could  not.
      There was passing reference to OM having received damages for unlawful
      imprisonment which may assist financially but I have  not  taken  that
      into account in reaching my decision, the detail and amount being  not
      disclosed in these proceedings.

        61. Lord Neuberger said in Hesham Ali:

                  Sections 32 and 33 make clear Parliament's view that there
                  is a strong public interest in the deportation of  foreign
                  nationals who have committed serious  offences,  and  that
                  the procedures for their deportation should be expeditious
                  and effective. The strength of  that  public  interest  is
                  reflected in Laws LJ's observation that for a claim  under
                  article 8 of the ECHR to  prevail,  it  must  be  "a  very
                  strong claim indeed": SS (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State
                  for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550; [2014] 1  WLR
                  998, para 54.


                  50. In summary, therefore, the tribunal  carries  out  its
                  task on the basis of the facts as it finds them to  be  on
                  the evidence before it, and  the  law  as  established  by
                  statute and case law. Ultimately, it has to decide whether
                  deportation is proportionate in the particular case before
                  it, balancing the strength of the public interest  in  the
                  deportation of the offender against the impact on  private
                  and family life. In doing so, it should  give  appropriate
                  weight  to  Parliament's  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
                  assessments of the strength of the general public interest
                  in the deportation of foreign offenders, as  explained  in
                  paras 14, 37-38  and  46  above,  and  also  consider  all
                  factors relevant to the specific  case  in  question.  The
                  critical issue for the tribunal will generally be whether,
                  giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest
                  in the deportation of the offender in the case before  it,
                  the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.
                  In general, only a claim which is  very  strong  indeed  -
                  very compelling, as it was put  in  MF  (Nigeria)  -  will
                  succeed.

  62. Taking all the above matters into account I am satisfied that although
      OM has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  Ma,  a  qualifying
      child, the effect of her deportation  upon  Ma  would  not  be  unduly
      harsh. OM does not meet Exception 2, s117C Nationality Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002.


  63. I have also considered whether there are very compelling circumstances
      that could result in OM not  being  deported.  In  particular  I  have
      considered OM's mental health and the detailed evidence from  the  two
      psychiatrists and Dr Agnew Davies. I have given  particular  attention
      to the opinion that OM needs the extensive  support  network  she  has
      been able to establish in the UK,  the  risks  of  self-harm  and  the
      deterioration in her mental health. I note that there are  psychiatric
      services available in Nigeria. Her support network in the UK  is  very
      strong. Given the extensive and detailed support they have given it is
      unlikely that they will simply abandon her. Even though there may  not
      face-to-face communication to the extent there is at  present,  it  is
      difficult to conceive of a future scenario where she would not be able
      to be in contact with the various friends and access the  support  she
      has acquired. It may not be of the same nature as  exists  at  present
      but it would  exist.  There  are  psychiatric  services  available  in
      Nigeria and her psychiatric needs do not meet the Article 3 threshold.
      That is not to say that such a threshold must  be  met  to  amount  to
      compelling circumstances preventing deportation, but  the  facts  that
      there are such services available, that she would be able to  maintain
      contact with her friends and supporters when considered in the context
      of  her  criminality  and  lengthy   unlawful   residence   they   are
      insufficient to amount to circumstances such as to render  deportation
      unlawful. In reaching this conclusion I have also borne in  mind  that
      she would be looking after her young daughter Z. There is no  evidence
      that she is unable to care adequately for Z and  the  reports  do  not
      lead to a conclusion that  Z  would  suffer  unduly  accompanying  her
      mother.


  64. I am satisfied that there are no very compelling circumstances overall
      such as would prevent OM's deportation.


  65. Although paragraph 398 Immigration Rules is not  replicated  in  s117C
      2002 Act, I have  nevertheless  considered  this  in  the  context  of
      Article 8. S117C is not exclusive. On the facts I have found I am  not
      satisfied that there are very compelling circumstances;  OM  does  not
      meet the Rules. This informs my  assessment  under  Article  8.  I  am
      satisfied that the deportation of OM would not breach  her  Article  8
      rights; her appeal against the refusal to revoke the deportation order
      is dismissed.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the Article 8 decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it


                                        Date 21st December 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
