

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02158/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th March & 4th April 2014                 |On 10th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                            MR VICTOR UCHE ANUKAM


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (5th March 2014) & Mr G Brown (4th April
                  2014) (instructed by T M Fortis Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Miss C Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Respondent,  with
       permission, against  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (Judge Cruthers and Dr  J  O  De  Barros)  who  in  a  determination
       promulgated on 21st January  2014  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
       against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him to Nigeria.


    2. Although the Secretary of  State  is  the  Appellant  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal, for ease of understanding and continuity I shall  continue
       to refer to Mr Anukam as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as
       the Respondent.


    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons for
       allowing the appeal given the numerous  weighty  credibility  issues
       found against the Appellant. The matter of whether or not the First-
       tier Tribunal had made an error of law and if so whether and to what
       extent the determination should be set aside came before me  on  5th
       March 2014 when the Appellant was represented by Ms Patel.


    4. Miss Johnstone made submissions relying  upon  the  grounds  and  in
       particular that the decision was inadequately reasoned. She  pointed
       out that throughout the  determination  adverse  credibility  issues
       were taken against the Appellant but  then  those  matters  did  not
       appear to have been taken into account when the Tribunal allowed the
       appeal. Ms Patel sought to defend the  determination  on  the  basis
       that any errors were not material and the weight to be  attached  to
       pieces of evidence was a matter for the Tribunal.  She  argued  that
       the Respondent was simply disagreeing with the First-tier Tribunal's
       conclusions and taking the determination as  a  whole  the  findings
       were adequately reasoned.


    5. I found the determination to be tainted by material  error  of  law.
       The Tribunal did not consider the evidence contained in  the  police
       report and despite a considerable amount of the determination  being
       taken up with serious adverse credibility findings, the finding that
       the Appellant is indeed gay is contained in one brief paragraph [15]
       and unreasoned. Given that his sexuality is a major  factor  in  the
       appeal the lack of reasoning surrounding that finding  goes  to  the
       core of the claim and accordingly I set aside the  determination  in
       its entirety.


    6. Having set aside the determination I indicated  that  in  accordance
       with Principal Resident Judge Southern's directions I would  proceed
       to rehear the appeal. However,  contrary  to  those  directions  the
       Appellant's solicitors had thought  it  appropriate  to  inform  the
       various witnesses that they need not attend. I  was  thus  prevented
       from rehearing the appeal on 5th  March  2014  and  adjourned  to  a
       future  date.  Such  behaviour  by  solicitors   is   reprehensible.
       Directions are given for a reason.  If the solicitors thought  there
       was a good reason why the rehearing, if there was to be one,  should
       be on another  day  they  should  have  made  that  known  to  Judge
       Southern. Be that as it may, it was not the Appellant's or Counsel's
       fault and I do not hold it against them.


    7. Thus, the matter came before me on 4th April 2014. On that  occasion
       the Appellant was represented by Mr Brown. As credibility is at  the
       heart of this case I reheard the appeal in its entirety.  I  pointed
       out that although this was a full rehearing, the oral evidence given
       to the First-tier Tribunal remained relevant and I caused copies  of
       Judge  Cruthers'  Record  of  Proceedings  to  be  given   to   both
       representatives.  There has been no challenge to the accuracy of the
       evidence as recorded in the First-tier Tribunal determination.


    8. So far as documentary evidence is concerned I had the original  Home
       Office bundle with Part O of that bundle provided separately  as  it
       was missing from my bundle (I subsequently found a loose copy in the
       file, presumably handed to the First-tier Tribunal) I  also  had  an
       Annex A and B to the Home Office bundle, served on 17th  March  2014
       and I had the original Appellant's bundle comprising a total of  223
       pages.


    9. Given the complex history of this appeal it is  appropriate  to  set
       the background out in full.


   10. The Appellant was born in Nigeria on 20th December 1977. He  applied
       for and was issued with a visa as a family  visitor  on  11th  April
       2005 and apparently entered the UK on 4th June 2005. That  visa  was
       valid for six months until October 2005.  The  Appellant  overstayed
       and remained in the UK.  On 14th  December  2005  he  submitted,  by
       post, an application to the Entry Clearance Officer in  Nigeria  for
       another visit visa, suggesting in the application form that  he  was
       in Nigeria at the time.


   11. On 19th January 2006 the Appellant was arrested at a bank  where  he
       was attempting to open  a  bank  account  using  a  forged  Nigerian
       passport containing a forged ILR stamp. On 24th February 2006  as  a
       result of his possession of a false instrument with  intent  he  was
       convicted and sentenced to 8 months imprisonment.


   12. The Entry Clearance Officer had asked the Appellant to attend for an
       interview in connection with the  visit  visa  application  on  26th
       January 2006.  Obviously he did  not  attend.  The  Entry  Clearance
       Officer refused the application on 28th May 2006 because he believed
       the Appellant to be illegally in the UK and impounded his passport.


   13. On 8th June 2006 the Appellant claimed asylum on the basis  that  he
       was a homosexual and would be at risk in Nigeria.


   14. On 13th June 2006 a deportation notice was issued on  the  basis  of
       his conviction.


   15. On  31st  January  2007  the  Appellant  had  his  asylum  screening
       interview.


   16. On 2nd April 2008 the Appellant married Lisette Anastacia Vrutall, a
       Dutch national resident in the UK.


   17.  On  30th  July  2008  the  Appellant  had  his  substantive  asylum
       interview.
   18. On 6th November 2008 the Appellant applied for an EEA residence card
       as the spouse of Lisette Anastacia Vrutall using a false passport in
       a different name.


   19. On 16th June 2009 his asylum claim was refused, a  decision  against
       which the Appellant lodged a Notice of Appeal.


   20. In light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HJ (Iran) [2009]  EWCA
       Civ 172 UKBA withdrew the asylum  decision  at  a  hearing  on  28th
       October 2009. At the same time it was accepted  that  the  Appellant
       had not been served with the deportation decision.

   21. On 17th September 2010  the  Appellant's  application  for  the  EEA
       residence card was refused and on  17th  December  2010  at  Croydon
       Crown   Court   he   was   convicted   of   possession/control    of
       false/improperly obtained ID cards, possessing apparatus for  making
       false ID cards and also conspiracy to facilitate the commission of a
       breach of immigration law. The latter was because his marriage was a
       sham marriage.  He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 9 months  and
       15 months imprisonment to be served consecutively making a total  of
       24 months imprisonment.


   22. On 2nd February 2011 the Appellant was informed of his liability for
       automatic deportation under the UK Borders Act  2007.  He  completed
       the questionnaire and statement and in  July  2011  asked  that  his
       partner Naomi Miki Shika and  their  two  children  Chizara  Ofentse
       Anukam and Kenechi Neo Anukam  be  included  as  dependents  on  his
       asylum claim.


   23. The Appellant was again interviewed in connection  with  his  asylum
       claim on 6th June 2012.


   24. On 29th  January  2013  a  deportation  order  was  signed  and  the
       Appellant served with it on 5th March 2013.


   25. Those decisions were subsequently  withdrawn  and  the  decision  to
       deport the Appellant which is the subject of this appeal  was  taken
       on 11th October 2013.


   26. In essence the Respondent does not accept the Appellant is a gay man
       and thus would not be at risk  on  return  to  Nigeria.  It  is  the
       Appellant's case he is a gay man who lives openly as a  gay  man  in
       the UK but will be prevented from doing so for fear  of  persecution
       on return to Nigeria. He also claims that to return him would  be  a
       breach of Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR as  he  is  HIV+  as  is  his
       partner and that his partner and the children cannot go with him  to
       Nigeria, his partner being a South African national.


   27. What is absent from the chronology set out above is the  Appellant's
       relationship  with  his  partner,  Ms  Shika.  Their  statements  of
       evidence and their oral evidence indicate that they met in 2007  and
       fairly shortly after decided to have a child together.  Their  first
       child, a daughter was born on 28th August 2008. Their second  child,
       a boy, was born on 16th  July  2010.  I  was  told  that  the  first
       occasion the family lived together was when they moved to  Wigan  in
       2012. They continue to reside at the same address.


   28. It is the Appellant's case that he "commenced being gay  around  the
       age of 16" with  one  of  his  roommates  at  boarding  school.  The
       Appellant would sneak into the other  boy's  bed  when  their  other
       roommates were asleep  and  they  would  commit  sexual  acts.  This
       resulted in fellow students turning against them, being  jealous  of
       their friendship, verbally abusing them and accusing them  of  being
       gay. They were also both physically attacked by other students.


   29. There was one specific incident that the Appellant  relies  upon  in
       1996. The Appellant was violently attacked by a  gang  of  four  men
       from his school after he refused to confirm or deny questions  about
       his sexuality. He sustained internal  bleeding  to  his  stomach,  a
       bruise to his head and a cut to his right knee and was left  at  the
       scene to die. He was taken to the  school  hospital  by  a  passerby
       where he was treated for his injuries and given painkillers. He  had
       stitches in his knee and was hospitalised for a  week  and  a  half.
       That is his account as  set  out  at  paragraph  6  in  his  witness
       statement. At paragraph 7 of his statement the Appellant  says  that
       he reported the incident to the police and  a  copy  of  the  police
       report is contained in the bundle. He did not give the names of  his
       attackers as they had threatened him.  He and his  friend  continued
       their relationship, only less  frequently  than  before,  until  his
       parents took him out of boarding school after the attack.


   30. The Appellant's next gay relationship was with a fellow student when
       he was at university. They enjoyed a sexual relationship about which
       the Appellant gives graphic details in his statement. One night,  on
       his way back to his accommodation from an evening class, as  a  joke
       he put an arm round  a  friend's  shoulder  but  the  friend  became
       extremely angry and accused  him  of  indecently  touching  him.  He
       started to shout and punched him. Two days later  that  same  friend
       came with a gang of his own friends to the Appellant's accommodation
       armed with knives and machetes and banged on the door and  tried  to
       force their way in. The Appellant jumped through a back  window  but
       his would-be assailants saw him and gave chase. The Appellant jumped
       over a fence but injured his legs on iron bars on  the  other  side.
       Neighbours called paramedics and he was taken to the  local  village
       hospital where he remained for four days receiving treatment for his
       injuries.


   31. After that incident the Appellant realised he could  not  remain  in
       Nigeria as a gay man. He contacted his aunt Christina in the UK  and
       explained to her what was happening. She was aware of his sexuality.
       By this time he had graduated  from  university  with  a  degree  in
       electrical and electronic engineering.


   32. With his aunt's agreement the Appellant applied for and was  granted
       a visa to visit her in the UK and he duly entered the UK.


   33. In the UK he had enjoyed a sexual relationship  with  a  man  called
       Dipesh in 2005 but that relationship was short lived.


   34. In 2007 the Appellant met Michael Todecilla.  He  never  lived  with
       Michael but they spent a lot of  time  together  and  had  a  sexual
       relationship. That  relationship  continued  until  the  Appellant's
       second period of imprisonment.


    Findings


   35. When considering Deportation appeals MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
       1192 and paragraphs 397- 399 of the Immigration Rules are relevant.


   36. Paragraph 397 states:-


                    i) "A deportation order will not be made if the person's
                       removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to
                       the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention  or
                       the Human Rights Convention. Where deportation  would
                       not be contrary to these obligations, it will only be
                       exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
                       deportation is outweighed."




   37. In this case the Appellant pleads that paragraph 397 applies to  him
       because he is a Refugee on account of his sexuality.  I  first  have
       to decide if he is gay as claimed and if so whether he would  be  at
       risk on return for that reason.


   38. There are a number of significant difficulties with the  Appellant's
       claim which I now deal with.


   39. I  am  fully  aware  that  one  cannot  assess  sexuality  based  on
       appearance and demeanour. I  am  also  fully  aware  that  intrusive
       questioning about sexual practices is of no assistance  even  though
       the Appellant in this case has given some  graphic  details  in  his
       statement. Sexuality is something that is  enormously  difficult  to
       prove. I have in mind the contents of a document from a  P  McCusker
       (page 104 of the Appellant's bundle) pointing that out. However,  in
       this case the Appellant has fallen a long way short of crossing even
       the very low threshold applicable in an asylum appeal. As I indicate
       below there is ample evidence that, if genuine he ought to have been
       able to adduce but  did  not  and  a  total  absence  of  persuasive
       evidence that he is gay. That, taken with the fact that he is living
       in a household with a woman he has described as his partner and  two
       young  children,  leads  me  to  conclude  that  this  Appellant  is
       heterosexual and claiming to be gay only to advance a  false  asylum
       claim in the same way as he has previously made false  applications,
       as noted earlier in this determination.


   40. The Appellant uses an odd expression in his statement saying that he
       "commenced being gay around the age of 16." It is generally accepted
       that a person is either gay or is not;  it  is  not  something  that
       starts or stops. However, I will give the Appellant the  benefit  of
       the doubt and assume that he meant that he became sexually active at
       that age or engaged in sexual experimentation.


   41. The Appellant claims that he was at boarding school  when  he  first
       had a sexual relationship with another student.   According  to  the
       Appellant he would share his friend's bed in the same room where two
       other young men slept.  That, if true, was extraordinarily reckless.
        These were  not  children,  but  young  men.   In  1996,  when  the
       Appellant says he was attacked he was 18 or 19. I simply do not find
       it credible that they would have taken such risks, knowing as he did
       the prevailing hostility towards homosexuality.


   42. By way of corroboration, the Appellant provided a police report that
       he said his uncle obtained from the police station. The authenticity
       of the police report has  not  been  expressly  challenged.  However
       there  are  difficulties  with  it  nevertheless.  In  his   witness
       statement the Appellant says that the incident took  place  in  1996
       and that he reported the matter to the police yet the police  report
       makes clear that the incident took  place  in  March  1995  and  the
       person reporting it to the police was the  Appellant's  father,  not
       the Appellant. The police  report  indicates  that  the  Appellant's
       father said that students used juju (magic) on his son  and  dragged
       him into uncompleted  buildings  and  started  beating  him  causing
       internal injuries to his stomach and a cut to his  right  knee.  The
       report indicates that the identity of the  assailants  was  unknown.
       The Appellant's account and that recorded by  the  police  therefore
       differ in significant detail. The Appellant is absolutely  clear  in
       his witness statement that it was he who reported  the  incident  to
       the police; even saying that he did not  give  the  names  of  those
       responsible for the beating because they had threatened to kill  him
       if he disclosed the details.  The Appellant  made  no  reference  in
       his witness statement to juju.


   43.  Those  very  significant  discrepancies  damage   the   Appellant's
       credibility.


   44. While superficially capable of corroborating the Appellant's  claim,
       on closer evaluation (to the lower standard) the report is  evidence
       only that the Appellant's father made a complaint to the police that
       his son had been attacked by unknown assailants in March 1995.  That
       could have been for any number of motives.


   45. The Appellant has claimed that his father did  not  know  about  his
       sexuality.  If, as  the  Appellant  claims,  he  underwent  frequent
       taunts at school about it, it is  not  credible  that  such  rumours
       would not have come to the attention of the school and his  parents,
       given that this was a boarding school being privately funded.


   46. The Appellant says that he had another  active  sexual  relationship
       with a man whilst at university and  he  describes,  in  detail,  an
       incident when he says he was attacked.  As  corroboration  for  that
       attack the Appellant called, as a witness, Mr  Dennis Ukpanwanne. He
       filed a witness statement, which he adopted as his oral evidence and
       was cross-examined. In his statement the witness says that he was at
       university with the Appellant and they  were  friends.  He  suggests
       that he thought it curious that throughout his  time  at  university
       the Appellant did not have a girlfriend and he  suspected  therefore
       that he was gay.  He and others all accused  him  of  sleeping  with
       another man. He then describes the incident of the attack.  He  says
       that on that particular day in 2004 he was returning from doing  his
       laundry when he noticed an odd atmosphere. He asked a few neighbours
       what was going on and was told that the Appellant had been  attacked
       by a group of armed men. "Rumour had it that he  was  caught  having
       sex with another male and that he might have died from  the  attack.
       But a few hours later, we found out that  he  was  still  alive  and
       responding well to treatment." He described how, later  that  night,
       the Appellant was brought back to his house limping and that he  and
       a few other neighbours went to check on him to see how he was.


   47. That is in stark contrast to the Appellant's own account that he was
       in hospital for four days.  That  contradictory  evidence  seriously
       damages the credibility of the Appellant's account.


   48. The credibility of that claim is further damaged by the  Appellant's
       claim that  despite  his  attackers  being  armed  with  knives  and
       machetes and determined to force their  way  into  his  property  to
       cause him harm and giving chase when they saw him  climb  through  a
       window, they gave up after he jumped over a fence.  They  must  have
       done because he was lying there with injured legs until assisted  by
       neighbours and taken  to  hospital.  It  makes  no  sense  that  his
       pursuers would have given up so easily.


   49. The differences in the accounts and its inherent lack of credibility
       lead me to conclude that it did not take  place.  In  reaching  that
       conclusion I am fully aware of and take into account  the  objective
       and background evidence relating to gay men in Nigeria.


   50. It is remarkable that despite these attacks and abuse the  Appellant
       was able to complete both his secondary and university education  in
       Nigeria before applying for leave to enter the UK.


   51. With regard to the Appellant's claimed  relationship  with  Michael;
       this was said to be a long-standing  and  serious  relationship  but
       there is virtually no evidence to confirm there was  a  relationship
       at all. The Appellant says in his  witness  statement  that  Michael
       wrote a statement and produced copies of his  passport  and  various
       bills which he gave to  the  Appellant's  solicitors  for  the  2009
       appeal. The Secretary of State has produced the short statement that
       Michael produced for that hearing but there  are  no  identification
       documents.  Michael did not give evidence before me  or  the  First-
       tier Tribunal; I was told because the relationship is over. Whilst I
       appreciate the Appellant is now with a different firm of solicitors,
       there is no reason why those various  documents,  if  they  existed,
       could not have been obtained and included in  the  papers  for  this
       appeal and yet they were not.


   52. Despite the claimed importance in  his  life  to  the  Appellant  of
       Michael there is not one single photograph of him or of him with the
       Appellant. The Appellant has claimed  that  he  does  not  like  his
       photograph being taken but  that  reservation  apparently  does  not
       apply to photographs of him with his children, of  which  there  are
       several in the bundle.


   53. I am told that Michael  accompanied  the  Appellant  to  the  appeal
       hearing in 2009 when the decision was withdrawn but again  there  is
       no evidence to corroborate that save the assertions of the Appellant
       and his uncle. This leads me to doubt that the Appellant   was  ever
       in a relationship with Michael as he claims, despite the evidence of
       Ms Shika and the Appellant's uncle.


   54. The Appellant says that he is an active homosexual and openly gay in
       the UK. However, during his asylum interview he was asked about  his
       life as a gay man in the UK and was asked if  he  attended  any  gay
       clubs or venues. He was able to name hardly any and those he did was
       unable to say where they other than in the vaguest terms  that  they
       were in the west end of London. He was unable  to  specify  any  gay
       websites. Perhaps not every gay man  may  wish  to  visit  clubs  or
       websites but it is generally considered to be one of the  advantages
       of a free society.


   55. If the Appellant is, as claimed, living an active life as a gay  man
       in the UK and living openly as a gay man then  he  would  have  been
       able to produce  numerous  witnesses  to  that  effect,  neighbours,
       friends from the gay community  and  he  would  have  been  able  to
       display knowledge of the gay community at his asylum interview.  The
       absence of evidence severely damages the credibility of his claim.


   56. In saying this I have taken further account of the evidence  of  the
       Appellant's partner, Ms Shika and that of his uncle. Ms Shika made a
       statement and gave oral evidence. Her evidence was that they met  in
       June 2007. When they met she told him that she was South African and
       had only been in the UK  a  short  time  and  they  exchanged  phone
       numbers. They then started to meet up and talked about their love of
       children. She says the Appellant asked her if she was interested  in
       having children with him and she said she was  very  interested  and
       they therefore commenced a sexual relationship. She became  pregnant
       in December 2007 and  she  said  the  Appellant  was  delighted.  He
       accompanied her to the various medical appointments  and  after  the
       birth of  the  first  child,  a  girl,  they  continued  with  their
       relationship until she became  pregnant  with  her  son.  After  she
       conceived she said they ceased their sexual relationship.


   57. She then described an incident concerning  the  Appellant's  friend,
       Michael with whom the Appellant spent a lot  of  time.  She  recalls
       being suspicious that he had another girlfriend and was horrified to
       see the Appellant and Michael kissing passionately in a car  outside
       her house. She describes checking his mobile phone and seeing a  lot
       of photographs of the two of them and she then describes challenging
       the Appellant  who  confirmed  that  he  was  gay,  had  never  been
       interested in her and just wanted a child.


   58. When the  Appellant  was  released  from  prison,  because  she  was
       struggling with the children, according to her, it was  agreed  that
       he would include her and the  children  as  his  dependents  on  his
       asylum claim.  This would mean  that  the  family  would  have  NASS
       support and accommodation and as a result they  all  live  together.
       She said that he is fully committed as a father to the children  but
       they have no relationship together.


   59. In contrast the Appellant in his oral evidence said  that  Ms  Shika
       had never met Michael but her evidence was that she had met him many
       times.


   60. The Appellant was unable to recall  whether  he  and  Ms  Shika  had
       discussed their status in the UK.  He did not think he had told  her
       about his sham marriage.  He did not  know  if  she  had  ever  been
       married (like him she was also convicted of  entering  into  a  sham
       marriage). He was unable  to  say  why  she  was  not  mentioned  or
       involved in his 2009 appeal when she had had his child by then.


   61. I approach Miss Shika's evidence with considerable caution. She  has
       everything to gain by being believed  and  by  the  Appellant  being
       successful in his asylum claim. She is a South African National  who
       has no right to be in the United Kingdom and indeed  has  also  been
       convicted of entering into a sham marriage with an EEA national  and
       attempting to obtain a residence  card  through  that.  Her  honesty
       therefore has been proven to be lacking. If, as has been  suggested,
       she is simply a surrogate mother for  the  Appellant,  then  it  was
       rather an unusual way to go about surrogacy.  They  were  apparently
       having a normal sexual relationship for  a  considerable  period  of
       time and I have grave doubts that this has in truth ceased.


   62. The Appellant's demonstrable continued commitment to  Ms  Shika,  as
       seen in the fact that they all live together, that he has made her a
       dependent on his asylum claim and the length of time that they  have
       had, even on their own dubious evidence, a sexual relationship leads
       me to find that they  are  in  truth  a  couple  with  two  children
       together. The absence of any reliable evidence about  Michael  leads
       me to doubt that that was ever a relationship.


   63. I also find it highly significant that  when  asked  at  a  previous
       hearing whether he was homosexual  or  bisexual  the  Appellant  was
       adamant that he was homosexual. Again that does not ring true  given
       the nature of his relationship, even on his own  evidence,  with  Ms
       Shika.


   64. It is also significant that the first time he claimed to be gay  was
       in 2006 after being convicted  of  a  criminal  offence.  I  do  not
       believe that he was unaware that a claim of homosexuality could give
       rise to a claim for asylum. He is clearly knowledgeable about  means
       of entry to the UK because he had already applied for one visit visa
       and sought to apply for a second.


   65. Furthermore,  the  Appellant  has  consistently  displayed  a  total
       absence of honesty. He has been convicted of  fraudulent  use  of  a
       passport. When asked about that he prevaricated. He was asked why he
       was opening a bank account and whether it was for wages to  be  paid
       and he said it was not.  He said he needed it so that he  could  pay
       college fees by direct debit. He said that the  college  would  only
       accept payment from him; they would not accept it  from  his  uncle.
       That is wholly incredible.


   66. When asked about the false passport he said  that  it  was  not  the
       passport that was false, rather it was the  stamp  in  it.  He  then
       acknowledged after a question from me that the  passport  must  have
       been false because his own passport had been sent to the Embassy  in
       Nigeria. He initially claimed not be able to remember. He could  not
       remember how he got that passport or how much he paid for it.  I  do
       not believe him.


   67. With regard to his application for the second visit visa he  claimed
       that he had applied for an extension and that he  had  followed  the
       procedure for that and that because he was  extending  the  visa  he
       just had to tick boxes. That is obvious nonsense.  It  is  perfectly
       clear that what he was applying for was another visit visa. The visa
       application form gave his address as being an address in  Abuja.  He
       was clearly trying to  deceive  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  into
       thinking that he was in Nigeria.


   68. The Appellant was asked whose the address in Abuja was that  he  had
       written on the Visa Application Form and he said  that  it  was  his
       uncle's. He was asked why he had used  his  uncle's  address  rather
       than his parents' and he said he  had  never  really  lived  at  his
       parents' house because  he  was  at  boarding  school  and  then  at
       university. However, in his screening interview when asked  for  his
       address he had given his parents' address.


   69. The Appellant gave false information at his screening interview.  He
       gave a different name for his father and said that he had never  met
       him since he had been born and that his mother was deceased. In fact
       both of his parents are very  much  alive  and  living  together  in
       Nigeria. The Appellant claimed not  to  know  how  that  information
       appeared in the screening interview. He also told the officer at the
       screening interview that he had no  siblings  whereas  elsewhere  he
       maintains that he has two sisters  in  the  USA  and  a  brother  in
       Nigeria.


   70. Undeterred by time in prison, the Appellant then entered  into  what
       he knew to be a sham marriage with an EEA national so that he  could
       lodge what he knew to be a fraudulent application  for  a  residence
       card, using yet another false passport.   He was, at the  same  time
       as being convicted for entering a sham marriage, also  convicted  of
       possessing  equipment  to  make  false  identity   documents.    The
       Appellant, at the hearing, claimed not to remember where that  false
       passport came from either.


   71. It is quite clear that the  Appellant  and  the  truth  are  virtual
       strangers. He has no difficulty whatsoever in  lying  and  deceiving
       the authorities repeatedly and is undeterred by imprisonment.  I  am
       led to conclude that I can place no reliance on  anything  he  tells
       me.


   72. As Ms Shiko has herself been convicted of dishonesty and, as I  have
       already indicated has every reason  to  want  the  Appellant  to  be
       successful, I therefore find that I can place  no  reliance  on  her
       evidence either.  I simply do not believe the  assertions  of  these
       two that they knew so little about each other.


   73. I now turn to  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  uncle.  He  gave
       evidence in a straightforward manner and if  it  were  not  for  the
       other difficulties I might have attached weight to what he said.  He
       said that he knew Michael and he knew the Appellant and  Michael  to
       have  been  in  a  long-standing  relationship.  He  supported   the
       Appellant although he did not like the  fact  that  he  is  gay  and
       wishes that he was not. He travels regularly  to  Nigeria.  He  does
       have property there but usually stays with relatives. It was he  who
       obtained the  police  report  and  confirmed  the  incident  with  a
       policeman at the station. He explained that it was important  for  a
       Nigerian man to continue his lineage by having children and that  is
       why the Appellant had children with Ms Shiko.  He  had  met  her  on
       frequent occasions when they lived in London but less  so  now  they
       live Wigan. He confirmed that Ms Shiko is in  contact  on  a  fairly
       regular basis with the Appellant's parents because she is the mother
       of their grandchildren. With regard to Michael he said that he first
       met him in about 2006 and saw him quite often but did not know  when
       the Appellant had last seen him.


   74. What is significant about this witness's evidence  is  that  he  had
       produced a statement to support the  Appellant  in  the  Appellant's
       2009 appeal and yet made no mention whatsoever of (a)  Ms  Shiko  or
       (b) the fact that he had a child in the  United  Kingdom,  which  by
       that time he had. That I find is because the Uncle  is  prepared  to
       help his nephew in any was he can to stay in the UK and his evidence
       is tailored  accordingly.  I  note  the  uncle's  evidence  that  he
       encouraged the Appellant to go to college in  the  UK  knowing  full
       well that he was an overstayer and so was not entitled to study.  He
       did not advise the Appellant to regularise his position.


   75. The statement signed by Michael for the  2009  proceedings  suggests
       that he and the Appellant had been together as a couple since  April
       2007 having met in a park. That statement  is  extremely  brief  and
       does not indicate that the couple were in a sexual relationship  and
       of course he has not appeared to give evidence in the present appeal
       proceedings. There is, as I have indicated above, a total absence of
       any other evidence which it would be reasonable to  expect  such  as
       photographs.


   76. There are also further difficulties for the Appellant's case  caused
       by the uncle's evidence about the Appellant's family's situation  in
       Nigeria i.e. that the Appellant's parents are alive and well.


   77. It is clear from what the Appellant said at his screening  interview
       that he sought to minimise the extent of his family  connections  in
       Nigeria by saying that he had not seen his father since he was born,
       that his mother was deceased and that he had no  siblings.  I  asked
       the Appellant what his father did in Nigeria and he said  he  was  a
       trader and his mother is a housewife. He said that he did  not  know
       why he had been sent to boarding school; he was the only one in  the
       family who had. It is significant that the Appellant's parents  were
       able to finance him at boarding school and then  through  university
       where he obtained a degree in  electronic  engineering.  Furthermore
       the police report refers to the Appellant's father as being  "Chief"
       Anukam.  I asked the uncle the significance of that. He told me that
       "Chief" is a title conferred by the King to show a person's position
       in society. It is an honour bestowed on an individual in recognition
       of his contribution to the community. The Appellant's uncle is  also
       a Chief. In his case  it  was  because  he  had  built  a  block  of
       classrooms and that is how he came to be given  the  title.  He  was
       unable to say exactly why the Appellant's father had been given  the
       title but confirmed that he would have done  something  similar.  He
       said it was an indication of  high  status  in  Nigeria  akin  to  a
       British knighthood. As with the British knighthood, the wife is also
       given a title; in Nigeria it is "Lolo". This would indicate that the
       Appellant's family has significant position and status in Nigeria.


   78. Taking all of the evidence into account and after  applying  anxious
       scrutiny to it, for all the above reasons I do not find the evidence
       of the Appellant or witnesses reliable so far as  his  sexuality  or
       events in Nigeria are concerned.  I find that the Appellant  is  not
       gay and is living with his female partner and their two children  as
       a family unit.  Having concluded as I have that the Appellant is not
       gay; his appeal against deportation on asylum grounds fails.


   79. For the same reasons he cannot rely on Article 3.   Although  he  is
       HIV+ he is healthy on antiretroviral drugs and the evidence is  that
       the necessary drugs are available in Nigeria.  He comes nowhere near
       to reaching the level of illness that would cause him to succeed  on
       Article 3 grounds, indeed even if he were suffering from AIDS with a
       limited lifespan he has family in Nigeria who could support and care
       for him.


   80. So far as the appeal against  deportation  otherwise  is  concerned,
       paragraph 397 refers to the ECHR and in that regard Article  8.   MF
       (above) tells us that the Immigration Rules are a complete code.   I
       thus refer to paragraph 398.


   81. The relevant part of paragraph 398 provides:-

                 "Where a person's claims that their deportation  would  be
                 contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the
                 Human Rights Convention, and


                           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is
                      conducive to the public good because they  have  been
                      convicted of an  offence  for  which  they  had  been
                      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  4
                      years but at least 12 months;"


   82. And Paragraph 399 provides


                 "This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                 applies if -


                    a) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                       relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
                       who is in the UK, and


                           (i) the child is a British citizen; or
                           (ii)the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously
                           for at least seven  years  immediately  preceding
                           the date of  the  immigration  decision;  and  in
                           either case
                                  (a)it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
                                  the child to leave the UK; and
                                  (b)there is no other family member who  is
                                  able to care for the child in the UK;
                           or


                     (b)  the  person  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                     relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is  a
                     British citizen, settled in the UK, or in the UK  with
                     refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and


                           (i)the  person has lived in  the  UK  with  valid
                           leave continuously for  at  least  the  15  years
                           immediately   preceding   the   date    of    the
                           immigration decision (discounting any  period  of
                           imprisonment); and
                           (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family
                           life with that  partner  continuing  outside  the
                           UK".


   83. Paragraph 399A provides:-


                  "This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                 applies if -


                     (a)the person has either lived continuously in the  UK
                     for at least 20 years immediately preceding  the  date
                     of the immigration decision (discounting any period of
                     imprisonment) and he has no  ties  (including  social,
                     cultural or family) with the country to which he would
                     have to go if required to leave the UK; or


                     (b)the person is aged under 25  years,  he  has  spent
                     half his lifeliving continuously in the UK immediately
                     preceding  the  date  of  the   immigration   decision
                     (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no
                     ties in the UK and loss has no ties (including social,
                     cultural or family) with the country to which he would
                     have to go if required to leave the UK".


   84. A person who comes within these provisions will be  granted  limited
       leave to remain.


   85. None of the above provisions benefit this Appellant. He comes within
       paragraph 398(b) but not within any of the provisions  of  paragraph
       399 or 399A. Neither  his  partner  nor  his  children  are  British
       citizens or settled in the UK; indeed they have no leave  to  be  in
       the UK at all.


   86. That being the case, I am told by paragraph 396 that:-


                 "Where a person is liable to deportation  the  presumption
                 shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It
                 is in the public interest to deport where the Secretary of
                 State must make a deportation  order  in  accordance  with
                 section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007."


   87. And by paragraph 397 that where deportation would not be contrary to
       the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR:-

                 "it will only be exceptional circumstances that the public
                 interest in deportation is outweighed".


   88. Mr Brown argued that there were exceptional  circumstances  in  this
       case. The exceptional  circumstances  were  that  this  is  a  young
       family. The Appellant is Nigerian and  his  partner  South  African.
       They  cannot  all  be  returned  to  either  country  and  therefore
       deportation will necessarily split the family. Furthermore, both the
       Appellant and his partner  are  HIV+  and  receiving  antiretroviral
       drugs. The best interests of  the  children  in  this  case  require
       maintenance of the status quo which means allowing the Appellant  to
       remain in the UK and that on an assessment  of  proportionality  the
       balance should fall in favour of the Appellant.

   89. I disagree. There is nothing exceptional about this case. This is  a
       couple, guilty of serious offences, particularly so given that  they
       relate to immigration law. Both have displayed flagrant breaches  of
       UK law,  the  Appellant  repeatedly  and  despite  having  dependant
       children and previous imprisonment. Neither have any reason to be in
       the UK. Both have sought to  deceive  this  Tribunal  and  the  Home
       Office making a false claim about  the  Appellant's  sexuality.  The
       Appellant has sought to conceal the circumstances of his  family  in
       Nigeria. Neither the Appellant, his partner, nor  the  children  are
       British or settled in the UK or indeed here lawfully.  The  children
       of course are innocent of wrongdoing. However, the fact remains that
       they are neither settled nor British nationals. They are  liable  to
       removal to South Africa with their mother. They are very  young  and
       their main ties are to their parents. The  case  of  Zoumbas  [2013]
       UKSC 74 makes clear that the best interests of  children,  whilst  a
       primary consideration, are not the paramount consideration that they
       are in family proceedings. Furthermore,  the  interests  of  British
       children are to be afforded greater  weight  (ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
       UKSC 4) (village Tanzania) than those of non-British nationals as in
       this case.

   90. Furthermore, I am told by MF (above) that the Immigration Rules  are
       a  complete  code.  Absent  any  exceptional  circumstances,  if  an
       Appellant  cannot  bring  himself  within  one  of  the   exceptions
       contained  in  the  Rules  then   the   public   interest   requires
       deportation.


   91. The Appellant's history and offending behaviour in this case  is  so
       serious that only deportation is appropriate.  Whilst  I  appreciate
       that the best interests of the children would be to live  with  both
       parents, the circumstances for them are unsettled and in  any  event
       they may be required to go to South Africa with  their  mother.  The
       children are both very young and will continue to be  cared  for  by
       their mother. There was no suggestion  that  she  was  incapable  of
       caring for them adequately. So far as their mother is concerned, the
       case as put to me, although I disbelieved it, is  that  she  is  not
       emotionally connected to the Appellant and therefore  is  not  in  a
       position to argue that she has Article 8 family life with him.


   92. Having found for  the  reasons  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this
       determination that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  and
       having set its  decision  aside,  having  reheard  the  evidence  my
       conclusion is that there is no reason why this Appellant should  not
       be deported to Nigeria.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed
       such that the Appellant's original appeal against  the  decision  to
       deport him is dismissed.




Signed                 Dated 9th April 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
