
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/02000/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21 March 2016                         |On 7 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MOHAMMED SAJJAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 September 1971.
     He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a  decision  to
    make a deportation order against him, the decision having been made  on
    14 October 2014.

 3. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge ("FtJ")  Perry  on  10
    December 2014 whereby he allowed the appeal.  Although he stated at the
    end of his decision that the appeal was dismissed, the error was  later
    corrected in an amended decision.

 4. The Secretary of State's complaints about the  FtJ's  decision  can  be
    summarised as follows.  It is asserted that the FtJ  treated  the  best
    interests of the appellant's children as dispositive of the appeal, and
    had failed to consider Article 8  and  the  children's  best  interests
    through the 'lens' of the Immigration Rules.

 5. It is also asserted that the  FtJ  gave  no  consideration  to  various
    aspects of the public interest in deportation,  having  regard  to  the
    seriousness of the offending and the number of  offences  committed  by
    the appellant. He had not considered whether it was reasonable for  the
    appellant's family to relocate to Pakistan with him,  wrongly  assuming
    that the appellant's deportation  would  result  in  splitting  up  the
    family.

 6. The  FtJ's  cursory  reference  to  section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")  at  the  end  of  the
    decision was wholly inadequate.  Furthermore, it is argued that it  was
    not explained why the appellant's deportation  would  have  an  "unduly
    harsh" effect.

 7. The background to the respondent's decision to make a deportation order
    against the appellant concerns in  particular  his  convictions  on  13
    October 2000 and 22 June 2012 for drugs offences.  On 13  October  2000
    he was convicted in the Crown Court  at  Reading  of  possession  of  a
    controlled drug with intent to supply, receiving  a  sentence  of  four
    years' imprisonment.  On 22 June 2012 he was convicted of two  offences
    of possession with intent to supply class A drugs and  one  offence  in
    relation to facilitating the acquisition, acquiring  or  possession  of
    criminal property, for which he received  a  total  sentence  of  three
    years' imprisonment.

 8. Otherwise, between 19 July 1990 and 22 June 2012 the appellant had been
    convicted on fifteen separate occasions of what are said to have been a
    total of 74 offences, including theft,  burglary,  deception,  assault,
    perverting the course of justice and possession of drugs.

 9. An earlier decision to make a deportation order was the subject  of  an
    appeal before FtJ Aziz. That decision of the respondent  was  based  on
    the convictions of 22 June 2012 but was wrongly predicated on the basis
    that the appellant had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment  of  at
    least  four  years,  whereas  his  sentence  was  one  of  three  years
    imprisonment.   Accordingly,  the  respondent  had  applied  the  wrong
    paragraphs of the deportation Immigration Rules.  FtJ Aziz allowed  the
    appeal to the limited  extent  that  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the
    respondent for a fresh decision to  be  made.   That  resulted  in  the
    decision which is the subject of the proceedings before me.

10. In order to put into  context  the  decision  of  Judge  Perry,  it  is
    necessary to refer to the fresh decision made by the  respondent  after
    the matter had been remitted by Judge Aziz.  At [18]  of  the  decision
    letter the respondent referred to the fact that the appellant's  appeal
    had previously been allowed, to the extent that the decision needed  to
    be reconsidered by the Secretary of State.  At [24] of the same  letter
    it states that the appellant's deportation is conducive to  the  public
    good and in the public interest because he had  been  convicted  of  an
    offence for which he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least four years.  The decision letter goes on to state that "Whilst
    deportation action has been initiated against you on the basis of  your
    latest conviction, it is noted that you were convicted  on  13  October
    2000 at Reading Crown Court of possessing a controlled drug with intent
    to supply and  sentenced  to  4  years'  imprisonment".   In  the  same
    paragraph it concludes that in accordance with  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the public interest requires his deportation  unless
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in the exceptions to deportation set out at paragraphs 399 and 399A.

11. In other words, that (new) decision of the  respondent  relies  on  the
    appellant's conviction on 13 October 2000 which resulted in a  sentence
    of imprisonment of four years' imprisonment.

12. Judge Perry set out the appellant's history  of  offending  and  quoted
    verbatim from the sentencing remarks, but in relation to the offence on
    22 June 2012.  It is also to be remembered that  in  respect  of  those
    offences  the  appellant  received   a   sentence   of   three   years'
    imprisonment.

13. Judge Perry referred to the evidence of the  appellant's  wife  in  her
    written statement, and the written representations of  the  appellant's
    former solicitors.  The appellant gave evidence at the  hearing  before
    Judge Perry, as did a friend of the appellant.

14. At [34], referring to s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, he said  that
    the respondent must make a deportation order in respect  of  a  foreign
    national who has been convicted in  the  UK  of  an  offence  and  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months, unless one
    of the exceptions in the 2007 Act applies.  At [36] he referred to  the
    respondent's assertion that the appellant needed to  establish  a  very
    strong Article 8 claim over and above the  circumstances  described  in
    the exceptions to deportation (set out at  paragraphs  399  and  399A),
    seemingly a reference to [24] of the decision letter, and relating to a
    sentence of four years or more.

15. At [37] Judge  Perry  stated  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant's separation from his family whilst he has been in prison had
    weakened the family life of the unit, and he concluded that the  family
    had survived the separation.  He concluded that it  was  apparent  from
    the evidence that the family looked upon permanent separation following
    deportation "with considerable anxiety".  He stated that he  found  the
    witness called on  behalf  of  the  appellant  to  be  a  balanced  and
    objective witness, that witness having given evidence about  the  worry
    faced by the appellant's wife  and  children  in  connection  with  the
    deportation proceedings.

16. He stated at [38] that he was impressed  with  the  appellant's  wife's
    strong loyalty to the appellant, and concluded that  she  remains  very
    dependent on him.  He found that the appellant, his wife and the  three
    children, continue to live together in the family home.   He  concluded
    that the appellant's wife is committed to maintaining the integrity and
    unity of the family in the UK.

17. He found  that  there  was  an  established  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his wife and children. The children were born on  31  May
    2000, 30 January 2003 and 5 March 2004.

18. At [41] he  found  that  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for  a
    considerable part of his life, albeit his actual date of entry was  not
    recorded.  He noted that the appellant's wife and three  children  were
    all born in the UK.  He decided that the starting point was that it was
    in the best interests of the children to be with both parents, and that
    generally it is in the interests of the children to have stability  and
    continuity of social and educational provision.  He found that it would
    not be in the best interests of the children to  be  uprooted  and  for
    them to go to Pakistan, a country of  which  they  have  no  ethnic  or
    cultural experience.  He also found that it would not be in their  best
    interests to be separated from the appellant, were he to be deported.

19. At [42], the last paragraph, there is the first and only  reference  to
    s.117C of  the  2002  Act  (referred  to  by  the  judge  as  the  2014
    Immigration Act).  He stated that the deportation of foreign  criminals
    is in the public interest,  and  that  the  more  serious  the  offence
    committed by a foreign criminal the greater is the public  interest  in
    deportation.  Noting that the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his wife and three children, he  concluded  that  the
    effect of deportation on them would be unduly harsh.

20. Mr Avery relied on the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
    expanded upon them in submissions.  He emphasised  that  there  was  no
    reference in  the  judge's  decision  to  the  appellant's  "appalling"
    criminal history or any appreciation  of  the  damage  caused  by  drug
    dealing on families and on society in general.  It was  submitted  that
    the  FtJ's  decision  was  one-sided  and  not  a   properly   balanced
    proportionality assessment.  There was also no assessment of  the  fact
    of the  appellant's  precarious  immigration  status  in  the  UK  with
    reference to s.117B of the 2002 Act.

21. The appellant, who was unrepresented before me, provided  clarification
    of a recent conviction whereby he was sentenced on 6 January 2016 to  a
    term of 15 months' imprisonment for an offence which he said was one of
    offering to supply drugs.  Generally, he said that his convictions were
    mainly to do with his use of illicit drugs and the way he  grew  up  in
    the UK.  He said that he had been in the UK for 33 years.

22. It seems to me that there is merit in the respondent's challenge to the
    decision of the FtJ.  On the assumption that the judge considered  this
    to be a case that was governed  by  the  Immigration  Rules  concerning
    those sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,  one
    of the matters that required  consideration  in  terms  of  the  public
    interest is the extent to which  there  was  a  risk  of  re-offending.
    Whilst it is not apparent that there  was  any  OASys  or  pre-sentence
    report available to the judge, it was nevertheless encumbent on him  to
    make that assessment as part  of  the  public  interest  consideration.
    Mere reference to the offences committed by the appellant, or indeed to
    his evidence that he is rehabilitated, is not sufficient.  This  alone,
    in my judgement, is an error of law that requires the  decision  to  be
    set aside.

23. Furthermore, it is also the case that there is no,  or  no  sufficient,
    recognition of the public interest in terms of the seriousness  of  the
    offences committed  by  the  appellant.   The  reference  in  the  last
    paragraph of the FtJ's decision to s.117C of the 2002 Act is inadequate
    in this respect, there being no analysis of the appellant's  particular
    circumstances.  Whilst the judge noted that the deportation of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest  and  that  the  more  serious  the
    offence committed the greater is the public interest,  that  recitation
    of s.117C is no substitute for a reasoned analysis in terms of why  the
    appellant's serious offending should not  result  in  his  deportation,
    notwithstanding his relationships with his wife and children.

24. Although the FtJ referred to the British citizenship of the appellant's
    wife  and  children,  and  the  effect  on  them  of  separation,  that
    necessarily could not be sufficient to mean that  his  deportation  was
    not warranted, having regard to the terms of paragraph  398(c)  of  the
    Rules and s.117C of the 2002 Act.  S.117C(6) states that in the case of
    a foreign criminal sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least
    four years, the public interest requires deportation unless  there  are
    very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2.  Those exceptions relate to length of residence  in
    the UK and integration, and genuine and subsisting relationships with a
    partner or qualifying child and whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  on
    either for a person to be deported.  Qualifying children are defined in
    s.117D as British citizens or those who have lived  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of seven years or more, and qualifying partner  means
    a partner who is a British citizen or someone settled in the UK.

25.  In  other  words,  British  citizenship,  length  of   residence   and
    integration, and undue harshness in separation are all factors inherent
    in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The FtJ has not  in  fact  identified  anything
    beyond those Exceptions, as required in the case of the  appellant  who
    received a sentence of at least four years' imprisonment.   Insofar  as
    the judge concluded that the effect  of  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh, it is not explained how or why it would be unduly harsh for  the
    appellant to be  separated  from  them,  even  taking  out  of  account
    questions of whether the 'unduly harsh' test involves a separate public
    interest balancing exercise.

26. Although the FtJ made findings in terms of where  the  children's  best
    interests lie, that issue cannot be determinative of  the  question  of
    whether there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A, or the Exceptions in s.117C.   In
    this  respect  I  am  also  satisfied  that  there  is  merit  in   the
    respondent's grounds.

27. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in  law  in
    the respects to which I have referred, and his decision is set aside.

28. At the end of the hearing I announced that I was satisfied that the FtJ
    had erred in law and that the decision was to be  set  aside.   On  the
    question of whether  the  decision  should  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or whether the matter should be remitted to the FtT, Mr  Avery
    suggested that there was nothing much in the decision of the FtT  which
    could be preserved.  On the other hand, he accepted that there was  the
    complicating factor of which conviction and sentence the  Secretary  of
    State is relying on in terms of the deportation decision.  On that,  it
    was contended that there  was  no  particular  reason  as  to  why  the
    respondent could not rely on the sentence of four  years'  imprisonment
    in October 2000 as the basis for the deportation decision.

29. It seems to me that the appropriate course is  for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the FtT, having regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement.  Findings will have to be made in terms
    of the risk of re-offending and there will need to be a proper analysis
    of the public  interest  with  reference  to  the  seriousness  of  the
    offences committed by the appellant.

30. Furthermore, I was informed by Mr Avery that the  appellant  had  on  6
    January 2016 in the Crown Court sitting at Croydon been sentenced to  a
    term of 15 months' imprisonment.  Mr Avery said  that  his  information
    was that this was for an offence of possession with  intent  to  supply
    cocaine, although the appellant told me that it was in relation  to  an
    offence of offering to supply cocaine.

31. In either case, that is a matter  that  will  need  to  be  taken  into
    account in any new decision on appeal.  Furthermore,  bearing  in  mind
    what is said in the FtJ's decision about  previous  comments  from  the
    appellant's wife that she would not  support  him  if  he  was  further
    convicted of drug-related offences, the question  of  his  family  life
    will need to be re-visited.

32. Accordingly, it is appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the FtT
    for a de novo hearing before a judge other than FtJ Perry.

33. At that hearing, it is important that the respondent be in  a  position
    to explain what is meant at  [24]  of  the  decision  letter  dated  14
    October 2014, to the effect that deportation action had been  initiated
    in relation to his latest conviction (presumably 22 June 2012), whereas
    it is the offence on 13 October 2000 resulting in a  sentence  of  four
    years' imprisonment that is relied  on  in  terms  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  This is a matter which the respondent will have to explain, and
    which the FtT will no doubt want to consider.

    Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and the  appeal  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a  judge  other
    than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Perry.   No  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            29/03/16
