
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02197/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Judgment given orally at hearing on           |On 29 September 2014         |
|On 10 September 2014                          |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                               greg kedienhon

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Turpin &
                  Miller Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 14 February 1991.
     He is now aged 23 years.  He was born in  Belgium  but  he  is  not  a
    citizen of Belgium.  He is said to have arrived in the UK in 2000.

 2. The circumstances in which his case comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relate to his conviction for criminal  offences  arising  in  2008  and
    2009.  He was sentenced on 23 June 2010 to  a  total  of  eight  years'
    imprisonment for offences concerning the supply  of  crack  cocaine  in
    April to June 2008.  Whilst on  bail  for  that  offence  he  committed
    another offence of supplying crack cocaine in October 2008  and  whilst
    on remand at  Norwich  Young  Offenders'  Institute  he  committed  the
    offence of wounding  with  intent.   The  drugs  offences  resulted  in
    concurrent sentences of four years' imprisonment.   The  wounding  with
    intent also resulted in a sentence of four years' imprisonment,  but  a
    consecutive sentence.

 3. As part of the further background to this appeal  it  is  necessary  to
    refer briefly to the fact that the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of
    various offences on a number of previous occasions.  These are set  out
    in the Secretary of State's decision  letter  dated  28  October  2013.
    They have involved, for the most part, various offences of violence and
    dishonesty, as well as failing to comply with court orders of one  sort
    or another.

 4. The result of the sentences that were imposed on 23 June 2010 following
    the convictions to which I have  referred  resulting  in  eight  years'
    imprisonment, was that on 28 October 2013 the Secretary of State made a
    decision under the UK Borders Act 2007  to  make  a  deportation  order
    under the automatic deportation provisions of that Act.

 5. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Martins and Mrs W Jordan, a non-legal member, on 4 March
    2014, and following which the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal.



 6. The  sole  ground  of  appeal  against  their  decision  and  on  which
    permission was granted is in relation  to  the  decision  in  Maslov  v
    Austria [2008] ECHR 546.  The  grounds  of  appeal  were  amplified  in
    submissions before me today by Mr Gilbert.

 7. Returning to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it  is  necessary
    to set out some of its  findings  of  fact.   The  Tribunal  took  into
    account,  and  made  reference  to,  the  appellant's  troubled  family
    background  and,  it  is  I  think  fair  to  say,  that   his   family
    circumstances have not been altogether conducive to an upbringing which
    would have enabled him to live a settled life.

 8. At [95] of the determination the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the
    appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the   deportation
    immigration rules and that fact appears to have been  accepted  on  his
    behalf (see [95]).

 9. Other findings were  to  the  following  effect.  In  relation  to  the
    appellant's daughter, who I shall identify by her initial as  'A',  who
    was born on 4 June 2009, the Tribunal  stated  that  for  most  of  his
    daughter's life the appellant had been in prison and therefore had  not
    had much interaction with her, or input into her life.  His  ex-partner
    is his daughter's primary  carer  and  that  situation  would  continue
    whether or not the appellant is in the UK.  The Tribunal concluded that
    even though the appellant does have family life with  his  daughter  by
    virtue of his relationship with her, the interference that would follow
    from his removal would not be disproportionate.

10. The Tribunal considered the appellant's relationship with various other
    family members. It was accepted that he had formed a good  relationship
    with his half sister and a stepbrother  with  whom  he  lived  for  six
    months before serving  his  prison  sentence.   The  Tribunal  went  on
    however, to state that he has since been absent  from  their  home  for
    some three and a half years.  His  stepmother  and  father,  being  the
    children's primary carers, meant that it would not be necessary for the
    appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK.   His  removal  in  terms  of   his
    relationship with them was found not to be disproportionate.

11. At [99] it was accepted that the  appellant  and  his  stepmother  have
    developed a bond and that he sees her as the mother he never  had,  and
    that she  has  embraced  him  as  her  son.   It  was  found  that  the
    appellant's family had maintained regular contact with him and they had
    visited him throughout his time in  prison,  and  then  in  immigration
    detention.  Again however, it  was  concluded  that  there  was  not  a
    dependency that went beyond normal family ties and there was no  family
    life in law between them.

12. It was concluded at [100] that the appellant has a very strong  private
    life in the UK.  He was born in Belgium and had spent nine years of his
    life there and the only other country he had lived in was the UK.   The
    Tribunal found that he had spent some fourteen years  of  his  23  year
    life in the UK and three and a half years of those in prison.  In terms
    of ties to Nigeria, it was found that the  appellant's  father  is  now
    permanently resident in the UK and has family here.

13. It appeared, and the Tribunal seemed to accept,  that  the  appellant's
    mother had made at least two applications to  return  to  the  UK  from
    Nigeria, one when the appellant's older brother had died, again another
    very sad feature of the appellant's life.  The Tribunal  accepted  that
    the appellant had no contact with his mother  or  his  younger  brother
    since they left the UK, even if other members of the  family  have  had
    some contact.  It was concluded  that  the  appellant's  father  has  a
    brother in Nigeria who is the father of the appellant's cousin and that
    cousin gave evidence before the Tribunal.  It was accepted on the basis
    of the evidence of the appellant's father  and  his  cousin,  that  the
    relatives in Nigeria do not know the appellant.

14. The Tribunal went on however, to conclude that  the  appellant  had  an
    uncle in Nigeria who could provide some support for him there with  the
    appellant's father "doing the necessary from the UK"  as  it  was  put,
    particularly in relation to financial support and initially in terms of
    settling the appellant in  Nigeria.  Contact  could  be  maintained  by
    visits, including by the appellant's cousins, stepmother and sibling in
    the UK.

15. It was accepted that the appellant has a substantial  private  life  in
    the UK which would be interfered with by his  deportation.   There  was
    reference to the legitimate aim of the prevention of disorder and crime
    and the Tribunal referred  to  the  significant  public  interest  that
    needed to be taken into account.

16. Continuing with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, it  was  found
    that the six months that the appellant had lived with his family before
    serving his sentence was a time in his  life  when  his  behaviour  was
    different from that which he had engaged in previously.

17. The Tribunal took into account however,  the fact that  whilst  serving
    his sentence the appellant appeared to have resorted to behaviour  that
    did not in fact inspire confidence regarding the risk he  may  pose  to
    the community.  There was reference to the 40 adjudications that  arose
    during his time in custody  and  that  he  had  by  that  time  reached
    adulthood.  The adjudications are referred to as having dated  from  13
    June 2009 to 24 September 2013 and  being  related  to  assault,  being
    disrespectful to an  officer,  disobeying  a  lawful  order,  fighting,
    possession of  a  non-authorised  article,  selling  or  delivering  an
    unauthorised  article,   disobeying   rules   or   regulations,   using
    threatening, abusive or insulting  words  or  behaviour,  intentionally
    obstructing an officer in the execution of his duty and  destroying  or
    damaging property.  In relation to those the Tribunal  stated  that  as
    the Secretary of State had  noted,  they  were  not  acts  of  juvenile
    delinquency  but  appear  to  have  been  deliberate  and   coordinated
    offences. The Tribunal stated that "...this does not bear out the hoped
    for choice and change to a more positive pattern of behaviour."

18. The Tribunal went on to state that the appellant posed a medium risk of
    reconviction. Reference was made to the significance of that  risk  and
    at [104] it was stated as follows:

            "despite consideration of the caution in the case of Maslov, in
           respect of those who commit crime when  young  and  taking  into
           account the fact that the appellant has life lived (sic) in  the
           United Kingdom since the age of 9 years, but with family in that
           country; we find that the balance is tipped  in  favour  of  the
           public interest and deterrent effect."

19. Reverting to the challenge to the determination,  it  does  as  I  have
    indicated, centre on the decision in Maslov. Although not expressed  in
    this way, it is said that that decision establishes the principle  that
    a Tribunal making an assessment of the proportionality of an  expulsion
    or deportation decision, needs to take into account the  issue  of  re-
    integration and it is said there is a duty on  a  state  to  facilitate
    that re-integration.  In that regard I was referred to [100] of  Maslov
    in particular, where there is reference to "the-  with  one  exception-
    non-violent nature of the offences  committed  when  a  minor  and  the
    State's duty to facilitate  his  re-integration  into  society."  Other
    factors were then referred to, the Court in Maslov going on to conclude
    that it was disproportionate for that individual  to  be  removed  from
    Austria.

20. The platform from which  that  conclusion  at  [100]  was  launched  is
    identifiable earlier on in the decision but continues at [83] of Maslov
    where there is reference to the best interests of the child and what is
    said to include an obligation to facilitate his or her  re-integration.
    In that connection the court noted that Article 40 of the Convention on
    the Rights of the Child makes re-integration an aim to  be  pursued  by
    the juvenile justice system, and they referred to their own  paragraphs
    36 to 38, where reference was made to that Article.

21. Even for the present accepting that there is a duty on the Secretary of
    State to facilitate re-integration in the circumstances  explained,  Mr
    Gilbert was not able to describe to me what the limits of that duty are
    in relation to  a  case  where  the  offender,  or  person  subject  to
    deportation, reaches adulthood.  It  was  submitted  that  that  was  a
    matter for the Tribunal to determine, but that does not engage with the
    issue which is an important one where it is asserted that  there  is  a
    duty on the Secretary of State. The boundaries, or limits, of that duty
    do need to be delineated.

22. Of significance, it seems to me, is that in Maslov  the  offences  were
    committed when that appellant was a juvenile.  There is  some  parallel
    with the circumstances of this appellant in that two  of  the  offences
    which prompted the decision to make a deportation order were  committed
    when he was under the age of 18 years.  One of  the  offences  however,
    and the one which resulted in a consecutive sentence, that  is  to  say
    the wounding with intent, was  committed  when  he  was  aged  18.   Mr
    Gilbert seeks to persuade me that it is significant that at  that  time
    the appellant was being treated as a young person by the  Secretary  of
    State in the sense that he was in a young offenders' institution, but I
    do not consider that the arrangements whereby a person is detained  for
    criminal offences helps to illuminate the argument.

23. Furthermore, in terms of specific facts, the  offences  that  concerned
    the Court in Maslov were, with one exception, non-violent. That is  not
    the case so far as this appellant is concerned.

24. Aside from Maslov, I was not referred to any other authority in support
    of the proposition advanced. In particular, I was not referred  to  any
    domestic authority which describes the  interrelationship  between  the
    duty asserted and the public interest in deportation  in  the  case  of
    offenders who have committed serious offences in relation to  drugs  or
    violence. I was not asked to consider that there was any parallel  with
    decisions relating to integration in cases involving deportation of  EU
    citizens.

25. I am not satisfied that there is the duty described by Mr  Gilbert,  at
    least not in the case of this appellant. If there is that  duty,  I  do
    not accept that it was breached by the Secretary of State in taking the
    deportation decision,  or  if  it  was  breached  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law by failing to  take  that  breach  into  account.
    Alternatively, if the First-tier  Tribunal  did  err  in  law  in  this
    respect, I am not satisfied that it is an error of  law  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside.

26. It is to be borne in mind that in relation to a number of the  offences
    for which the appellant had previously received sentences,  there  were
    non-custodial options, for example supervision orders and the like,  as
    well as custodial sentences, such as a detention and training order. It
    seems to me that those sentences were part and parcel of the  Secretary
    of State's attempts to integrate, or re-integrate, the  appellant  into
    society and to steer him away from offending. In any  event,  the  last
    offence for which the appellant was convicted was undoubtedly  when  he
    was an adult and it was also undoubtedly a serious offence.

27. For the sake of completeness, in so far as Mr Gilbert sought  to  widen
    the grounds to include the  point  about  very  serious  reasons  being
    required for expulsion when the offences were committed as a  juvenile,
    it is important to bear in mind the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    Akpinar [2014] EWCA Civ 937 where  the  limits  of  what  is  sometimes
    described as the 'Maslov principle' are explained.

28. Mr Gilbert  referred  me  to  the  psychological  assessment  dated  18
    February 2014 from Joanne Lackenby. I was  referred  in  particular  to
    pages 93, 97 and 101.  In relation to page 97 it  was  stated  in  that
    report that if released and deported to Nigeria, family  support  would
    be unavailable or available in such a limited  way  through  telephone,
    internet or letter contact  as  being  unlikely  to  provide  any  real
    support and would not serve as risk-reducing, in that lack  of  support
    for individuals is considered risk  increasing.   But  of  course  that
    aspect of the report fails to take  into  account,  as  necessarily  it
    would because it preceded the determination of the First-tier Tribunal,
    the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions in relation to the  support  that
    the appellant could expect to receive on return to Nigeria.

29. In relation to page 101 and the social network that the appellant would
    have the benefit from when residing in  Cambridge,  these  are  matters
    that were manifestly taken into account by the First-tier Tribunal. The
    same can be said for the other part of that psychological assessment to
    which I was referred, at page 93.

30. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal or any error of law that
    requires the decision to be set aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal therefore stands.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            26/09/14
