
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02058/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                         sibusiso sydwell somawonga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G O'Ceallaigh
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with leave against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robinson dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 25 November  2014  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him pursuant to Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 and
    to refuse his human rights claim.   The  reasons  for  the  deportation
    order were that on 14 October  2014  at  Portsmouth  Crown  Court,  the
    appellant  was  convicted  of  "Affray"  and  "Breach  of   Conditional
    Discharge" for which he was sentenced to 45 weeks" imprisonment.  As  a
    his criminality, his deportation was considered to be conducive to  the
    public good and as such was liable to deportation by virtue of  section
    3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  appellant  appealed  the
    respondent's decision on the basis that his deportation would lead to a
    breach of his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of South Africa, born  on  15  August  1991.
    He entered the UK on June/July 2003.  On 9 December 2003 he applied for
    leave to remain as a dependent child and this was granted until 31 July
    2005.  A further application was granted until 25 January 2007.  On  24
    November 2005 he applied for indefinite leave to remain  and  this  was
    granted on the same day.

3.   The appellant has numerous convictions starting from  22  August  2006,
    when he was 15 years old until 14 October 2014 when he was convicted of
    affray and breach of conditional discharge.  The judge at  paragraph  2
    listed all of the appellant's criminal offences.  Some of the  offences
    led to custodial sentences, but the majority did not.  The majority  of
    the offences were committed by the appellant when he was a minor.

4.   UTJ Canavan granted permission as follows:

         "The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  correctly  referred  to  Maslov  v
         Austria [2008] ECHR 546 but did  not  as  a  matter  of  fact  make
         findings as to what weight should be placed on offences  that  took
         place while the appellant was still a minor.  In assessing  whether
         there was a 'strong  argument  for  deportation'  it  is  at  least
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have taken  into
         account the nature of the offences and the age when  many  of  them
         were  committed  as  part  of  the  overall   balancing   exercise,
         especially in light of the requirement  for  a  judge  to  consider
         section 117C(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002.

         It is also arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
         apparently  requiring  the  appellant  to  be   in   a   cohabiting
         relationship with his partner.  Whether Article 8 is engaged  is  a
         matter of fact relating to the strength of family ties and does not
         necessarily require co-habitation.

         Given that the appellant's status on arrival in the UK  appears  to
         be unclear the argument that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
         finding that the appellant was not lawfully in the UK for 'most  of
         his life' may be weaker but permission is granted on all grounds in
         order for the matter to be argued in more detail."

5.   I accept the argument in the  grounds  that  it  is  evident  that  the
    respondent took into account  the  entire  course  of  the  appellant's
    offending behaviour, from August 2006 until October 2014 in deciding at
    paragraph 12 of the Decision to Deport Notice that the appellant was  a
    persistent offender in accordance with paragraph 398 of the Immigration
    Rules such that deportation action should be taken.

6.   The argument posed by  the  appellant's  Counsel  in  reliance  on  the
    grounds is whether in the light  of  Maslov,  the  appellant  being  an
    'integrated alien' who has been lawfully resident in the UK during  his
    childhood, should have the offences committed whilst as a  minor  taken
    against him as  to  lead  to  him  being  described  as  a  'persistent
    offender'.  Counsel was disputing that the appellant  is  a  persistent
    offender.  He  argued  that  there  was  no  definition  of  persistent
    offender.

7.   Paragraph 398(c) which is the applicable  immigration  rule,  describes
    two types of offenders; (a) the offender  whose  offending  has  caused
    serious harm or  (b)  they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law.  The respondent relied on the  latter
    to support her decision  that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  is
    conducive to the public good [12].

8.   I find that  the  word  "persistent"  has  to  be  given  its  ordinary
    meaning.   According  to  the  definition  in  the  Oxford  Dictionary,
    "persistent" means "continue firmly or obstinately (in opinion,  course
    of action, doing  thing)  especially  in  the  face  of  difficulty  or
    objection".  I find that this definition aptly describes the  appellant
    who, for a period of 8 years from 2006 to 2014, embarked on a course of
    criminal behaviour thereby showing a  particularly  disregard  for  the
    law. Consequently, I find that by his behaviour,  the  appellant  is  a
    persistent offender in accordance with  paragraph  398(c).   I  do  not
    support Counsel's argument that the appellant's offending behaviour  as
    a minor should have been  taken  out  of  the  equation  when  deciding
    whether or not he is a persistent offender because  deportation  action
    could not have been pursued at that time.  There is no  logical  reason
    why it  should  not  have  been  taken  into  account.   His  offending
    behaviour continued into adulthood, which was the appropriate time  for
    the  respondent  to  pursue  deportation   action.    Furthermore,   by
    definition, the appellant is a  foreign  criminal  who  is  subject  to
    deportation by virtue of the Immigration Rules and Section 117C of  the
    amendment to the 2002 Act.

9.   I find that although the judge made errors in his decision, the  errors
    do not materially undermine his decision for the following reasons.

10.  I accept that in considering the exceptions to deportation,  the  judge
    erred in finding that the requirements of the "exception" in  paragraph
    399 could not be met because there was no evidence of past-cohabitation
    by the appellant and his partner or evidence that they  have  supported
    each other financially. I note that even  though  the  judge  described
    Natasha McMullan as the  appellant's  partner,  the  appellant  in  his
    statement, which he  relied  on  in  evidence,  described  her  as  his
    girlfriend. However, on the evidence that was before the  judge,  I  do
    not find that he erred in law in finding that the appellant was not  in
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with his "partner" such  that  it
    infected his treatment of whether the claim could succeed  because  the
    facts were "exceptional" or very compelling.

11.  In respect of paragraph 399A (a) I find that the judge's  finding  that
    the appellant has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
    life was an error because the respondent had accepted that he has  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life.   I  note  that  the
    judge decided paragraph 399A(b) in the appellant's favour, that is,  he
    is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK  by  virtue  of  his
    education and social contacts.  The judge found against him in  respect
    of 399A(c), the judge was not satisfied that there are very significant
    obstacles to his integration in South Africa where he would be  removed
    to.  I find that the judge's findings at paragraph 44 on this issue are
    sustainable on the evidence.  This means that the appellant  could  not
    satisfy all the three limbs of the exception in order  for  the  public
    interest in deportation to be outweighed.

12.  I find that the judge properly relied on the judgement of the  ECHR  in
    Maslov v Austria, and the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) in his  assessment
    of the proportionality of the appellant's removal.  His  assessment  of
    proportionality is set out at paragraphs 51 to 60.  Contrary to what is
    stated in the grant of permission, at paragraph 51 the judge considered
    nature, number and seriousness of the crimes committed by the appellant
    He found that the appellant has a long list of offending  for  a  young
    man of 23 years of age. There were serious offences  of  violence  and,
    according to the most recent assessment, he presents a medium  risk  to
    the public.  He has breach community penalties in the past.  The  judge
    considered  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  On the evidence that
    was before him, I find that the judge's proportionality assessment does
    not disclose an error of law.

13.  For all the above reasons I find that the judge's  decision  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal is sustainable and should stand.

Notice of Decision

14.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

