
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02083/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 September 2014                            |On 7 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Victor Tavares
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Loughran, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Victor Tavares, was born on 28  March  1984  and  is  a
    citizen of Portugal.  He was sentenced on 13 October 2011 to a term  of
    imprisonment of six years at Snaresbrook Crown Court for possession  of
    a prohibited firearm and ammunition without a certificate.

 2. On 10 October 2013,  the  appellant  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    respondent.  The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    A W Khan; Mr A P Richardson JP) which in a determination promulgated on
    30 May 2014, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  I shall hereafter refer to the
    appellant as the respondent and to the respondent as the  appellant  as
    they appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Tribunal found that the appellant could only be deported  from  the
    United Kingdom on imperative grounds because he had  been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for ten years.   The  respondent  asserts  that  the
    Tribunal failed correctly to apply the judgment in MG [2014]  EUECJ  C-
    400-12.

 4. The grounds assert that the appellant's ten year residence should  have
    been calculated backwards on the date of the  decision  to  deport  (10
    October 2013) and that the appellant "would need  to  show  ten  years'
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom preceding that date, however
    his ten years was broken by his imprisonment."

 5. Ms Loughran, for the appellant, submitted that, although  the  Tribunal
    had failed to refer to the MG (judgment delivered by the  court  on  16
    January 2014) its determination was not flawed by legal error.  Indeed,
    in all cases where imprisonment had  occurred  prior  to  an  expulsion
    order, the necessary ten year period would be broken by that period  of
    imprisonment and no applicant could possibly achieve a  period  of  ten
    years' residence.  Ms Loughran submitted that MG made provision  for  a
    period of ten years to have been accrued prior to imprisonment  (as  in
    the present case - this appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    1999) and that that residence could be  "taken  into  consideration  as
    part of the overall assessment required in order to  determine  whether
    the integrating links previously forged with the host Member State have
    been broken."

 6. I agree with that submission.  It is clear from a number of passages in
    the determination that the Tribunal was satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had integrated into United Kingdom society and had done so  during  his
    pre-imprisonment period of residence since 1999.  There is,  therefore,
    nothing in the  determination  and  reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  which
    contradicts the principles of MG.

 7. Mrs Pettersen, for the Secretary of State, submitted that the  Tribunal
    had failed to explain why it had accepted that the appellant  had  been
    in the United Kingdom exercising Treaty Rights at all times during  the
    claimed  pre-imprisonment  period  of  residence.   There   were,   she
    submitted, gaps in the appellant's evidence showing his  residence  or,
    more particularly, that he was exercising Treaty  Rights  during  those
    periods.  There had been a gap of  approximately  one  year  after  the
    appellant had left school and before he attended college and a  further
    period of three years between leaving college and  starting  employment
    as a support worker.

 8. Ms Loughran submitted that the reasoning of the Tribunal  was  adequate
    in this regard.  At [23] the Tribunal recorded that it had

         taken into account all the witness statements and the oral evidence
         as well as the documentation contained within both the  appellant's
         and respondent's bundles.  We are satisfied that the appellant  has
         been resident in the UK for at least ten years on  the  basis  that
         there is clear evidence to support this, for  example  confirmation
         from Lewisham College that the appellant attended from 10 September
         2001 until he withdrew from the college on 10 February 2004.

 9. In the same paragraph, the Tribunal refers to other items  of  evidence
    of the appellant's residence during the relevant period.  The  Tribunal
    made the  explicit  finding  that  there  was  "no  evidence  that  the
    appellant's residence has been broken by extended visits to  Portugal."
    It is true that the Tribunal does not refer to the exercise  of  Treaty
    Rights by the appellant but, given that the Tribunal has accurately set
    out the relevant parts of the Regulations in its  determination,  there
    was no reason to suppose that by referring to "residence" the  Tribunal
    has had in mind residence whilst exercising Treaty Rights.

10. The Secretary of State was represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but the representative does not  appear  to  have  submitted  that  the
    appellant may  have  been  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  yet  not
    exercising Treaty Rights.  I agree with Ms Loughran that the  reasoning
    of the Tribunal [23] is adequate to deal with the  exercise  of  Treaty
    Rights throughout a ten year period prior to imprisonment.  I find also
    that, whilst it does not refer to the judgment,  the  determination  is
    consistent with the reasoning in MG.

11. It follows, therefore, that the Tribunal was correct at [24] to  go  on
    to consider whether  the  appellant  represented  a  threat  to  public
    security.  The grounds of appeal make no challenge to that part of  the
    determination and I find that the Tribunal has had proper regard to the
    seriousness  of  the  appellant's  criminal  offending,   the   judge's
    sentencing remarks and the OASys evidence in  reaching  its  conclusion
    that the appellant was not a threat to public security.  It follows, in
    turn, from that finding that the Tribunal did not err in law.

12. Even if I am  wrong,  then  I  find  that  the  Tribunal's  alternative
    findings in respect of five years' permanent residence  and  Article  8
    ECHR are likewise not flawed by legal error.  There was some dispute of
    fact as to whether or not the Presenting Officer before the  First-tier
    Tribunal accepted that the appellant had acquired permanent  residence.
    Mrs Pettersen was unable to clarify the position with Mr  Grennan,  the
    Presenting Officer.

13. In the light of my findings regarding the ten year period  (see  above)
    the dispute does not appear to be material and  I  find  no  reason  to
    disagree with the Tribunal's finding at [29] that there was no credible
    evidence "to show that the appellant's personal  conduct  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society."

14. The Tribunal made very clear findings  that  the  appellant  had  taken
    steps to  address  his  offending  behaviour  and  that  he  was  "very
    motivated" to change and rehabilitate.  Likewise,  referring  to  those
    same factors,  I  see  no  reason  to  interfere  with  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion at [33] that the appellant (who has resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of 14; he is now 30 years old),  disproportionate
    by reference to Article 8 ECHR.

15. In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

16. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 30 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

