
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02438/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision promulgated         |
|on 26 August 2016                             |On 30 August 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marcus instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. In a decision dated 13 October  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer
       found that the First-tier had made  an  error  law  material  to  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
       revoke a deportation order and refusal of the  appellants  claim  for
       asylum or for a grant of leave on human rights grounds.

    2. Directions were given for a re-hearing of the merits  of  the  appeal
       before  the  Upper  Tribunal  which  included  a  direction  for  the
       respondent to file and serve an updated position and  any  additional
       evidence in light of the First-tier's  unappealed  finding  that  the
       appellant was born in Sierra Leonne. No  further  evidence  has  been
       provided.

Discussion

    3. As a result of Judge Plimmer being unwell a judicial  transfer  order
       has been made and the matter comes before  me  today  for  a  resumed
       substantive heading.

    4. Judge Plimmer identified in her error of law decision that the First-
       tier panel were correct to refer to the  cases  of  MA  (Ethiopia)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 298 and ST
       (Ethnic Eritrean-nationality-return) Ethiopia CG  [2011]  UKUT  00252
       but that they had failed to make a finding on the essential issue  of
       whether the appellant had taken all reasonable steps  to  obtain  the
       requisite documents to enable him to return to Sierra Leone.

    5. It is not disputed that the appellant has attended the  Sierra  Leone
       Embassy in the United Kingdom on seven occasions without success. The
       appellant has been interviewed by the Sierra Leone authorities in the
       United Kingdom but not recognised as a citizen. It  was  recorded  by
       the Panel [16] that the appellant's  evidence  was  that  the  Sierra
       Leone authorities had asked for a birth certificate but that  he  did
       not have one and that on the second occasion  the  official  was  not
       happy with him and shouted at him.

    6. It was accepted  by  Mr  Bates  that  the  appellant  has  taken  all
       reasonable practical steps to seek to obtain the  documents  required
       to enable him to return to Sierra Leone.

    7. The second element is the need to consider  whether  it  would  be  a
       breach of the Refugee Convention if the appellant ended up in  Sierra
       Leone when it had refused to accept him as a citizen. It was accepted
       in ST that the denial  of  a  right  to  return  is  very  likely  to
       constitute persecution in very many cases.

    8. In this case I accept there has been a denial of the right to return.
       Mr Marcus outline the case in  relation  to  why  on  the  facts  the
       appellant is entitled to be recognised as a refugee, which is a  fact
       sensitive assessment.

    9. Mr Bates did not concede the point but accepted  that  on  the  facts
       taken as a whole the appellant was entitled to  be  recognised  as  a
       refugee. The expert evidence speaks  of  discrimination  against  the
       Fula, the appellant's ethic group, in Sierra Leone. The appellant  is
       unable to move his life forward in light of the refusal of the Sierra
       Leone authorities  and  suffers  from  mental  health  problems.  The
       authorities in Sierra Leone mistrust the Fula  from  the  region  the
       appellant originates from and act accordingly.

   10. I find it made out on the facts that the appellant faces a real  risk
       of treatment sufficient to amount to persecution as a result  of  the
       actions of the Sierra Leone authorities in refusing to recognise  him
       as a citizen of that country, effectively making him  stateless,  and
       the real risk of persecution if he ended up in Sierra Leone  when  it
       had refused to recognise him as a citizen, as per the guidance in the
       case law referred to above.

Decision

   11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially erred
       in law and that decision set aside. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

   12. I continue the anonymity order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 August 2016

