
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02082/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd  March 2015                            |6th March 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Mascord, of Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's appeal comes before us following a hearing on  12  May
      2014 at which errors of law were found in the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to deport her from the United Kingdom pursuant to regulation  19(3)(b)
      of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA
      Regulations").

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 18  December  1982.  She
      first entered the United Kingdom in 2007 to work and study.  She  came
      to the adverse attention of the UKBA when she was arrested on 17 April
      2010 for the index offences.

   3. The circumstances of the appellant's offences are  that  on  18  April
      2010 she shook her three month old daughter several times in order  to
      stop her crying, as a result of which her daughter suffered severe and
      life-threatening injuries leaving her  brain-damaged,  confined  to  a
      wheelchair and blind. That occurred at a time when the  appellant  was
      on her way out to meet a male who had been in contact with her  via  a
      sex search website and after which she  left  her  daughter  with  her
      partner, the child's father, who subsequently, when it became clear to
      him that the child was  seriously  unwell,  telephoned  the  emergency
      ambulance service. Both the appellant and her partner  were  found  to
      have lied about the  circumstances  under  which  their  daughter  had
      suffered her injuries. Since that time their daughter had been  placed
      in foster care and neither parent was assessed  as  suitable  to  have
      custody of her.

   4. On 21 May 2012 the appellant  was  convicted  of  inflicting  grievous
      bodily harm and perverting the course of public justice.  On  21  June
      2012 she was sentenced to three years and two years imprisonment,  the
      terms to run concurrently. She did not appeal against  her  conviction
      or sentence.

   5. On 10 October 2012 the appellant was  notified  of  her  liability  to
      deportation and on 7 October 2013 the respondent made  a  decision  to
      deport her under regulation 21 of the EEA regulations, on the  grounds
      that she posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to
      the interests of public policy.

   6. In her reasons for deportation, the  respondent  considered  that,  in
      view of the absence of adequate evidence of  continuous  residence  in
      the United Kingdom under the EEA regulations, the  appellant  had  not
      established a right of permanent residence. On the basis of  the  NOMS
      ("National  Offender  Management  Service")  assessment  made  by  her
      Offender Manager, who found that she posed a medium risk  of  harm  to
      her child, a low risk of re-offending and a medium risk of harm should
      she re-offend, the respondent considered  that  the  appellant  had  a
      propensity to re-offend and continued to pose a risk of  harm  to  the
      public. It was considered that her deportation  to  Poland  would  not
      prejudice the prospects of her rehabilitation and that the decision to
      deport her was proportionate and in accordance with the principles  of
      regulation 21(5). It was considered further that her deportation would
      not breach her Article 8 human rights.

   7. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      before the First-tier Tribunal by a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Kimnell and Dr P L Ravenscroft.  The  panel  noted  the
      concession made on behalf of the appellant that she was  not  entitled
      to permanent residence and accordingly  could  not  benefit  from  the
      enhanced protection against deportation  under  the  EEA  regulations.
      They concluded that she posed  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
      serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society
      and  that  the  decision  to  deport  her  was  proportionate  and  in
      accordance  with  the  EEA  regulations.  They  also  found  that  her
      deportation would not breach Article 8 of  the  ECHR  and  accordingly
      dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   8. Permission to appeal against that decision was sought, inter alia,  on
      the grounds that the Tribunal had  erred  by  taking  into  account  a
      reference in a social services report to  "old  bleeds",  rather  than
      considering the facts as they were before the sentencing judge who had
      noted that the offence was isolated and out  of  character;  that  the
      Tribunal had paid insufficient regard to the conclusions in  the  pre-
      sentence report and OASys report as to the risk  of  re-offending  and
      had wrongly concluded,  in  the  light  of  such  evidence,  that  the
      appellant remained  a  threat;  and  that  the  Tribunal  had  wrongly
      approached the question of the public interest.

   9. Permission was granted on 14 March 2014.

  10. At an error of law hearing on 12 May  2014  we  found  the  Tribunal's
      determination to be materially flawed by reason of errors of  law  and
      accordingly set it aside, for the following reasons:

    "9. We have carefully considered the submission made by Mr Tufan,  that
    the reference by the Tribunal, at paragraph 71 of its determination, to
    "old bleeds" was no more than a reference to the evidence and  that  it
    was not central to the determination. However, we  cannot  accept  that
    that is the case. Whilst the Tribunal was  entitled  to  refer  to  the
    evidence before it, what  it  was  not  entitled  to  do  was  to  make
    assumptions from that  evidence  that  appear  to  be  speculative  and
    unsupported. Yet that is what it seems to have done. Reading  paragraph
    71 as a whole, it seems to us that there is  a  clear  suggestion  that
    there was a history to the appellant's daughter's injuries going beyond
    the one incident leading to her conviction. However there  was  nothing
    in the conclusions reached by the probation services in  any  of  their
    reports to support such a suggestion and indeed it ran contrary to  the
    observation of the Sentencing Judge that the  offence  was  "mercifully
    isolated and...out of character". On the other hand, there was evidence
    before the Tribunal  that  the  appellant  posed  a  low  risk  of  re-
    offending, yet there was nothing in the  Tribunal's  findings  to  show
    that  it  took  account  of  that  evidence.  Indeed,  the   Tribunal's
    assessment of risk and propensity to re-offend  was  extremely  limited
    and, as such,  paragraph  71  appears  to  have  been  central  to  its
    conclusions with respect to regulation 21(5).

    10. Accordingly, and  in  view  of  the  absence  of  full  and  proper
    reasoning to support the conclusions reached in regard to the  question
    of risk, we find that the decision is not a sustainable one and that it
    has to be set aside.

    11. We do not consider that we are able, at this point, simply to go on
    and re-make the decision ourselves and accordingly we  shall  list  the
    appeal for a resumed hearing at which further submissions can  be  made
    by the parties. We see no need for further  oral  evidence,  since  the
    primary facts are not in dispute. However it may be that  limited  oral
    evidence would be necessary to address any change in  circumstances  if
    appropriate. It would be helpful to have  a  further  report  from  the
    probation services in regard to the risk of re-offending."

  11. The appeal came before us for a resumed hearing on 3  March  2015,  by
      which time  a  further  report  had  been  produced  by  the  National
      Probation Service in regard to the risk posed by the appellant.

  12. The appellant adopted as her evidence a new statement confirming  that
      she was no longer in a relationship with the father of her child.  The
      parties then made submissions before us.

  13. Ms Everett referred to the probation report in which the appellant was
      assessed as a low risk of re-offending and a medium risk  to  children
      and submitted that a low risk was still a risk. Safeguarding  measures
      had been put in place, namely no access to her daughter and no  access
      to children under 16, and that was because she posed a risk.  She  had
      not integrated into society in the United Kingdom. She met the test in
      Regulation 21 of the EEA  Regulations  and  the  deportation  decision
      should therefore be upheld.

  14. Ms Mascord submitted that the test had not been met and the  appellant
      did not pose a sufficiently  serious  threat.  Exclusion  was  a  last
      resort and the safeguarding measures were  in  place  to  avoid  that.
      Since the appellant was not a threat it was not necessary to  consider
      integration.

Consideration and findings

  15. It is not in dispute that the appellant is entitled only to the  lower
      level of protection afforded under the EEA  Regulations.  Accordingly,
      her expulsion can be justified only on the general grounds  of  public
      policy, public security or public health, the relevant test for  which
      is to be found in regulation 21(5), as follows:

    "21(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of  public  policy
    or public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
    preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with
    the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
         justify the decision."

  16. In the case of Essa v Secretary of State for the Home Department (EEA:
      rehabilitation/integration) Netherlands  [2013]  UKUT  316  the  Upper
      Tribunal made the following observation at paragraph 32:

    "... for any deportation of an EEA national or family  member  of  such
    national to be  justified  on  public  good  grounds  (irrespective  of
    whether permanent  residence  has  been  achieved)  the  claimant  must
    represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact  of  a  criminal
    conviction is not enough. It is not  permissible  in  an  EEA  case  to
    deport a claimant on the basis of criminal offending  simply  to  deter
    others. This tends to mean, in case of criminal conduct  short  of  the
    most serious threats  to  the  public  safety  of  the  state,  that  a
    candidate for EEA deportation must represent a present threat by reason
    of a propensity to re-offend  or  an  unacceptably  high  risk  of  re-
    offending. "

  17. In line with that observation, we turn to the question  of  propensity
      to re-offend or risk of re-offending. In  that  respect  the  relevant
      evidence addressing that question is the most recent report  from  the
      National Probation Service, dated 28 November 2014, together with  the
      earlier pre-sentence report of 14 June 2012 and the OASys report of 27
      August 2012. In all of those reports the appellant was assessed  as  a
      medium risk to children, a low risk to the public and a low risk of re-
      offending.

  18. In the pre-sentence report of 14 June 2012, the appellant's  probation
      officer found that the  appellant  posed  a  "low  likelihood  of  re-
      offending bearing in mind her background information and lack  of  any
      previous offending" and that, whilst she posed a risk of harm, she did
      not pose  an  imminent  risk  of  offending  and  did  not  cross  the
      dangerousness threshold.

  19. The OASys report defined the "medium risk" that the appellant posed to
      children in the following terms: "there are identifiable indicators of
      risk of serious harm. The offender has the potential to cause  serious
      harm  but  is  unlikely  to  do  so  unless  there  is  a  change   in
      circumstances...".   We  note  in  particular  the  reference  to  the
      appellant  being  "unlikely"  to  cause  serious   harm   unless   her
      circumstances change. As regards those circumstances, it  is  relevant
      to note that the appellant has the  benefit  of  secure  accommodation
      with her brother or sister upon her release and has, in the past,  had
      no problem finding employment, but in any event has the support of her
      siblings.

  20. In the most recent report of 28 November 2014, the  probation  officer
      assessed the appellant as follows:

    "In terms of the risks [she] poses to society and members of the public
    I have employed the National Probation Service assessment tools  namely
    the Offender Assessment System (OASys) and Offender Group  Reconviction
    (OGRS) and she has been  assessed  as  the  following  -  Low  risk  of
    reoffending and medium risk to children, however, it is  my  assessment
    this is at the lower end of the spectrum as [the  appellant]  will  not
    have access to the victim...

    It is my further view that it is unlikely  that  [the  appellant]  will
    offend in a similar way as she now has  the  ability  to  generate  pro
    social alternative problem solving solutions in the community and there
    is also a newfound maturity.

    It is my assessment that [the appellant]  should  be  afforded  another
    opportunity to remain in the United Kingdom. I  believe  that  she  has
    learnt a very difficult and painful lesson which will remain  with  her
    for the rest of her life."

  21. It is a significant feature of this case that the appellant's  offence
      was an isolated one, committed against her own child at  a  time  when
      she was under particular stress, and was apparently out  of  character
      and that she has shown genuine remorse. That was  indeed  accepted  by
      the Sentencing Judge who commented in like terms, that the offence was
      "mercifully isolated and ... therefore out of character" and that  the
      appellant appeared to be "genuinely remorseful". The appellant has  no
      access to her daughter and, as part of the terms of  her  licence,  is
      not able to have any access to children under the age of 16.

  22. In such circumstances,  having  had  regard  to  the  views  of  those
      professionals best placed to assess her level of risk and the risk  of
      re-offending, we  find  insufficient  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      appellant represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
      threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society,  such
      interests in this case being the protection of vulnerable children, as
      accepted in the First-tier Tribunal.

  23. We do not see how the fact that safeguarding measures have been put in
      place indicates in itself  that  the  appellant  poses  a  threat,  as
      suggested by Ms Everett, when those  measures  are  precautionary  and
      when, as a result of those measures, the appellant will simply have no
      access to children at all. It is not the case, in any event, that  the
      risk the appellant poses is mitigated solely by the  fact  that  those
      safeguarding measures  are  in  place,  but  the  most  recent  report
      indicates that the appellant has herself developed the necessary tools
      to address such issues, with  her  "ability  to  generate  pro  social
      alternative problem solving solutions in the community and... newfound
      maturity". As for Ms Everett's submission that low risk does not  mean
      no risk, that must be correct but, in our view,  when  taken  together
      with the other comments made  by  the  probation  services,  does  not
      amount to showing that she poses a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
      serious threat.

  24. Having come to that conclusion, that has to be the end of  the  matter
      and the appellant's exclusion cannot be justified on grounds of public
      policy since one of the mandatory elements of the test  in  Regulation
      21(5) cannot be met. There is no  need  to  go  further  and  consider
      integration and proportionality, but  in  any  event  expulsion  would
      clearly not be proportionate if the appellant does not pose a genuine,
      present and sufficiently serious threat.

  25. We consider it necessary to stress at this point  that  considerations
      that would have been significant and relevant in a non-EEA deportation
      case, such as deterrence and public revulsion, simply do not apply  in
      this case. We are fully aware  that  the  appellant's  offence  was  a
      shocking one and that the repercussions are extensive, leaving a young
      child permanently disabled and with the prospect of a truncated  life.
      Had this been an ordinary deportation case such other  considerations,
      taken together with the appellant's circumstances in general, may well
      have led us to conclude that deportation  was  justified  and  in  the
      public interest. However the appellant is  an  EEA  national  and,  as
      such, she benefits from the protection of the EEA Regulations to which
      we are required by law to defer.

  26. Accordingly we find that there is only one decision  we  are  able  to
      reach, namely that the appellant's deportation would be in  breach  of
      the EEA Regulations.

DECISION

  27. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and the  decision  has  accordingly  been  set
      aside. In re-making the decision, we allow the appeal  under  the  EEA
      Regulations.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  We  continue
    that order, pursuant to pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






                               Signed   Date 3rd March 2015
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
