
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02332/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates'     |Determination Promulgated            |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On 26 August 2014                    |On 5 September 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                 Lex Deklerk
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Permission to appeal has been granted  to  this  national  of  Zimbabwe
    where he was born 13 January 1994.  A panel in the First-tier  Tribunal
    comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and Mr G  H  Getlevog  (the
    panel),  for reasons given in their determination dated  12  May  2014,
    dismissed his appeal against  the  decision  that  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applied and so resulting in a deportation order  dated
    4 November 2013.

 2. The grounds of challenge are confined to the single question which  was
    whether the appellant has  ties  to  Zimbabwe  within  the  meaning  of
    paragraph 399A.  It is  argued  that  the  panel  materially  erred  by
    applying the wrong legal test in applying a  narrow  interpretation  of
    "ties" which had been rejected by the Tribunal in Ogundimu (Article 8 -
    new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).   It  is  argued  that  the
    panel materially erred in failing to apply this decision and had  given
    insufficient reasons to differentiate Maslov where it  was  argued  the
    case involved a more severe offending history.

 3. The appellant was unrepresented.  He  explained  that  his  mother  had
    spoken to the lawyers who had indicated that they were unable to obtain
    legal aid funding.  His mother, who has moved to Ireland to be  with  a
    partner for work purposes, had been unable to  raise  funding  for  the
    appellant's  representation.   Having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
    challenge, I considered  that  I  could  justly  proceed  to  determine
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  the  absence  of
    representation for the appellant.  I explained to  him  in  detail  the
    purpose of  the  hearing  and  thereafter  heard  submissions  from  Mr
    McVeety.  I  also  invited  comments  from  the  appellant  and  I  was
    satisfied understood the process. He was unable to add anything new  of
    a material nature to that which had  been  stated  already  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and  raised  in  the  grounds  of  application.   I
    reserved my decision.

 4. The facts are these.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 22
    December 1999 when he was nearly 6 years old  as  a  dependant  on  his
    mother's passport who on 20  March  2007  was  accepted  as  a  British
    citizen by descent.  The appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 30 April 2003.

 5. The chronology  of  his  criminal  offending  is  as  follows.   On  16
    September 2007 he was cautioned for shoplifting.  On 22 April  2010  he
    was sentenced to a  twelve  month  detention  and  training  order  for
    burglary and theft of a dwelling.  He was warned by the respondent that
    if he committed any further offences the question  of  his  deportation
    would be reconsidered.  On that  occasion  no  deportation  action  was
    taken.  On 3 August 2012 he was convicted of burglary and sentenced  to
    three years' imprisonment.  It is this offences which gave rise to  the
    decision under s.32(5).

 6. The unchallenged findings of the panel in respect  of  the  appellant's
    connections to Zimbabwe are as follows:

      i) The appellant's father still lives in Zimbabwe.  The appellant  has
         only had limited contact with him since he left Zimbabwe  but  that
         contact has continued and the panel saw no reason why it could  not
         be revived.

     ii) On the occasion of  the  only  visit  the  appellant  has  made  to
         Zimbabwe in 2004 with his mother, they visited his father.

    iii) The appellant's father contacted him on New Year's Eve  2010  which
         indicated that he did take some interest in his son and that he  is
         someone whom he may contact in order to seek support or  assistance
         on his return.

     iv) The appellant also has a maternal aunt in Zimbabwe and  four  adult
         cousins.  On the occasion of his visit  he  stayed  at  the  aunt's
         house.  The appellant's grandparents who are in the United  Kingdom
         may be of assistance in providing  him  with  contact  numbers  and
         addresses of that aunt and the four adult cousins who may  be  able
         to assist him.

      v) There are no grounds to suggest that  the  appellant  is  estranged
         from the culture of Zimbabwe to the extent that reintegration  into
         family or private life  in  that  country  would  amount  to  undue
         hardship.

     vi) Any employment  or  education  courses  undertaken  in  the  United
         Kingdom could be utilised to assist his integration, to enable  him
         to gain employment and live an independent and sustainable life.

    vii) There was no evidence that the appellant's health is such  that  he
         would be unable to work to support himself.  It would not  be  easy
         for the appellant to establish life in Zimbabwe  and  it  would  no
         doubt involve a degree of hardship and discomfort but  it  had  not
         been shown that it would be unduly harsh to return him.

   viii) The appellant had provided no independent evidence  to  demonstrate
         that he would be destitute or that  he  would  be  unable  to  find
         gainful  employment.   He  had  proved  his  abilities  in  passing
         examinations  at  school  and  college  and  in  addition  he   had
         undertaken  courses  whilst  in  detention  that  may  assist   his
         employment skills in Zimbabwe.  As a resourceful adult he would  be
         able to re-establish himself in Zimbabwe.

 7. I pause to note that the appellant explained to me that his father  had
    made contact after the appellant had written to him.  He had asked  his
    son how he was.  His aunt had plans to leave Zimbabwe  for  the  United
    Kingdom but as yet had not done so.  The appellant's cousins had  left.
    It is not clear whether this evidence was before the panel.

 8. After setting out the oral evidence, the panel directed  itself  as  to
    the  legislative  framework  including  pertinent  to   the   challenge
    paragraph 399A which is in these terms:

         "399A.   This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                ...

                (b)    the person is aged under 25 years, he  has  spent  at
                    least half of his life living  continuously  in  the  UK
                    immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the   immigration
                    decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he
                    has no ties (including social, cultural or family)  with
                    the country to which he would have to go if required  to
                    leave the UK."

 9. The panel's direction included reference to  the  Convention  on  Human
    Rights, the legislative background to the automatic  deportation  order
    and part 13 of the Immigration Rules in force at the time of  decision.
    Under the heading "Our Findings" the panel  addressed  the  appellant's
    background,  his  criminal  offending  including  a  reference  to  the
    sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Tremberg, the risks  of  further
    offending, the appellant's links to Zimbabwe, the panel's finding under
    Articles 2 and 3 and finally the ability of the  appellant  to  support
    himself.

10. The panel then proceeded  to  consider  the  case  under  the  heading:
    "Applying the amended Immigration Rules".   Specifically  it  concluded
    that the appellant did not have  any  family  life  with  a  spouse  or
    partner and so could not benefit from  paragraph  399(a)  or  paragraph
    399(b) and then turned to paragraph 399A and set out the  text  of  the
    reasons letter accompanying the decision in which it was accepted  that
    the appellant had lived continuously more than half his life in the UK.
     The next step under the same heading was to consider  Maslov  and  the
    representations that had been made.

11. There followed further consideration under the headings "Third  Parties
    and Article 8" with reference to the impact on family members and  then
    "Applying Article 8".  In the course  of  directing  itself  the  panel
    referred to Ogundimu, not in the context of its conclusions  on  "ties"
    but as to the serious  reasons  required  to  justify  expulsion  of  a
    settled migrant who has spent lawfully all or the major part of his  or
    her childhood in this country.  The rest of the determination is  taken
    up with the completion of that exercise with a  concluding  observation
    on the liability of the appellant to deportation under s.32 of the 2007
    Act.

12. In essence Mr McVeety argued that the determination was odd in the  way
    it had been set out but when  read  as  an  entirety,  there  had  been
    adequate consideration  of  the  appellant's  links  to  Zimbabwe.   He
    described the determination as having all the right notes  but  in  the
    wrong place.

13. My conclusions are as follows.  Mr  McVeety  is  right.   There  was  a
    muddling by the panel between the issues that  they  were  required  to
    address under the Immigration Rules  and  any  freestanding  Article  8
    exercise.  The question I must ask myself is  whether,  notwithstanding
    this, the panel in substance asked itself the  correct  question  under
    paragraph 399A which, if answered in  the  negative,  would  have  been
    determinative of the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

14. The panel quoted the relevant rule.  It set out the  respondent's  case
    under that Rule.  The extent of its finding is indicated by the text at
    [53] as follows:

         "53. The respondent has  appropriately  given  consideration  under
             paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules  which  defines  the
             criteria  which  must  be  satisfied  before  an  individual's
             private life outweighs the public interest in  deportation  in
             line with Article 8 of the ECHR.  That paragraph requires that
             each of the criteria contained within it is satisfied.  ..."

15. It is evident to  me  that  the  panel  agreed  with  the  respondent's
    conclusions that the appellant had ties to Zimbabwe.  If this  was  the
    extent of their reasoning it would be problematic but in the context of
    its detailed findings at [39] to [42] and [44] and [45]  regarding  the
    extent of the connections and the ability of the appellant to establish
    himself there, I am persuaded that the panel's conclusion is adequately
    reasoned in the proper context.

16. It is correct that Ogundimu was not referred  to  in  the  analysis  of
    paragraph 399A but I do not consider this fatal to  the  determination.
    As observed by Judge O'Connor at [125]:

         "Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant to
         the assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to which
         they would have to go if they were required  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom must include, but are not limited to: the length of time  a
         person has spent in the country to which he would have to go if  he
         were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age that the  person
         left that country, the exposure that person has had to the cultural
         norms of that country, whether that person speaks the  language  of
         the country, the extent of the family and friends that  person  has
         in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and  the
         quality of the relationships that person has with those friends and
         family members."

17. These observations followed an analysis of what was meant by "ties"  at
    [123]:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin.  If this were not the case then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  Rule.
         This would render the application of the Rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."

18. Having regard to the findings by the panel on the appellant's  ties  to
    Zimbabwe, I am satisfied that in substance it conducted  that  exercise
    with the correct enquiry in mind and reached conclusions open to it  on
    the evidence.  The grounds in reality are  therefore  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with those findings. It cannot  be  said  that  the  panel
    applied the wrong test. Despite my misgivings about the format  of  the
    determination, when read as a whole, I  am  satisfied  that  the  panel
    carried  out  the  task  it  was  required  to  when  considering   the
    appellants' ties to Zimbabwe. The challenge is confined to this  single
    aspect on which I am persuaded the panel did not materially err.

19. Accordingly the appeal by  the  appellant  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed and the decision of the  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.


Signed   Date 4 September 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
