
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02315/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |              Decision & Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 26th November 2015                  |              On 4th January 2016       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Mr J C S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sesay, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow
Office)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this case the Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal  with
    permission against a Decision  of  Judge  McIntosh  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. By a Decision promulgated on 19th May 2015 the judge  allowed
    Mr S's appeal against the Secretary of State's Decision to  deport  him
    under the automatic deport provisions  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,
    following a conviction for possession of class A drugs with  intent  to
    supply and a sentence of 28 months' imprisonment.

 2. The case presented to the First-tier Tribunal was that the  Appellant's
    current partner and her children's situation justified the appeal being
    allowed.  The facts as found by the judge in the Decision was that  the
    Appellant  and  his  partner  were  in  a  subsisting   and   committed
    relationship, that the stepchildren, and I will call them that for want
    of a better phrase, view him as their father, he has a child  with  the
    same partner, he also has a number of other children with whom  he  has
    varying degrees of  contact,  his  partner  suffers  from  sickle  cell
    anaemia and she has had various crises and admissions to hospital as  a
    result and her son also has sickle cell anaemia.

 3. When the Appellant was in prison Social Services had to become involved
    due to her inability to care for her children.  The  Appellant  is  her
    carer and receives carer's allowance in relation to  that.   There  was
    evidence before the judge from Probation and from a prison officer that
    the Appellant presented a low risk of  reoffending  and  detailing  the
    efforts that he had made to improve and to  rehabilitate  himself.   On
    the above facts the judge found  that  it  was  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children and his partner  to  go  to  Jamaica  with  him  and  also  or
    alternatively to remain in the UK without him.

 4. It is true that the judge's reasoning is unstructured and difficult  to
    follow and it does not address in terms the various parts of Rules  398
    and 399A of the Immigration Rules and, as Mr Avery pointed out, in fact
    is contradictory between paragraphs 46 and  47.  At  paragraph  46  the
    judge says that he has had regard to the provisions  of  paragraph  398
    and in particular 399(b) finding that the Appellant is in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with his partner and the children but  then  at
    paragraph 47 completely contradicts that by saying he does not meet the
    requirements of the Rules.  However, the findings  that  he  makes  are
    reasoned in relation to the factual  circumstances  and  the  situation
    that would be faced by the family.

 5. So far as the Secretary of State's argument that the COIR  makes  clear
    that there are treatment  facilities  available  in  Jamaica,  that  is
    neither referred to in the refusal letter nor was  there  any  evidence
    put before the judge to that effect, so the only evidence  he  had  was
    that put forward by  the  Appellant.  Therefore  the  Judge  cannot  be
    criticised for not dealing with evidence that the  Secretary  of  State
    did not produce or put before him.  It is quite clear from the  various
    findings that the Judge does make that he found that the  exception  in
    paragraph 399A is met and so any error of law in the  rather  difficult
    to follow and unstructured Decision and Reasons is not material.

 6. The sickle cell anaemia condition, while for some  people  has  minimum
    impact on their lives and is well-controlled, that clearly is  not  the
    case for the Appellant's partner in this case, and  for  those  reasons
    the judge came to the conclusion that his presence was necessary in the
    United Kingdom and it would be unduly harsh on  the  remainder  of  the
    family, in particular the children, if he was not. The  likelihood  is,
    based on the evidence, that the children would have to  be  taken  into
    care when she has crises, and indeed there is evidence today  that  she
    has recently had another  one  and  she  is  unable  to  care  for  the
    children. It is clearly the case that children in care or  being  taken
    into care as an alternative to remaining  at  home  with  a  parent  is
    unduly harsh.

 7. Taking the public interest into account; the Immigration Rules tell  us
    that it is in  the  public  interest  to  deport  somebody  unless  the
    exceptions apply.  If the exceptions apply, that is the end of  it.  In
    this case the judge clearly  found  that  the  exceptions  applied  and
    therefore I find no material error of law and the Secretary of  State's
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 21st December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



