
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham
On: 7 July 2013                         Decision Promulgated:

         On 31 July 2014



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AB
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms Norman, instructed by Ravi Dilan & Hayer Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appeal is brought against the decision promulgated on  12  May  2014  of
First-tier Tribunal  Judge Ferguson and Mr  GF  Sandall  which  allowed  the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 13 November 2013  to
make a deportation order against AB.

For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary of State as  the
respondent and to AB as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  before
the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Kosovo.

The appellant's history is not  in  dispute.  The  appellant  and  his  wife
entered the UK illegally on 10 March 2000. They came with  their  two  older
children, LB and EB.  Their asylum claims failed. Two further children  were
born in the UK, FB and  PB.  On  24  April  2004  the  family  were  granted
indefinite leave to remain.

On 26 August 2005 AB was convicted  of  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily
harm and sentenced to 18 months  imprisonment.  He  was  at  the  same  time
convicted of dangerous driving, using a vehicle  whilst  uninsured,  driving
otherwise than in accordance with a licence  and  driving  a  motor  vehicle
with  excess  alcohol  for  which  he  received  an  additional   8   months
imprisonment to run concurrently. He was disqualified  from  driving  for  3
years. He was released from prison in 2006.

In March 2010 the family applied for British  nationality.  AB  was  refused
but the rest of the family are now British citizens.

As above, on 13 November 2013 the respondent made a  decision  that  it  was
conducive to the public good to deport AB.

The ground of appeal before me was narrow. The respondent accepted that  the
appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  British  minor
children and that it was not reasonable to expect those  children  to  leave
the UK. The respondent did not accept that there was no other family  member
who was able to care for the children in the UK. The respondent's  view  was
therefore that the  requirements of paragraph 399(a)(i)(b) were not met  and
the  appellant's  relationship  with  his   children   could   not   prevent
deportation.

The First-tier Tribunal  found  otherwise  at  [26]  of  its  determination,
concluding that the appellant's wife was not able to care for  the  children
in the UK without the appellant. The  respondent  challenged  that  finding,
maintaining that the panel was not entitled to find that the wife's  medical
conditions precluded her from  caring  for  the  children  where  there  was
little medical evidence of this. The panel referred  at  [23]  to  it  being
"difficult" for her to care for the children but this was not sufficient  to
meet the test in paragraph 399(a)(i)(b) of being "unable" to care for  them.


In my judgement, the First-tier Tribunal identified quite  rightly  at  [21]
that the question of whether the wife could care for the  children  was  "at
the heart of the appeal". The panel was equally  correct  in  indicating  at
[22] that there was  limited  medical  evidence  before  it  on  the  wife's
medical conditions.

It remains the case that the panel was  entitled  to  place  weight  on  the
letter dated 11 September 2013 from the GP which  was  consistent  with  the
evidence of the appellant and his wife that she would be unable to care  for
the children alone as she  suffers  from  a  number  of  medical  conditions
including   "type   2   diabetes   mellitus   with    neuropathy,    asthma,
osteoarthritis, vitamin D deficiency, headache and obesity" and  had  had  a
"thigh lipoma excised,  joint  injections  for  arthritic  pain  and  carpal
tunnel release" and was on a large number of medications. It  was  a  matter
for the panel to place what weight they saw fit on the illness of  the  wife
in their assessment of whether she would be able to care  for  the  children
without the appellant.

In  addition,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  further  evidence  before  it
supporting the claim that the wife was not able to look after the  children.
There was a letter dated 10 December 2013 from EB's head teacher at page  64
of the appellant's bundle.  This  confirmed  that  the  appellant  played  a
fundamental role in  supporting  EB  who  had  significant  educational  and
behavioural difficulties and had previously been  excluded  from  mainstream
education. The letter stated that the appellant was  contacted  on  a  daily
basis about EB and was working with the school to  support  the  child.  The
head teacher also confirmed the school's  view  that  the  appellant's  wife
found it difficult to manage the children and that the appellant  should  be
allowed to stay in order to continue to be able to offer support to EB.

There was also a letter dated 10 December 2013 from PB's school at  page  65
of the appellant's bundle confirming  that  the  appellant's  wife  was  not
well. The letter stated  that  the  school  "strongly"  disagreed  with  the
decision to deport the appellant as he was "vital to  [PB]'s  emotional  and
behavioural  condition  as  he  does  most  of  the  looking  after  of  the
children." The school was also "firmly of the opinion that [PB]'s  behaviour
and academic progress would seriously deteriorate if he  were  to  lose  his
father through deportation."

There was a further letter  dated  11  December  2013  at  page  66  of  the
appellant's bundle from Barnado's  who  were  supporting  the  family.  That
letter also confirmed that the appellant's wife  had  medical  problems  and
that the family needed support with household budgeting and parenting.

There was clearly, in my view, sufficient  evidence  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal, notwithstanding the absence  of  detailed  medical  evidence,   to
allow it to find that the appellant's  wife  was  unable  to  care  for  the
children in the absence of the appellant  and  that  paragraph  399(a)(i)(b)
was met. I did not find that the decision disclosed an error on a  point  of
law in so finding, the grounds really only seek to reargue the point.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 12 November 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Anonymity

I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, his wife or his children.   I  do  so  in  the  best
interests of the children in order to protect their identities.

