
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02456/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2016                           |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               danilo restivo
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin Counsel instructed by David Wyld & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Strachan, QC Counsel instructed by the
GLD


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT").

 2. This appeal comes back before me following a  hearing  on  8  September
    2016 before Upper Tribunal Judge Southern and me which resulted in  our
    setting aside the decision of the FtT for error of  law.   The  hearing
    before me was for the re-making of the decision.

 3. In order to put my decision into context, I reproduce the error of  law
    decision in full as follows:

                           "ERROR OF LAW DECISION


          1. On 29 June 2011, before the Crown  Court  at  Winchester,  the
             respondent was convicted of murder, an offence committed on 12
             November  2002,  for  which   he   was   sentenced   to   life
             imprisonment, the term to be served being subsequently amended
             by the Court of Appeal from the whole life term imposed by the
             trial judge to a minimum term of 40 years.


          2. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("SSHD")  has
             been granted permission to appeal against the  decision  of  a
             panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   by   a   determination
             promulgated following a hearing on 23 April 2014, to allow the
             respondent's appeal against a decision to make  a  deportation
             order as a consequence  of  that  conviction.  Permission  was
             granted  by  Haddon-Cave  J  following  a   successful   "Cart
             challenge" to the decision of an Upper Tribunal judge who  had
             refused to grant permission to appeal.  In granting permission
             to bring the application for judicial review Cobb J said:


                  "The application raises important points of  principle  in
                  relation to the correct  interpretation  of  the  relevant
                  statutory instruments for the deportation and transfer  of
                  a prisoner within the EEA; given the particular context of
                  this offence/offender, there is  a  compelling  reason  to
                  achieve clarity."


             Which view was echoed by Hadden-Cave J who  said  in  granting
             permission to appeal:


                  "In my view Cobb J was right to find that the  application
                  in the present case raised important points  of  principle
                  as to the correct interpretation of the [Immigration (EEA)
                  Regulations 2006] and the Framework Agreement  leading  to
                  the deportation and transfer of prisoners within the EEA."


          3. Before examining the reasons given by the First-tier  Tribunal
             for allowing the appeal and the grounds upon which  permission
             to appeal was sought and granted it is necessary  to  set  out
             some detail of the nature of the respondent's offending,  both
             in the United Kingdom  and  in  Italy,  because  this  becomes
             relevant to the discussion that is to be conducted below.


          4. As can be seen from how the trial judge, Burnett J,  expressed
             himself when passing sentence, this was a particularly  brutal
             murder, disclosing behaviour by the respondent that  seriously
             aggravated the offence of murder itself. The judge  said  that
             the evidence of the respondent's guilt was  overwhelming.  The
             jury had heard also that he had murdered another  young  woman
             in Italy in September 1993 in  a  manner  that  bore  striking
             resemblance to the way in which the murder of Ms  Barnett  had
             been carried out. The judge said that the respondent had  gone
             to Ms Barnett's flat intending to murder her and  to  mutilate
             her body:


                  "... You made careful preparations. You  had  with  you  a
                  hammer, or something similar, with which you killed her by
                  beating her repeatedly about the head. You  had  with  you
                  the knife with which you mutilated her  after  her  death.
                  You cut off her breasts and cut her throat. You also  left
                  carefully incised marks on her abdomen.


                  ...


                  You carefully  arranged  her  body  in  a  way  strikingly
                  similar to the way in which you had arranged Elisa  Claps'
                  body in 1993. Her body was not found until last year.  You
                  cut both bras at the front. You lowered the  trousers  and
                  underwear to  expose  the  pubic  hair.  Most  strikingly,
                  perhaps, you cut Heather Barnett's hair and placed some of
                  it under her left hand, just as you had  done  with  Elisa
                  Claps. You also left a lock of hair of an  unknown  person
                  in Heather Barnett's right hand.


                  ...  There  is  no  doubt  that  at  least  in  part  your
                  motivation was sexual. You had a long-standing hair fetish
                  which you indulged by cutting the hair of women on  public
                  transport and in cinemas in England and in Italy."


             Burnett J then explained  how  the  careful  planning  of  the
             respondent had included that he  had  sought  to  set  up  for
             himself an alibi and continued:


                  "... you knew that she had children  at  school,  and  you
                  knew that the children would return after  school  on  the
                  day you had killed their mother. You knew that an  11-year
                  old girl and a 14-year old boy  would  find  their  mother
                  butchered on the bathroom floor. That feature of this case
                  will haunt those who have sat through it.


                  ...


                  ... Why you picked out Heather Barnett as a  victim  I  do
                  not know, but it is clear that you did  so  to  satisfy  a
                  sadistic sexual appetite. The evidence  in  this  case  is
                  that you are a cold, depraved, calculating killer ..."


          5. The SSHD had concluded, in the light of this conviction,  that
             the respondent was a person whose  removal  was  justified  on
             grounds of public  policy  or  public  security  so  that  the
             requirements  of  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of   the   Immigration
             (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regs")
             were met. It was accepted by all concerned that,  in  view  of
             the time the respondent had lived in the  United  Kingdom,  he
             had secured a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15
             and so the relevant test was that in Regulation 21(3) that the
             decision may not be taken except on serious grounds of  public
             policy or public security. As the SSHD was satisfied that this
             test was met, a decision to make a Deportation Order  pursuant
             to section 5 Immigration Act 1971 was made. It is important to
             recognise, given the issues that arise in  this  appeal,  that
             the decision under challenge is  one  to  make  a  deportation
             order and not the actual making of such an order.


          6. Although the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was against
             the decision to make a deportation order, it  was  clear  from
             the documents before the tribunal that the SSHD's  purpose  in
             so doing was in order to explore the possibility  of  securing
             agreement of the Italian Government to the  transfer  of  this
             respondent to Italy so  that  he  could  serve  in  Italy  the
             sentence imposed by the British court for  the  murder  of  Ms
             Barnett. The respondent had been sentenced also by an  Italian
             court to 30 years imprisonment for the murder of Elisa  Claps.
             Although the respondent had been convicted of that  murder  in
             his absence, he had  been  subject  to  temporary  extradition
             arrangements in March 2013 so that  he  could  participate  in
             what proved to be for him an unsuccessful appeal against  that
             conviction.


          7. The position as at the date of the hearing before  the  First-
             tier Tribunal was that the rejection of that challenge had not
             exhausted the respondent's rights of appeal in Italy and  that
             he intended to pursue a final further onward right  of  appeal
             against conviction. Mr Hawkin informed us  that  final  appeal
             available to the respondent in Italy was finally dismissed  on
             7 March 2016 which was, of  course,  after  the  date  of  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


             The legal framework.


          8. As we shall see, it becomes plain from  the  determination  of
             the First-tier Tribunal that the panel misunderstood the legal
             framework relating to the process  for  the  transfer  of  EEA
             nationals sentenced to imprisonment in the United  Kingdom  to
             serve their sentence in their own Member State. That framework
             was originally established by the Council of Europe Convention
             on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons of 21  March  1983.  That
             provided for such transfers  only  with  the  consent  of  the
             person concerned. A Protocol  of  18  December  1997  allowing
             transfers without the serving prisoner's consent,  subject  to
             certain conditions, although ratified by the  United  Kingdom,
             was not ratified by all Member States and those States who had
             chosen not to ratify that  Protocol  were  under  no  duty  to
             accept such transfers. The Council of Europe resolved that the
             time had come to impose such a duty and this resulted  in  the
             Council Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA, the fifth recital  of
             which included that:


                  "Notwithstanding the need to provide the sentenced  person
                  with adequate safeguards, his or her  involvement  in  the
                  proceedings should no longer be dominant by  requiring  in
                  all cases his or her consent..."


             This Framework Decision did not  require  to  be  ratified  in
             order to take effect. The only Member State excused  from  the
             duty to accept, where appropriate, such transfers was  Poland,
             because:


                  "Poland needs more time than the other  Member  States  to
                  face the practical and material consequences  of  transfer
                  of Polish  citizens  convicted  in  other  Member  States,
                  especially in the light of an increased mobility of Polish
                  citizens within the Union. For that  reason,  a  temporary
                  derogation of limited scope for a maximum period  of  five
                  years should be foreseen."


             Before leaving the recitals to the Framework Decision,  it  is
             helpful to set out what is said in recital 13:


                  "This Framework Decision respects fundamental  rights  and
                  observes the principles recognised by  Article  6  of  the
                  Treaty on European Union and reflected by the  Charter  of
                  Fundamental Rights of the European Union..."


          9. Regulation  19  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
             provides, so far as is relevant for present purposes:


                  "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


                  ...


                  (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who
                  has entered the United Kingdom... may be removed if-


                  ...


                  (b) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public policy, public
                  security or public health in accordance with regulation
                  21;"


             Regulation 21 provides, again so far as is relevant:


                  "Decisions taken on public policy, public security and
                  public health grounds


                  21. -    (1)  In this regulation a "relevant decision"
                     means an EEA decision taken on the grounds of public
                     policy, public security or public health.


                     (2)   A relevant decision may not be taken to serve
                     economic ends.


                     (3)   A relevant decision may not be taken in respect
                     of a person with a permanent right of residence under
                     regulation 15 except on serious grounds of public
                     policy or public security.


                     (4)   A relevant decision may not be taken except on
                     imperative grounds of public security in respect of an
                     EEA national who-


                        (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom for a
                        continuous period of at least ten years prior to
                        the relevant decision; or


                        (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant
                        decision is necessary in his best interests, as
                        provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the
                        Child adopted by the General Assembly of the United
                        Nations on 20th November 1989


                     (5)   Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
                     public policy or public security it shall, in addition
                     to complying with the preceding paragraphs of this
                     regulation, be taken in accordance with the following
                     principles-


                        (a)    the decision must comply with the principle
                        of proportionality;


                        (b)    the decision must be based exclusively on
                        the personal conduct of the person concerned;


                        (c)    the personal conduct of the person concerned
                        must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
                        serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
                        interests of society;


                        (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the
                        case or which relate to considerations of general
                        prevention do not justify the decision;


                        (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions do
                        not in themselves justify the decision.


                     (6)   Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds
                     of public policy or public security in relation to a
                     person who is resident in the United Kingdom the
                     decision maker must take account of considerations
                     such as the age, state of health, family and economic
                     situation of the person, the person's length of
                     residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
                     and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and
                     the extent of the person's links with his country of
                     origin."


             Article  33(2)  of   Directive   2004/38/EC   ("the   Citizens
             Directive") provides:


                  "If an expulsion order, as provided for in paragraph 1, is
                  enforced more than two years  after  it  was  issued,  the
                  Member State shall check that the individual concerned  is
                  currently and genuinely  a  threat  to  public  policy  or
                  public security and shall assess whether  there  has  been
                  any  material  change  in  the  circumstances  since   the
                  expulsion order was issued."


             The Council Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA:


                  Article 6


                  Opinion and notification of the sentenced person


                  1.   Without prejudice to paragraph 2, a judgment together
                  with a certificate may be forwarded to the executing State
                  for the purpose of its recognition and enforcement of  the
                  sentence only with the consent of the sentenced person  in
                  accordance with the law of the issuing State.


                  2.   The consent of the  sentenced  person  shall  not  be
                  required where the judgment together with the  certificate
                  is forwarded:


                     a) to the Member State of  nationality  in  which  the
                        sentenced person lives;


                     b) to the Member State to which the  sentenced  person
                        will be deported once he or she  is  released  from
                        the enforcement of the sentence on the basis of  an
                        expulsion or  deportation  order  included  in  the
                        judgment  or  in  a  judicial   or   administrative
                        decision or any other measure consequential to  the
                        judgment;


                     c) to the Member State to which the  sentenced  person
                        has fled or  otherwise  returned  in  view  of  the
                        criminal proceedings pending against him or her  in
                        the issuing State or following  the  conviction  in
                        that issuing State.


                  3.   In all cases where the sentenced person is  still  in
                  the issuing State, he or she shall be given an opportunity
                  to state his or her opinion orally or  in  writing.  Where
                  the issuing State considers it necessary in  view  of  the
                  sentenced person's age or his or her  physical  or  mental
                  condition, that opportunity shall be given to his  or  her
                  legal representative.


                  The opinion of the sentenced person shall  be  taken  into
                  account  when  deciding  the  issue  of   forwarding   the
                  judgement together with the certificate. Where the  person
                  has availed him or herself of the opportunity provided  in
                  this paragraph, the opinion of the sentenced person  shall
                  be forwarded to the executing State, in particular with  a
                  view to Article 4(4). If the sentenced person  stated  his
                  or her opinion orally, the issuing State shall ensure that
                  the written record  of  such  statement  is  available  to
                  executing State.


                  4.   The competent authority of the  issuing  State  shall
                  inform the sentenced person, in a language which he or she
                  understands, that it has decided to forward  the  judgment
                  together with the certificate by using the  standard  form
                  of  the  notification  set  out  in  Annex  II.  When  the
                  sentenced person is in the executing State at the time  of
                  that decision, that  form  shall  be  transmitted  to  the
                  executing State which shall inform  the  sentenced  person
                  accordingly.


                  5.   Paragraph 2(a)  shall  not  apply  to  Poland  as  an
                  issuing State and as an executing State in cases where the
                  judgement was issued before the lapse of five years from 5
                  December 2011. Poland may at any time notify  the  General
                  Secretariat of the Council that it will  no  longer  avail
                  itself of this derogation.


         The grounds of appeal


         10. Both parties are, of course, aware of the full detail  of  the
             reasoning that led the First-tier Tribunal  to  conclude  that
             the appeal should be allowed, and  for  present  purposes  the
             following summary will suffice:


               a. The First-tier Tribunal considered that  the  decision  to
                  make a deportation  order  was  premature,  first  because
                  agreement of the Italian authorities under  the  Framework
                  Decision for the respondent to serve his sentence in Italy
                  had not yet been secured (indeed, the Italian  authorities
                  had not even been approached concerning  such  a  request)
                  and secondly  because  the  appeal  process  in  Italy  in
                  respect of the respondent's conviction for the  murder  of
                  Elisa  Claps  had  not  been  exhausted.  The   First-tier
                  Tribunal said, at paragraph 55:


                      "We do find that it is premature for the Secretary of
                      State to seek to  deport  the  Appellant  until  that
                      final appeal is determined by the Italian Courts."


               b. Regulation 21(5)(c) of the 2006 regulations required  that
                  the  personal  conduct  of  the  respondent  represent   a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.  As  the
                  respondent was imprisoned as a Category A prisoner serving
                  a 40 year minimum term, that risk "cannot and has not been
                  properly and comprehensively and fairly  assessed  at  the
                  present time";


               c. The conditions in which the respondent would be imprisoned
                  in Italy would be such as to infringe rights protected  by
                  Article 3 of the ECHR;


               d. The appeal fell to be allowed under Article 8 of the  ECHR
                  also, on the basis that since his transfer  to  serve  his
                  sentence  in  an  Italian  prison  would  subject  him  to
                  treatment contrary to Article 3,  therefore  the  decision
                  was not in accordance with the law and  so  not  a  lawful
                  decision for the purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR either.




         11. The essence of the grounds upon which the SSHD sought and  was
             granted permission to appeal may be summarised as follows:


               a.  This  was  an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  make   a
                  deportation order and not against a decision to request  a
                  transfer of a serving prisoner  to  Italy.  Therefore  the
                  First-tier Tribunal was not  concerned  with  issues  that
                  might  possibly  arise  in  the  future  consequent  to  a
                  transfer decision, if one were to be made, and  was  wrong
                  to conflate the two issues. The approach of the First-tier
                  Tribunal represents a potentially  serious  impediment  to
                  the proper operation of proposed prisoner transfers  under
                  the Framework Decision.


               b. The First-tier Tribunal were wrong in law to approach  the
                  assessment of risk posed by the respondent  on  the  basis
                  that as a prisoner at the start of a long  sentence  there
                  is no genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                  because  he  is  incarcerated.  This  is  said  to  be  "a
                  fundamental  misinterpretation  of  the   requirement   in
                  Regulation 21 and one that would  defeat  the  object  and
                  purpose of the European prisoner  transfer  arrangements".
                  Alternatively, Mr Strachan  submits  that  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal made an error of law in failing to carry out such
                  an assessment at all.


               c. The First-tier Tribunal erred in principle in  seeking  to
                  resolve the issue  of  whether  a  prison  transfer  would
                  breach Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR as these were dependent
                  upon a possible future transfer decision and did not arise
                  from the decision to make a deportation order.


         Discussion


         12. At paragraph 46 of  their  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             said:


                  "...  We  find  that  the  proposed  deportation  of   the
                  Appellant to Italy under the Convention is premature until
                  it  is  established  that  Italy  has  signed  up  to  the
                  Additional Protocol and/or has  accepted  that  they  will
                  accept the transfer of the Appellant  in  compliance  with
                  the Framework Decision and/or would make an application on
                  their own behalf for the return of the Appellant to  serve
                  the sentence imposed by the Italian courts for the  murder
                  of Elisa Claps."


             Thus, two reasons were given for considering that the decision
             to  make  the  deportation   order   was   premature.   First,
             arrangements were not already in place for the transfer of the
             respondent to Italy for  him  to  serve  his  sentence  there.
             Indeed, the First-tier Tribunal observed that they  could  not
             be because Italy, unlike the United Kingdom, had not  by  then
             ratified the Protocol of 1997.  As we have  said,  the  First-
             tier Tribunal were wrong about that.  The  Protocol  had  been
             overtaken by the Framework Decision,  precisely  because  some
             Member States had not ratified it.


         13. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal considered that the making of  a
             deportation order before the  transfer  arrangements  were  in
             place was premature and  so,  presumably,  unlawful.  For  the
             reasons that follow, we are in no doubt at all  that  in  that
             regard the reasoning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses
             material and fundamental legal error.


         14. It is important to recognise that the decision of the SSHD  to
             make a deportation order is not a decision to make  a  request
             for, let alone to secure the transfer of a serving prisoner to
             another EEA  Member  State  to  serve  his  sentence  in  that
             country. Indeed, that is not even a decision to  be  taken  by
             the SSHD because it is a decision for the Secretary  of  State
             for  Justice  to  make,  she  being  the  competent  authority
             notified to the General Secretariat of the Council pursuant to
             Article 2 (1) of the Framework Decision. In conflating the two
             issues the First-tier Tribunal fell into  legal  error.  If  a
             deportation order is made, that will enable the  Secretary  of
             State for Justice to consider whether or not to seek to pursue
             a transfer request.


         15. Although the First-tier Tribunal, wrongly, thought the  making
             of the deportation order was premature  because  the  transfer
             request had not been agreed, in fact precisely the opposite is
             the case. It would be premature,  for  two  reasons,  for  the
             Secretary of State  for  Justice  to  have  sought  to  secure
             agreement of the Italian authorities  to  a  transfer  request
             where no deportation order had been made. That is  because  it
             had to be established, regardless of any ambition to  transfer
             the respondent  to  Italy,  that  a  deportation  order  could
             properly  be  made  in  the  light  of  the  requirements   of
             Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.  Secondly,  a  transfer
             request  cannot  be  made  unless  and  until  a  removal   or
             deportation decision is in place.


         16. In his oral submissions Mr Hawkin advanced an argument to  the
             contrary, seeking to demonstrate that there was no requirement
             in the form of a precondition that a deportation order  be  in
             place before a  transfer  request  is  made.  We  reject  that
             submission. Article 6(2)(b) of the Framework decision  enables
             the transfer of EEA national prisoners  to  their  own  Member
             State, without their consent, in consequence of  an  expulsion
             decision. It is clear from Article 6  that  the  mechanism  of
             transfer depends upon a prior deportation  decision.  This  is
             reinforced by the format of the certificate found at  Annex  1
             to the Framework Decision which, at section (g)  (b)  requires
             confirmation of the "expulsion or deportation  order..."  and,
             if the order is not included in the judgment itself,  as  will
             be the case for those convicted in the  United  Kingdom,  "the
             name of the authority that issued the order, the date of issue
             and, if available, the reference  number"  from  which  it  is
             clear that the order must have been issued.


         17. Therefore a deportation decision is a necessary  pre-condition
             for the transfer of a prisoner,  without  his  consent,  under
             Article 6(2)(b) of the Framework Decision. Thus, the making of
             a deportation decision was not premature but an essential step
             to taken before the mechanism of the Framework Decision  could
             be engaged. It follows that it was an error  of  law  for  the
             First-tier Tribunal to proceed on the basis that the  transfer
             request should have been made before the deportation  decision
             was taken.


         18. The second reason given by the First-tier Tribunal for finding
             that the making of the deportation  order  was  premature  was
             that the respondent's onward appeal in Italy in respect of his
             conviction there for the murder of Elisa Claps was unresolved.
             We are satisfied that this reasoning  was  also  fundamentally
             flawed  such  as  to  disclose  material  legal   error.   The
             deportation  order  was  made  as   a   consequence   of   the
             respondent's conviction for the murder of Ms Barnett. Although
             the jury that convicted the respondent  of  that  murder  were
             told also of the murder committed by the respondent in  Italy,
             the conviction for the murder of Ms Barnett stands  regardless
             of the outcome of any appeal to the  Italian  courts.  Further
             confirmation of this, should it be required, is found  in  the
             decision of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)  in  David
             Oakes and Others v R [2012] EWCA Crim 2435. This was a special
             constitution of the court, the Lord Chief Justice sitting with
             Hallett,  Hughes  Leveson  and  Rafferty  LJJ,   convened   to
             consider:


                  "... sentences which were imposed on  different  occasions
                  following very grave crimes..."


             The outcome for the respondent was that the  whole  life  term
             imposed by Burnett J was varied to a minimum term of 40 years.
             At para 78 The LCJ said:


                  "When the judge  summed  the  case  up  to  the  jury,  he
                  directed them, quite correctly, that the only  court  with
                  jurisdiction to try DR for the murder of Elisa Clap[s] and
                  to convict him of the offence was an Italian court. It  is
                  also clear that there was a vast body  of  evidence  which
                  provided strong evidence that he was indeed guilty of that
                  murder. However, as the case was left to the jury, it  was
                  clearly open to them  to  convict  DR  of  the  murder  of
                  Heather Barnett even if they were not  sure  that  he  had
                  murdered Elisa Clap[s]. In short, therefore,  DR  was  not
                  tried for or convicted of the murder of Elisa  Clap[s]  (a
                  murder which he denied), and the verdict did not and could
                  not carry with it the inevitable conclusion that the  jury
                  must have been sure that he murdered her..."


             Put another way, as did Mr Strachan in his submissions, it was
             not open to the SSHD to approach the matter in any  way  other
             than that the respondent had been convicted of the  murder  of
             Ms Barnett and that would remain to be the case regardless  of
             the outcome of any further appeal pursued  by  the  respondent
             against conviction for another offence in another country.


         19. Therefore, the fact that the respondent was seeking to  pursue
             an appeal against his conviction in Italy was no basis at  all
             to consider that the SSHD was not lawfully entitled to proceed
             to make the deportation decision she did. Indeed, if  it  were
             otherwise,  the  SSHD  would  be  precluded  from   making   a
             deportation decision where any person had unresolved  criminal
             proceedings or appeal rights  in  another  country.  There  is
             nothing in the domestic or European jurisprudence  to  justify
             such a proposition.


         20. For these reasons we are also satisfied  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal fell into material legal error in concluding that the
             decision to make a deportation order was premature because the
             respondent's appeal rights in Italy in respect of a  different
             offence altogether were not yet exhausted.


         21. Next, we address the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal that
             as the respondent had a further 37 years of  his  sentence  to
             serve, therefore the risk posed by him could not and  had  not
             been properly and comprehensively and fairly assessed so  that
             it is not established for the purposes of Regulation  21(5)(c)
             that he represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
             threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.
             There are two aspects to this issue. Mr Strachan submits  that
             it is implicit from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
             although  not  specifically  articulated,   that   the   panel
             considered there  was  no  genuine,  present  or  sufficiently
             serious threat  posed  by  the  respondent  to  a  fundamental
             interest of society because, as the respondent was a  Category
             A  serving  prisoner,  any  risk  that  he  may  represent  is
             adequately managed so that there was no risk to the public  at
             large. Alternatively, it  was  their  task  to  carry  out  an
             assessment of the level of threat for the  purposes  of  their
             consideration of the EEA Regs and it was an error of  law  for
             them to decide not to do so. At paragraph 53 the panel said:


                  "... At the present time  the  Appellant  is  in  a  high-
                  security  prison.  The  risk  assessments  have  not  been
                  carried out and they are unlikely to be done for a  period
                  of time. What risk assessments we have could be  described
                  as contradictory as we have  outlined  above  but  in  any
                  event the Appellant has 37 years of his sentence left.  We
                  find that the risk posed by the  Appellant,  at  the  very
                  beginning of an extremely lengthy prison sentence,  cannot
                  and has not been properly and comprehensively  and  fairly
                  assessed at the present time."


         22. It is plain both that the First-tier Tribunal was required  to
             carry out the assessment of threat or risk that they  declined
             to, and that there was ample material before  them  to  inform
             that assessment. That material was in the form of the decision
             letter which identified all  that  the  SSHD  relied  upon  in
             asserting that threat was established, the sentencing  remarks
             of the judge, the "Categorisation Document"  representing  the
             decision  of  the  Prison  Governor  as  to  the  respondent's
             designation as a  Category  A  prisoner,  explaining  why  the
             conclusion reached was that:


                  "Mr Restivo continues to pose a high risk  to  the  public
                  and a serious risk of re-offending in a  similar  unlawful
                  way if at large."


             and the NOMs report, discussed by the First-tier  Tribunal  at
             paragraph 48 of the determination. The fact  that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal detected tensions in some of the views expressed
             as to the risk of re-offending  is  no  basis  upon  which  to
             consider that no assessment of risk should be made.


         23. That alone is  sufficient  to  identify  legal  error  in  the
             approach taken to this issue by the First-tier Tribunal.


         24. It is apparent also that the First-tier Tribunal  have  fallen
             into error in conflating issues of the existence  of  risk  or
             the risk of reoffending and the management of  that  risk.  It
             may well be that while he serves his sentence as a Category  A
             prisoner there is a very much reduced risk of any reoffending,
             even though he was described by the sentencing judge as "a man
             capable  of  inhuman  depravity"  and   "a   cold,   depraved,
             calculating killer". As Mr Strachan submits, if  the  approach
             of the First-tier Tribunal were maintained, that would  defeat
             the objective and purpose of the  European  prisoner  transfer
             arrangements because, if it  were  the  case  that  a  serving
             prisoner must be regarded as a person who, on account of being
             in prison, did not represent such a risk, then no  removal  or
             deportation decision could be made and so the result would  be
             that no deportation order could be  made  until  release  from
             prison was imminent and so no  transfer  under  the  Framework
             Decision could ever be made.


         25. The third reason given by the First-tier Tribunal for allowing
             the appeal was that on being transferred to serve his sentence
             in Italy, the respondent would be subjected to treatment  such
             as to infringe Article 3 of the ECHR. At paragraph 58 of their
             decision the First-tier Tribunal said:


                  "In any event we find that the decision does not comply at
                  the present time with  the  principle  of  proportionality
                  under Regulation 21(5) as it does not, for  reasons  which
                  we shall give, comply  with  Article  3  of  the  European
                  Convention on Human Rights."


             This is not altogether easy to follow as the rights  protected
             by Article 3 are absolute and not qualified so the question of
             whether there is a real risk of infringement of Article  3  is
             not a matter informed by the principle of proportionality.


         26. In reaching its conclusion concerning article 3,   the  First-
             tier Tribunal made a further material  error  of  law  because
             there was no arrangement in place for the applicant  to  serve
             his sentence in Italy and that was not the  basis  upon  which
             their  assessment  was  to  be  made.  Put  another  way,  the
             consequence  of  the  deportation  order  was  not  that   the
             respondent would be sent to serve his sentence in  an  Italian
             prison. Such a transfer could take place only if a  subsequent
             decision were made under the Framework Decision and if such  a
             decision was made the respondent would have an opportunity  to
             raise any legal  challenge  he  thought  appropriate  at  that
             stage. As we have observed, that would be a challenge not to a
             decision of the SSHD but to a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
             State for Justice.


         27. In discussion at the hearing before us,  Mr  Hawkin  submitted
             that, by analogy with the position is  asylum  appeals,  there
             should have been a theoretical assessment of the  respondent's
             circumstances on the basis that he was returned to  Italy.  As
             he has been sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment by the Italian
             courts, on arrival he would be detained to serve that sentence
             and the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find, on the basis
             of the material before them, that he would serve that sentence
             in conditions that were in breach of Article 3  of  the  ECHR.
             Therefore, the issue of prison conditions  arose  whether  the
             position of the respondent is assessed on the  basis  that  he
             was  returned  under  the  Framework  Decision  to  serve  the
             sentence imposed by the United Kingdom court  or  whether  his
             position is considered on the hypothetical basis of  being  in
             Italy without regard being had to the United Kingdom sentence.
             In either case, Mr Hawkins submits,  the  respondent  faces  a
             real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 while  serving  a
             lengthy prison sentence.


         28. As Mr Strachan submitted, the reality of the situation is that
             the respondent will return to Italy only if a transfer request
             is accepted by the Italian authorities  and  that  will  occur
             only if the processing of the request establishes  that  there
             is no Article 3 risk. The Secretary of State has no  power  to
             set aside a prison sentence imposed by the court  and  so  the
             alternative scenario simply does not arise.


         29. Thus, any assessment of the existence of any article 3 risk is
             one to be carried out at a future date as part of the transfer
             request mechanism.  An  illustration  of  the  fact  that  the
             approach of the First-tier Tribunal  in  having  regard  to  a
             possible future decision of the Secretary of State for Justice
             was itself premature is found in Elashmawy  &  Riva   v  Italy
             [2015] EWHC 28 (Admin). In giving the judgement of  the  court
             Aikens LJ said, at paragraph 101:


                  "Taken overall, and bearing in mind the high threshold, we
                  are satisfied that the evidence  demonstrates  that  there
                  are not substantial grounds for believing that there is  a
                  real risk that the  appellant,  or  Mr  Riva,  would  face
                  prison conditions that were in breach of  Article  3  upon
                  extradition to Italy..."


             In reaching the  conclusion  that  they  did,  the  First-tier
             Tribunal  made  clear,  at  paragraph  60,  that  they  placed
             reliance on the decision in Badre v Court of  Florence,  Italy
             [2014] EWHC 614 (Admin), an extradition case, which found that
             the burden was on the SSHD to provide evidence to satisfy  the
             court  that  the  relevant  real  risk  of  incarceration   in
             conditions contrary  to  Article  3  did  not  arise  in  that
             particular case and she had failed to do so.   The  First-tier
             Tribunal proceeded on the basis that as the court  had  found,
             therefore, that there were substantial grounds for  believing,
             that there was a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3,
             those findings were pertinent to the appeal and so  should  be
             followed. However, in Elashmawy Aitkens LJ said, at  paragraph
             91 that events had moved on since Badre. This illustrates that
             in wrongly conflating issues arising from the  making  of  the
             deportation order, which were in play, with  the  position  in
             which the respondent may  find  himself  if  a  decision  were
             subsequently made for his transfer to Italy, the error of  the
             First-tier Tribunal was a material one.


         30. Mr Hawkin submitted that a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
             order can be made lawfully only if the SSHD is  able  to  move
             immediately to give effect to it by removing the  person  from
             the United Kingdom. Thus the First-tier Tribunal were  correct
             to consider all that might possibly flow from that as  at  the
             date of the hearing so that  they  were  correct  to  conflate
             consideration of both the  deportation  arrangements  and  the
             possibility of  transfer  under  the  Framework  Decision.  We
             reject that submission also because it is clear that there are
             various reasons why that cannot be correct. For example, there
             are  obvious  pragmatic  reasons  for  making  a   deportation
             decision in respect of a serving prisoner sufficiently  before
             his earliest release date so that any appeal  process  pursued
             can run its course before then, avoiding the possible need for
             him to be moved into immigration detention, thus extending the
             length  of  time  he  is  detained.  There  may  be  pragmatic
             obstacles to removal by the SSHD  of  a  nature  that  do  not
             prevent a voluntary  departure  should  the  person  concerned
             choose to  do  so  at  some  future  date.  The  making  of  a
             deportation order would prevent re-entry. There  may  be  good
             reason why the SSHD, even though removal  for  one  reason  or
             another cannot be  effected  immediately,  wishes  to  make  a
             deportation order,  not  simply  to  establish  the  principle
             inherent in it, but also to invalidate  any  leave  previously
             given. Further, Article  33(2)  of  the  Citizens'  Directive,
             which we have reproduced above,  plainly  recognises  that  an
             expulsion order may not be acted upon for some time, providing
             that it is to be reviewed if not executed within two years  to
             see if there has been any material change in circumstances.


         31. We can dispose of the final plank  of  the  reasoning  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal shortly. The appeal was allowed on Article
             8 ECHR grounds because, as the tribunal had found that  prison
             conditions were such as to infringe Article 3 of the ECHR, the
             Tribunal said:


                  "In particular we find that it would not be in  accordance
                  with the law under the Razgar provisions to return him  to
                  Italy as his Article 3 rights would be breached."


             In allowing the appeal on that  basis,  the  Tribunal  made  a
             further error of law. The finding that the respondent faced  a
             real risk of being subjected to treatment such as to  infringe
             article 3  was,  for  the  reasons  we  have  given,  one  not
             reasonably open on the evidence since he would not, on account
             of the making of a  deportation  order,  find  himself  in  an
             Italian prison and no other reason was offered for fearing  an
             infringement of Article 3. Therefore, the First-tier  Tribunal
             was plainly wrong to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds for
             that reason alone.


         32. For all of these reasons we are satisfied that the  First-tier
             Tribunal made errors of law material to the  outcome  of  this
             appeal such that the decision to allow the appeal must be  set
             aside. It is therefore necessary for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
             remake the decision on the  respondent's  appeal  against  the
             deportation order made against him.


         Summary of conclusions on the points of principle identified in the
         grant of permission


         33. The European Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA has replaced  the
             framework  previously  set  out  in  the  Council  of   Europe
             Convention  on  the  Transfer  of  Sentenced  Persons,  itself
             supplemented by the Protocol of 18 December 1997,  to  provide
             the framework within which a request may be  made  to  another
             Member State for the transfer of an EEA national sentenced  in
             the United Kingdom to serve that sentence in his own  country.
             In the United Kingdom context, it is a precondition for making
             a transfer request that there be in place a deportation order.
              A decision to make a deportation order is not a  decision  to
             transfer a serving prisoner to another Member State  to  serve
             his prison there and so in any appeal against  a  decision  to
             make a deportation order the Tribunal is  not  concerned  with
             whether there is any  legal  impediment  to  such  a  transfer
             taking place.


         34. Where the personal conduct of a person represents  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
             fundamental interests of society, the fact that such threat is
             managed while that person serves his or her prison sentence is
             not itself material to the assessment of the threat he or  she
             poses. The threat exists, whether or not  it  cannot  generate
             further offending simply because the person  concerned,  being
             imprisoned,  has  significantly  less  opportunity  to  commit
             further criminal offences.


         Summary of decision:


         35. The First-tier Tribunal made material errors of  law  and  the
             decision to allow the appeal against the deportation order  is
             set aside.


         36. The appeal will be listed for a resumed  hearing  after  which
             the Upper Tribunal will substitute a fresh decision  to  allow
             or to dismiss the respondent's appeal against the decision  to
             make a deportation order."


 4. In response  to  directions,  the  parties  provided  further  skeleton
    arguments and on behalf of the appellant there were  two  supplementary
    bundles consisting of 45 and 73 pages, respectively.

 5. As is clear from the error of law decision,  now  reported  as  Restivo
    (EEA - prisoner transfer) [2016] UKUT 00449(IAC) in particular at [26]-
    [30] and [33], the scope for argument in relation to Articles 3  and  8
    of the ECHR and in relation to arguments in terms of  the  consequences
    of removal, is vanishingly small.  This was an issue that was canvassed
    with the parties at the resumed hearing me.  In the light of the  error
    of law decision, it was accepted by both parties that that was so.   It
    was in those circumstances that  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  both
    parties were more succinct than would otherwise have been the case.

    Submissions

 6. On behalf of the appellant Mr Hawkin's submissions were  predicated  on
    the basis that the appellant was innocent of the two murders  of  which
    he had been convicted, the convictions occurring in Italy, and  in  the
    UK, for  which  he  received  sentences  of  30  years  and  40  years,
    respectively.   It  was  however,  conceded  that  my  decision   would
    inevitably have to be made on the basis of  the  appellant's  guilt  in
    relation to each of those offences.

 7.  Mr  Hawkin  relied  on  his  updated  skeleton  argument  and  on  the
    supplementary witness statements provided by the  appellant,  his  wife
    and other family members.  In terms of the factors  to  be  taken  into
    account under regulation 21(6) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations"),  there  was  detailed
    information in the witness statements and the letters  of  support.   I
    was reminded that it was accepted on behalf of the respondent that  the
    appellant had family life in the UK.

 8. Furthermore, it had previously been accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence.  It was submitted that insofar
    as the appellant's private and family life could be taken into account,
    those were relevant matters in terms of the effect of deportation.

 9. A further factor to be taken into account, it  was  submitted,  is  the
    appellant's wife's poor health, referred to in various of  the  witness
    statements, and supported by the medical evidence including the  up-to-
    date medical evidence at pages 19-28 of the supplementary bundle.   Her
    mobility is considerably restricted and she would not therefore be able
    to visit the appellant in Italy.

10. So far as the risk of re-offending is concerned, the evidence from  the
    OASys report was that the risk of re-offending was  low.   I  was  also
    referred  to   the   psychological   report   dated   27   June   2016.
    Rehabilitation was a matter to be taken into account and  the  decision
    in MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015]  UKUT  00520  (IAC)  was
    referred to, as was Article 3(1)  of  the  Council  Framework  Decision
    2008/909/JHA, which refers to the facilitation of social rehabilitation
    of the sentenced person.   The  further  factors  referred  to  in  the
    supplementary skeleton argument at [18] were also relied on in terms of
    social rehabilitation.

11. Mr Strachan indicated that the respondent's submissions  would  proceed
    on the footing that the appellant had acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence.  However, the further grounds of  appeal  in  terms  of  the
    withdrawal of the respondent's concession that the appellant did have a
    permanent right of  residence,  were  not  abandoned.   The  respondent
    reserved her position in relation to those grounds.  It  was  submitted
    that in any event the appellant falls well within the considerations of
    serious grounds of public policy, in the light of his convictions.

12. On the question of integration, it was relevant to  take  into  account
    that shortly after the appellant arrived in the  UK  he  committed  the
    murder, for which he was  subsequently  arrested  and  convicted.   The
    integration contended for must therefore be  questioned  on  the  basis
    that the appellant had committed that serious offence shortly after his
    arrival, but had not been apprehended for  it  until  later.   However,
    again this was not a matter that  required  detailed  argument  in  the
    circumstances.

13. I was referred to the decision in Straszewski v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 in  terms  of  the  extent  to
    which issues of deterrence and  public  revulsion  can  feature  in  an
    assessment  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   It   was   submitted   that
    Straszewski was authority for the proposition that they could.

14. It was submitted that in any event the appellant's case was clearly one
    in which it could be said that he represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  As the Tribunal had already indicated in the error of  law
    decision, the fact of his incarceration does not mean that he does  not
    represent such a threat

15. Amongst other documents, I was referred to the prisoner  categorisation
    document at page 71 of the appellant's 73-page  bundle,  which  it  was
    submitted supported the evidence of risk.  Moreover, the facts  of  his
    offences and his continued denial of guilt are also matters that can be
    taken into account in terms of the risk of re-offending.

16. In reply, Mr Hawkin submitted that the Straszewski point was  not  free
    from doubt.  There was a need to weigh up all the  evidence,  including
    the appellant's own personal circumstances.

    My Conclusions

17. The error of law decision sets out the provisions of regs 19 and 21  of
    the EEA Regulations.  In line with the  respondent's  submissions,  but
    noting the reserved position of the respondent in terms of  whether  or
    not the appellant has a permanent right of residence, I proceed on  the
    footing that he does.  Accordingly, serious grounds of public policy or
    public security are necessary to justify the deportation decision.

18. Plainly the 'serious grounds' apply in the  light  of  the  appellant's
    convictions for these offences of the utmost gravity.  In terms of  reg
    21(5) no issue arises in terms of whether or not the decision was based
    exclusively on the personal conduct of the appellant.

19. As to whether the appellant's personal conduct  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests  of  society,  it  seems  to  me  that  only  two
    arguments are advanced on behalf of the appellant.  The  first  is  his
    continued denial of the offences.  The second is what is  said  in  the
    OASys report to be an assessment of the risk of re-offending as low.

20. As to the first proposition, it is plainly  and  obviously  a  hopeless
    argument.  On the contrary, the appellant's refusal  to  recognise  his
    guilt could be said to be enough in itself to lead  to  the  conclusion
    that he does represent the  necessary  level  of  risk  justifying  the
    deportation decision.  So far as the OASys assessment is concerned,  as
    indicated this gives an assessment of the likelihood of reconviction as
    low.  Naturally however,  that  is  in  the  context  of  the  relative
    infrequency of his offending, albeit that the level of offending is  of
    the utmost severity.  The  National  Probation  Service  report  within
    which the OASys assessment of the likelihood of reconviction is  given,
    states that at the time of writing the report in  2012,  the  appellant
    had not wanted to offer an explanation  as  to  why  he  committed  the
    offences and was not willing to enter into any discussion about it.

21. Furthermore, the appellant's categorisation report in relation  to  his
    status as a category A prisoner, refers to that category as relating to
    a prisoner whose escape would be highly dangerous to the public, or the
    police or the security of the State, and for whom the aim  must  be  to
    make escape impossible.  It is apparent from that assessment  that  the
    appellant had made no effort to undertake any work in terms of reducing
    the risk of re-offending.  The report refers to his most  recent  OASys
    assessment of May 2016 identifying him as a high risk  to  the  public,
    children and a known adult(s) in the community, and as low risk in  all
    other areas.  It refers to his refusal to take part in any part of  the
    sentence planning process due to his denial of the index  offence.   He
    has had no contact with the  psychology  and  interventions  department
    during the relevant period.

22. The psychological report dated 27  June  2016,  prepared  in  order  to
    inform the assessment by the Category  A  team,  under  the  subheading
    'Risk Assessment' states as follows:

         "The Offender Group Reconviction Scale 3  (ORGS3),  a  static  risk
         assessment, indicates that Mr Restivo presents  as  'low'  risk  of
         being reconvicted; 40% risk of reconviction  within  the  two  year
         period of starting a non-custodial sentence or being released  from
         custody."

23. Under a subheading Combined static and dynamic risk it states  that  he
    presents as a 'low' risk of proven re-offending for non sexual  violent
    offences and a 14% risk of re-offending  in  the  two  years  following
    release.  What is  described  as  the  OASys  General  Predictor  (OGP)
    assessment is said to suggest that he presents as a low risk of  future
    non-violent general re-offending, and a 32% risk of re-offending in the
    two years following release.

24. Under the subheading Dynamic risk it states that the  OASys  assessment
    is to the effect that he is a 'high' risk of harm to the public,  known
    adults and children in the community, and a 'low'  risk  to  all  other
    groups.

25. The report also refers to the appellant's lack of engagement  with  the
    psychology and interventions department or with sentence planning.

26. As already indicated, his apparent lack of remorse, lack of recognition
    of the impact of his offences on  the  families  of  the  victims,  his
    refusal to acknowledge his guilt, and the  magnitude  of  the  offences
    committed, in my judgment all lead to the conclusion that  he  poses  a
    significant risk of serious re-offending.  That is so regardless of the
    fact that his opportunities for re-offending are constrained because of
    his incarceration.

27. In the circumstances, I do not consider it  necessary  to  resolve  the
    issue  of  whether,  following  the  decision   in   Straszewski,   the
    appellant's  offending  justifies  his  deportation  on  the  basis  of
    deterrence  and  public  revulsion.    If   such   considerations   can
    legitimately be taken into account, the appellant's offending would  be
    a paradigm example.

28. I have taken into account the written evidence of  the  appellant,  his
    wife and those who have made statements in support of  his  appeal.   I
    have also taken into account the  evidence  given  before  the  FtT  in
    terms, for example, of the commitment to the appellant by his wife,  as
    well as his wife's health problems.  There is no reason  to  doubt  the
    most recent medical evidence which reveals  continuing  difficulty  for
    the appellant's wife in visiting him, and the  effect  on  her  of  his
    imprisonment.

29. I have taken into account all of the factors that are  required  to  be
    taken into account under reg 21(6), that is to say the appellant's age,
    state of health, family and economic situation, as well as  his  length
    of residence in the UK and his social and cultural integration, as well
    as his links to Italy.  He is 44 years of age, and has been in  the  UK
    since 2002.  According to his witness  statement  he  had  his  thyroid
    removed in 2001 and has had to have an operation on  his  vocal  cords,
    with one of them remaining paralysed.  In 2005 he was diagnosed with an
    eye condition.

30. In evidence before the FtT he accepted that his parents still  live  in
    Sicily, although again according to the evidence before the  FtT  their
    ability to visit him in prison may be limited because of  the  distance
    they would have to travel. The appellant's wife was born  in  Rome  and
    gave evidence to the FtT consistent with her witness statement  to  the
    effect that she is an Italian national. She has not been back to  Italy
    since 1987 she says in her witness statement, and although she has some
    relatives there, she has not contact with them.

31. The scope for social  rehabilitation  is  plainly  constrained  by  the
    appellant's refusal to acknowledge his guilt and thus  the  devastating
    effect of his offending on  the  victims  of  his  offences  and  their
    families, and with respect to society in general.

32. I am satisfied that the respondent was entitled to make  a  deportation
    order against the appellant. The appellant does  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests  of  society.  The  respondent's  decision  is  a
    proportionate one under the EEA Regulations, and none  of  the  factors
    set out in reg 21(6), either alone or cumulatively, suggest an  outcome
    in favour of the appellant.

33. Although it is accepted that the appellant has family life in the UK, a
    consideration  of  Article  8  does  not  reveal   a   disproportionate
    interference with family life in the light of the conclusions under the
    EEA Regulations.

34. The reliance by the appellant on any Article 3 risk takes his appeal no
    further, as explained in the  error  of  law  decision  at  [29].  This
    includes the argument advanced in the supplementary  skeleton  argument
    in terms of the asserted risk to the appellant from others, as set  out
    in his updated witness statement at [14].

35. Taking into account the conclusions in the error of law  decision,  and
    the further analysis in this the re-making of the decision, the  appeal
    is dismissed under the EEA Regulations, and under Articles 3 and 8.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision having been set aside, the decision  is
    re-made, dismissing the appeal under the EEA Regulations and  on  human
    rights grounds with reference to Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  23/01/17
