
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/02037/2013
                                                               DA/02038/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court                 |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 August 2014                                |On 3 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                        Mubarik Essa (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       Mohammed ESSA (sECOND APPELLANT)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson, instructed by J R Jones, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second respondents are brothers and are citizens  of  the
    Netherlands.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to  the  respondents  as  "the
    appellants" and to the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  as
    the "respondent" (as  they  were  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellants entered the United Kingdom  in  August  2002
    when they were respectively age 9 and 11 years.  On  6  February  2013,
    the appellants were convicted of conspiracy to defraud.  They  received
    sentences of 27 months' imprisonment.  On 25 September 2013,  decisions
    were made to deport the appellants.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Chambers;  Ms  S  E  Singer)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3 March 2014,  allowed  the  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal stated the issue in these appeals as being,

         Whether, under Article 28 of  Directive  2004/38,  either  of  [the
         appellants] has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  ten  years
         counting back from the date of the respondent's  decision  ordering
         their expulsion, taking account of the fact  that  the  periods  of
         imprisonment interrupted  the  period  of  residence,  as  recently
         confirmed in the judgment of the Court of Justice of  the  European
         Union (Second Chamber preliminary ruling) in Secretary of State for
         the Home Department v MG (case C-400/12) (16 January 2004).

 3. At [10], the Tribunal concluded:

         Doing the necessary calculation by the time of the  making  of  the
         deportation orders (25 September 2013) they had been in the  United
         Kingdom for eleven years and one month.  Both appellants  make  out
         to the degree requisite on  the  evidence  that  they  satisfy  the
         requirements of Article 28 of  Directive  2004/38.   The  Directive
         given  effect  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006 provides that EEA nationals such as the appellants
         can only be deported on imperative grounds of public security.   It
         is not shown that imperative grounds of public  security  are  made
         out in either of the appellants' cases.  We allow both appeals.

 4. There are, in essence, two grounds of appeal.  First, it is  submitted,
    by  reference  to  MG,  that  "counting  back  from  the  date  of  the
    deportation decision, the claimant's continuity of residence was broken
    by their 27 months' sentences  of  imprisonment.   The  FTT  failed  to
    engage with this reality."  Secondly, accepting that the appellants had
    resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  ten  years  before  they   were
    imprisoned, the Tribunal had failed to have regard to [36] and [37]  of
    MG. The Tribunal had carried out a "simple mathematical assessment"  of
    the period of time of the appellants' residence in the  United  Kingdom
    and they should, following MG, have addressed the  "much  more  complex
    issue" of  the  "qualitative  assessment  of  the  integration  of  the
    claimants."

 5. Notwithstanding ground 1, the facts in the appeal do not appear  to  be
    in dispute.  The ten year period calculated back from the date  of  the
    deportation decision is, indeed, broken by the 27 month imprisonment of
    the appellants.  However, I accept Mr Nicholson's submission  that  the
    pre-conviction residence of ten years  would  appear  (subject  to  the
    application [38] of MG) entitle the appellants to the higher  level  of
    protection.   As  Mr  Nicholson  submitted,  if  the  analysis  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds at [2] is accurate, then the Secretary  of
    State could defeat all such appeals  simply  by  making  a  deportation
    decision whilst an appellant is in prison  (and  thereby  incapable  of
    satisfying the condition of ten years' continuous residence).   As  the
    grounds appear to acknowledge, the real  issue  in  this  case  is  the
    status of the ten years' residence which these appellants have  enjoyed
    before they were imprisoned.

 6. Mr Nicholson appeared before the appellants at the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.   Although  he  was  reluctant  to  give  evidence  about  the
    proceedings before that  Tribunal,  he  told  me  that  the  Record  of
    Proceedings should show that there was a  detailed  discussion  between
    the representatives and the Tribunal as to the implications of MG.   It
    is to be regretted, however, that the  determination  of  the  Tribunal
    deals only briefly with MG.  The crux in this  appeal  is  whether  the
    Tribunal has dealt adequately with the ratio of MG and, in  particular,
    the discretion ("the fact that the person resided in  the  host  member
    state  for  ten  years  prior  to  imprisonment  may  be   taken   into
    consideration ...") which appears to be afforded by  [38]  of  MG.   In
    short, did the Tribunal exercise its judicial discretion as to  whether
    to take into account "as part of its overall assessment ... whether the
    integrating links previously forged [by the appellants] with  the  host
    member state have been broken?"

 7. The passage at [4] of the  determination  which  I  have  quoted  above
    certainly gives the impression  that  the  Tribunal  appeared  to  have
    believed that MG did little more than establish the  principle  of  the
    ten year period that should be calculated by  counting  back  from  the
    date of the expulsion decision.  I  accept  Ms  Johnstone's  submission
    that MG (in particular at [38]) goes  beyond  the  calculation  of  the
    period of residence.  The court made it clear that integration  in  the
    society of the host member state forms the basis of entitlement to  the
    greater protection offered by the  Directive.   Having  considered  the
    determination carefully, I am prepared to accept that the Tribunal  did
    have in mind this question of integration and  that  the  Tribunal  has
    engaged adequately with the ratio of MG.   The  Tribunal  has  directed
    itself to MG at [4] and,  assuming that the Tribunal  had  MG  in  mind
    throughout its analysis, it ultimately found that "both appellants make
    out the  degree  requisite  on  the  evidence  that  they  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  Article  28  ...".    That   conclusion   follows   a
    consideration of the evidence of the appellants'  schooling  and  their
    employment history both before and after their convictions.   I  accept
    Mr Nicholson's submission  that  the  fact  that  the  appellants  were
    employed after they had committed the  offences  for  which  they  were
    imprisoned may be regarded as evidence of integration.  I am  satisfied
    that the Tribunal was aware that it needed to exercise a discretion and
    it has done so, although it is to be regretted that  the  determination
    does not make this entirely clear.

 8. MG does not provide that decision makers  must  consider  pre-offending
    periods of  residence  and  integration  forged  during  that  time  as
    necessarily broken by a period of imprisonment; such conduct  "may"  be
    taken into account.  I am satisfied that the  Tribunal  did  have  that
    principle in mind when it allowed these appeals.  In  consequence,  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

These appeals are dismissed.

Signed                              Date 30 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
