
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02487/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2017                     |On 3 October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                                   Between
                            VOLODYMYR PYSKLYVETS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms A. Radford of counsel instructed by
Lupins Solicitors
For the Respondent:                  Mr. W. Bramble, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on 16  November  1964,  is  a  national  of
    Ukraine. It is the Appellant's case that he first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 May 2006 and claimed asylum on 23 January 2009, after  he
    was encountered by a UK Border Agency arrest team. On 30 January  2009,
    he was convicted of  being  knowingly  possessing  a  false  Lithuanian
    passport and another person's  driving  licence  and  sentenced  to  12
    months' imprisonment.

2.   On 20 February 2009, the Appellant applied for a facilitated return  to
    Ukraine, withdrew his application for asylum on 13 March 2009  and  was
    removed to Ukraine on 24 April 2009. An exclusion order was made  on  5
    May 2009 but the Appellant re-entered the United Kingdom in April 2010.

3.   The Appellant was arrested on 6 March 2011 and on 8 March 2011  he  was
    convicted of failing to provide a specimen, driving without  a  licence
    and possession of a false instrument. He was sentenced to five  months'
    imprisonment and on 5 April 2011  he  was  served  with  illegal  entry
    papers. He completed his  criminal  sentence  and  was  transferred  to
    Immigration Detention. He was served with a decision to  deport  on  27
    May 2011 and he appealed on 6 June 2011. His appeal  was  heard  on  26
    August 2011 and his appeal was  dismissed  on  6  September  2011.  His
    appeal rights became exhausted on 20 October 2011 and  on  17  December
    2011 he was served with a deportation order.

4.   The Appellant made further representations on 15 December 2011  and  16
    October 2012. It is his case that he was previously a business  man  in
    Ukraine and had been  subjected  to  extortion,  threats  and  physical
    attacks from an organised criminal  group  and  that  this  placed  him
    within a particular social  group  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. His application to  revoke  his  deportation  order  on  an
    asylum grounds was refused and the Respondent decided that the  further
    representations did not amount to a fresh claim on 26 February 2013. He
    appealed and his appeal was dismissed with  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas in  a  decision  promulgated  on  15  December  2014.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted the Appellant permission to appeal on 16
    March 2015. On 3 February 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  Gleeson  found  an
    error of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas' decision and  remitted
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on 4 March 2016.

5.   The remitted appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Callow  on
    13 March 2017 and he dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    11 April 2017. The Appellant appealed  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew granted him permission to appeal on 31 July 2017.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

DECISION

7.   The first ground of appeal  asserted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow did not give adequate reasons for his conclusions in relation to
    the expert evidence relied upon by the Appellant.

8.   As counsel for the Appellant noted, the  panel  in  its  determination,
    promulgated on 6 September 2011, accepted that the Appellant had been a
    businessman in Ukraine and in paragraph 54 they found that he may  have
    been beaten by those to whom he "owed" money.  In  paragraph  58,  they
    also accepted that he had been beaten by unknown people in  2009.  This
    was accepted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow and it was in relation
    to this factual matrix that the Appellant's legal  representatives  had
    sought expert evidence.   Both experts found that it was plausible that
    this would put the Appellant at risk in Ukraine and that he  would  not
    be able to obtain  a  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  Ukrainian
    authorities or benefit from  internal  relocation.  In  addition,  they
    found that his previous political  activity  would  not  give  rise  of
    itself to persecution but was likely to make it more difficult for  him
    to access protection from the Ukrainian authorities.

9.   Dr. Slade also explained that it was  likely  that  the  criminal  gang
    would have an on-going interest in keeping the Appellant in  a  renewed
    relationship of dependence as this  would  give  rise  to  an  on-going
    source of income.

10.  In paragraph 31 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow
    simply stated that "the expert reports from Drs Galeotti and  Slade  do
    not show that the appellant would be at risk on the basis  claimed.  In
    making their assessments the experts, have, with respect to them, quite
    improperly  assumed  the  role  of  deciding  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim".

11.  This is the only  direct  findings  First-tribunal  Judge  Callow  made
    about the Dr. Galeotti's report. I have taken  into  account  the  fact
    that Dr. Galeotti reminded himself of the duty he owed to the court  as
    an expert and I note that he was explicitly instructed  to  comment  on
    the plausibility of the Appellant's  account.  I  also  note  that  Dr.
    Galeotti is a well-known and respected expert and that, at paragraph 13
    of his report, dated 4 December 2011, he stated that "it is, of course,
    not for me to make any judgment about credibility".

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  also  stated  in  paragraph  27  of  his
    decision that  Dr.  Slade  had  ignored  adverse  credibility  findings
    previously made about the Appellant's account. But in  paragraph  3  of
    his report, Dr. Slade outlined the questions which he had been asked to
    provide an opinion on. Questions ii) and iii) were  predicated  on  the
    instruction "assuming that it is accepted that our client is  still  of
    interest to organised criminals as he describes in his statement". They
    then go on to ask him whether  in  these  circumstances  the  Appellant
    would be able to obtain protection from the Ukrainian  authorities  and
    if, in his opinion, there is a properly functioning witness  protection
    scheme. He was  also  asked  whether  it  would  be  possible  for  the
    Appellant  to  relocate  to  another  area  of  Ukraine  to  avoid  the
    attentions of the criminals, if he was at risk.

13.  Dr. Slade then gave an impartial and  fully  referenced  assessment  of
    the level of organised crime in Ukraine, which included an analysis  of
    the shortcomings  of  the  Respondent's  own  Country  Information  and
    Guidance on Ukraine. At paragraphs 15,  he  noted  that  he  could  not
    provide any detailed comment on the levels of organised  crime  in  the
    Appellant's specific town and home  regions  but  stated  that  reports
    indicated that organized criminal groups  operated  throughout  Ukraine
    with more or less intensity.

14.  In paragraph 17, he goes no  further  than  finding  that  the  account
    given by the Appellant was highly plausible and common for  businessmen
    in Ukraine at the time when  he  was  in  business  there.  It  is  the
    function of experts to identify whether country conditions  in  general
    fit the account given by an appellant. When doing so they do not  usurp
    the ultimate role of the Judge to decide whether an appellant's account
    is credible in the context of expert and objective evidence and his own
    statements. It was also within their legitimate  professional  role  to
    engage with previous findings that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
    access state protection.

15.  The second ground of  appeal  asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had failed to make  clear  findings  about  which  parts  of  the
    Appellant's account were rejected  and  which  were  accepted.  It  was
    submitted that there was evidence which was commented on by the experts
    and which was also in  the  papers  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow that he failed to take into account or refer to.

16.  I have taken into account that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    give any weight to the fact that in his expert report, dated 4 December
    2011, Professor Galeotti found that the Public/Civil Control ID Card, a
    notice of appointment, a certificate from the  Officer  of  the  Public
    Prosecutor and the reference from the Ministry of Internal Affairs  all
    appeared to be genuine documents. This was evidence which was  relevant
    to any future fear of persecution and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    should have said whether he was giving it any weight. The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer agreed with this conclusion in his oral  submissions
    and noted that in paragraph 30  of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Callow had  mistakenly  found  that  no  new  evidence  had  been
    submitted in relation to the Appellant's political profile.

17.  As counsel for  the  Appellant  also  noted,  in  an  appeal  with  the
    considerable history of this one, it was also necessary for the  First-
    tier Tribunal to make clear findings as to what  aspects,  if  any,  he
    accepted of the Appellant's account. He  did  not  carry  out  such  an
    exercise.

18.  The third ground of appeal related to the manner in  which  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge treated the  section  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement, dated 9 March 2017, which referred to events concerning  his
    wife.  At the beginning of this statement, the Appellant explained that
    his previous solicitors had not fully updated his statements, dated  18
    March 2014 and 29 June 2016, before submitting them. In his most recent
    statement, the Appellant asserted that his wife  continued  to  receive
    telephone call asking where he was once every one or two months. But in
    paragraph 29 of his decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow  found
    that "the belated evidence of the  appellant's  wife  in  a  statement,
    dated 1 September 2016, (after IJ Parker recused herself at the hearing
    of 12 July 2016) describing demands made of her as to  the  appellant's
    whereabouts amid reminders that he remained in  debt  to  them...is  an
    afterthought to bolster the appellant's claim. Had this  evidence  been
    credible it would have been made available when the appellant  formally
    claimed asylum in October 2012 and would have been produced by the  way
    of a statement at the hearing before IJ Parker.  The  production  of  a
    statement at the hearing of this appeal is an attempt  to  shore  up  a
    gaping hole in the credibility of the appellant's claim".

19.  However, the record of proceedings made by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parker indicated that she  recused  herself  because  counsel  and  the
    Appellant's  previous  solicitors  had  taken  responsibility  for  not
    including this evidence in his  updated  statements.  A  more  detailed
    record submitted by the Respondent makes it even clearer as  it  states
    that "my understanding is that a tactical decision  was  made  by  reps
    that appellant could 'get  home'  on  sufficient  positive  credibility
    findings in 2011 decision and expert evidence presented in 2014.  Seems
    to me a tactical error since there have always been credibility  issues
    and the appellant was likely to be cross-examined". She then added that
    it was "not in the interests of either party for me  to  determine  the
    appeal". Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow's approach was not
    in keeping with the reasons for adjourning the previous appeal hearing,
    which amounts to a procedural error.

20.  I also note that there is a  reference  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas in paragraph 53 his decision, promulgated on 15 December 2014, to
    criminals starting to contact the Appellant's wife again  in  2013  and
    this allegation being contained in a statement made by  the  Appellant,
    dated 18 March  2014.  In  paragraph  60  of  the  decision  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas notes  that  the  statement  also  said  that  the
    organised criminals were continuing to contact his wife.

21.  Furthermore, the Appellant's re-drafted statement, dated 9 March  2013,
    refers to contact with his wife by those he feared  starting  again  in
    early 2013 and, therefore, the Appellant could not have disclosed  this
    in 2012.  This  confusion  over  dates  indicates  a  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

22.  As a consequence, I find that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow  did
    make material errors of law in his decision and reasons.
DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier     Tribunal      Judge Callow.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 29 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
