
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00117/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 January 2021                          |On 2 February 2021             |
|                                            |                               |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                     TN
                           (Anonymity Order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by OTB Legal
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 8 May 1974.  He  arrived  in
the UK on 19  August  1998  and  claimed  asylum  as  a  16-year-old  ethnic
Albanian minor born on 8 May 1982 in Peja, Kosovo, claiming  that  his  home
in  Kosovo  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Serb  army  and  that  he  feared
persecution  from  the  Serbian  police  who  had  beaten  him  on  numerous
occasions. On 9 February 2004 he was  informed  that  he  had  been  granted
asylum in the UK. On 3 March 2004 he applied for a travel document,  in  the
same false identity and signed a declaration of  truth  in  his  application
form.

On 11 February 2005 the appellant submitted an application to naturalise  as
a British citizen, in the same false identity, again declaring that  he  had
told the truth,  and  on  27  September  2005  he  attended  a  ceremony  to
naturalise as a British citizen.

In October 2016 the appellant  submitted  a  passport  application  for  his
daughter and supplied supporting documents which confirmed that  he  was  an
Albanian national and not  Kosovan  as  previously  claimed.  His  case  was
referred by HMPO to the Status Review Unit of the Home Office as a result.

On 2 May 2018 the appellant submitted a Form RR (application for  correction
of a  registration  or  naturalisation  certificate)  and  he  provided  his
correct details, giving his date of birth as 5 May 1974  and  his  place  of
birth as Peqin,  Albania.  He  enclosed  his  Albanian  passport  and  other
identity  documents  confirming  his  genuine  identity,  together  with   a
statement admitting that he  had  previously  given  a  false  identity  but
blaming the interpreter arranged by his legal representatives who  had  told
him to declare that he was a Kosovan  national.  The  appellant  claimed  to
have submitted his genuine Albanian  documents  previously  when  sponsoring
his parents' entry visa application in 2005. The Home Office did  not  agree
to amend the naturalisation certificate and issued an  investigation  letter
to the appellant's legal  representatives  informing  them  that  there  was
reason to believe that he had obtained his British citizenship as  a  result
of fraud. The appellant's  solicitors  then  responded,  claiming  that  the
appellant had been advised  to  provide  false  information  by  his  former
solicitors.

The respondent, in a decision dated 30 October  2019,  did  not  accept  the
appellant's  explanation  as  a  justification  for   the   deception.   The
respondent considered that the appellant had had multiple  opportunities  to
disclose his genuine identity but had chosen not to and  had  only  informed
the Home  Office  of  his  genuine  identity  after  HMPO  had  revoked  his
passport. The respondent noted that the appellant was  a  24-year-old  adult
when he entered the UK and was not a minor  as  claimed.  As  such,  he  was
responsible for the information he had provided in  his  asylum  application
and subsequent applications. The respondent concluded that  the  appellant's
British citizenship had been obtained fraudulently and  that  he  should  be
deprived of his British citizenship  under  section  40(3)  of  the  British
Nationality Act 1981. It was considered that deprivation would  not  have  a
significant effect on the best interests  of  the  appellant's  children  as
their status would not be affected and that it would be both reasonable  and
proportionate.

The appellant appealed against that decision under  section  40A(1)  of  the
British Nationality Act 1981. His appeal was heard  on  7  January  2020  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Graves. The judge noted  that  the  appellant  had
three children, J born on 9 June 2005, K born on 3 February 2016 and R  born
on 6 January 2017, all of whom  were  British  citizens.  His  wife  was  an
Albanian citizen with limited leave to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules. He had married her after the death of his first wife  and
her leave had been granted on the basis of their marriage. It was after  the
birth of the second child that the appellant had made the application for  a
British passport which led to the  deprivation  decision.  It  was  accepted
before the judge that there had been fraud and deception and that the  fraud
was material  to  the  grant  of  his  citizenship.  However  the  appellant
challenged the deprivation decision on the basis  that  the  respondent  had
known about the deception in 2005 when processing his  parents'  visit  visa
applications and had therefore delayed in taking action, that he  had  lived
in the UK for more than 20 years and  that  the  respondent  had  previously
relied upon a policy not to deprive those who had lived  here  for  over  14
years and that he had relied on the advice of his previous  solicitors  when
claiming to be Kosovan.

The judge found that the burden  of  proving  fraud  had  been  met  by  the
respondent, noting that the appellant  had  maintained  the  false  identity
with numerous government  agencies,  including  when  he  had  contact  with
social services, when registering the births of his two eldest children  and
when claiming benefits. The judge found further that the appellant  had  not
established mitigating factors such as duress  or  a  lack  of  capacity  or
knowledge, that the deception  was  material  to  the  grant  of  leave  and
citizenship, that the effect of deprivation would  not  make  him  stateless
and that his conduct was sufficiently  serious  to  warrant  proceedings  to
deprive him of his British citizenship. In terms of  Article  8,  the  judge
concluded that the appellant  had  not  established  that  the  decision  to
deprive him of citizenship was  disproportionate.  She  concluded  that  the
respondent had properly exercised  discretion  against  the  appellant.  The
judge rejected the appellant's claim that the  respondent  had  known  about
the deception for 14 years since the entry clearance  applications  for  his
parents in 2005 and had done nothing, noting  that  the  visas  were  issued
after he had been granted British citizenship and that  he  would  not  have
had to disclose his Albanian  nationality.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
appellant had not established that  the  respondent  had  knowledge  of  the
deception any earlier than 2016. As for the 14 year policy, the judge  noted
that that had been withdrawn and she did  not  accept  that  the  respondent
ought to have applied it. The judge found there to be no unlawful  delay  on
the part of the  respondent  and  she  concluded  that  the  respondent  was
entitled to pursue deprivation.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on eight  grounds:   first,
that the judge had failed to make any assessment of the  best  interests  of
the  children;  second,  that  the  judge  had  failed   to   consider   the
destabilising impact of deprivation on the appellant's eldest child;  third,
that the judge failed  to  consider  the  impact  upon  the  family  of  the
appellant's inability to work as a result of the deprivation order;  fourth,
that the judge failed to consider  the  impact  on  the  appellant's  wife's
immigration status; fifth, that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  likely
length of delay in making a deprivation order and a decision on a  grant  of
further leave; sixth, that the judge failed to give weight to  the  historic
14 year deprivation policy; seventh, that the judge failed  to  address  the
argument as to breaches of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009 and Article 8(2) on account of the  immediate  economic
consequences of deprivation on the whole family whilst waiting for leave  to
be granted; and eighth, that the judge  failed  to  consider  delay  in  the
context of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.

Permission was  initially  refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
granted on a renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  respondent
filed a Rule 24 response, submitting that the  grounds  of  appeal  were  an
attempt to re-argue the points already  considered  in  the  case  of  Hysaj
(Deprivation of Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 128.

Hearing and Submissions

The matter then came before me for a remote hearing  by  way  of  skype  for
business   and both parties made submissions.

In response to the respondent's case, in the  Rule  24  response,  that  the
grounds of challenge made by the appellant had  effectively  been  addressed
by the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  Hysaj,  Mr  Hodgetts  quite  properly
accepted that ground six, relating to the relevance of the previous  14-year
deprivation policy, was dealt with  by  Hysaj  and  that  he  would  not  be
advancing that ground. Indeed, the judge made full and  proper  findings  in
that regard at [27] of her decision. Mr Hodgetts' case was  that  Hysaj  did
not, however, preclude  a  positive  outcome  on  Article  8  grounds  in  a
compelling case and he submitted  that  this  was  a  compelling  case,  for
various  reasons.  He  submitted  that  the  destabilising  impact  on   the
appellant's eldest child, J, of the deprivation decision  and  the  loss  of
her father's  British  citizenship  and  his  wife's  legal  status,  was  a
compelling circumstance, given in particular because this would add  to  the
sense of loss J had already experienced through the loss of her mother,  the
appellant's first wife, who had died of cancer when she was eight  years  of
age.

Mr Hodgetts submitted that the judge gave this matter no  consideration  and
that she completely failed to address the best interests  of  the  children,
both in her  Article  8  consideration  and  in  the  consideration  of  the
respondent's exercise of discretion. Mr Hodgetts submitted  that  the  judge
did not even  acknowledge  that  J  was  the  daughter  of  the  appellant's
previous  marriage.  He  submitted  further   that   the   judge   gave   no
consideration to the financial impact of deprivation,  as  the  family  were
already living on the breadline and barely surviving, but  would  then  lose
the appellant's income and have no income at all  since  his  wife  was  not
permitted to have any recourse to public funds  and  they  had  no  savings.
They would have no access to housing benefit and the appellant's wife  could
not possibly find employment enabling her to cover the  costs  of  rent  and
all the bills.  That  would  be  the  position  for  them  as  soon  as  the
deprivation order was made and  for  the  period  in  which  they  would  be
waiting for the respondent's decision on whether to grant leave  to  remain.
Mr Hodgetts submitted that, in addition to  these  foreseeable  consequences
of deprivation, the  judge  also  failed  to  consider  the  fact  that  the
appellant's wife would lose her current leave to remain, as that  was  based
on being the spouse of a British national and she  would  have  to  make  an
application outside the immigration rules. The judge failed to consider  the
likely length of time waiting for a decision on a grant of  leave  following
a deprivation order, which was likely to far exceed the four weeks  followed
by eight  weeks  referred  to  in  the  deprivation  decision.  Finally,  Mr
Hodgetts submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  the  impact  of  the
respondent's delay, in the context of EB (Kosovo),  as  there  was  a  three
year gap between the respondent finding out about the appellant's fraud  and
then making the deprivation decision. During that period the  appellant  had
no way of proving his nationality and immigration status,  as  his  passport
had been revoked and was only re-issued in late December  2020  following  a
judicial review challenge, so that he was unable  to  change  employment  or
move to a bigger house. Mr  Hodgett  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision
could not stand and the appeal  had  to  be  re-decided  with  further  oral
evidence as to the impact on the family of deprivation.

Ms Cunha submitted that the judge  had  properly  addressed  the  reasonably
foreseeable consequences of deprivation in accordance with  Hysaj.  She  had
considered all  relevant  matters  and,  whilst  she  had  not  specifically
addressed the best interests of the children, that was not material  to  the
outcome as there would be little impact on the  children.  Mr  Hodgetts,  in
response, and referring to ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2011] UKSC 4, submitted that such an omission was material.

Discussion and Conclusions

I have to say that Ms Cunha's submissions were not entirely clear.  However,
I understood her response to the grounds relating  to  the  children's  best
interests to have been that, whilst there were no specific findings  on  the
matter by the judge, consideration had been given to the children in a  more
general context and no material error arose as a consequence. That seems  to
me to be the case, as the judge clearly gave careful  consideration  to  the
situation of the family and the impact upon them of a deprivation order,  in
particular at [22], [23], [27], [28] and [30]. In any  event  I  cannot  see
how a specific  reference  to  the  children's  best  interests  could  have
elicited any different outcome, given that they would not  be  losing  their
own British citizenship and that the impact upon them  of  the  respondent's
decision would be temporary, awaiting a grant  of  leave  for  their  father
which, as Ms Cunha submitted, is the likely outcome  in  the  circumstances.
Indeed, that is what was said by the Upper Tribunal in Hysaj, at [118]:

    "The children's best interests are in staying in  a  family  unit  with
    their parents, which they will continue to do  upon  deprivation.  That
    the family unit may have to move accommodation or  enjoy  more  limited
    financial resources is not such as  to  come  close  to  defeating  the
    significant public interest in the  appellant  being  deprived  of  his
    British citizenship. The Tribunal held in BA that consequent to  such
    weight, where statelessness is not in issue it is likely to be only  in
    a rare case that the ECHR or some very compelling feature will  require
    an appeal to be  allowed.  The  circumstances  in  such  a  case  would
    normally be exceptional in nature."






It was Mr Hodgett's submission, however, that  this  was  one  of  the  rare
cases referred to in Hysaj and that the situation of the  eldest  child,  J,
was particularly compelling as she had  already  lost  her  mother  and  the
impact of the respondent's decision was already causing her  distress  ([28]
of the appellant's statement) and had a  destabilising  effect  on  her.  He
submitted that the judge had not even understood her circumstances  and  had
referred to her as the daughter of the appellant's current wife, at  [2]  of
her decision. However, the wording  of  that  paragraph  suggests  that  the
judge had missed out a sentence in error and, when taken together  with  the
following two paragraphs, it seems to me that the judge was perfectly  aware
of the family situation. In any event,  given  the  findings  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in Hysaj in relation to the  best  interests  of  the  children,  I
cannot see how the judge could lawfully have reached any other  decision  on
the basis of J's situation. As a 15 year old girl  she  would  no  doubt  be
capable  of  understanding,  if  explained  to  her,  that  the  deprivation
decision did not mean that the family would be split  up,  but  most  likely
the result would be that her father would simply have a different  basis  of
stay in the UK.

As for the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Hodgetts  in  regard  to  the  period
following  a  deprivation  order  being  made,  and  the  impact  upon   the
appellant's wife and children of losing his income and access  to  benefits,
and of financial hardship, that was no different from the arguments made  in
Hysaj on the "limbo" situation, at [103] and [107], which were  rejected  by
the Tribunal at [108] to  [110].  Mr  Hodgetts  sought  to  distinguish  the
appellant's case before me on the basis that this was a  family  already  on
the breadline and that the appellant's wife claims she would not be able  to
find employment to cover all the bills, but it seems to me that the  reasons
given in those paragraphs are no less applicable in this case. Neither do  I
find merit in Mr Hodgett's submissions in regard to the  appellant's  wife's
immigration status, a matter he said that the judge had materially erred  in
failing to consider. The respondent's deprivation decision at [28]  made  it
clear, when considering section 55 and the best interests of  the  children,
that a deprivation order would not impact upon the status  of  the  children
or their mother. Further, as stated in the respondent's rule 24 response  at
[6], the appellant's wife's status in a further application would  not  only
depend upon his status but would also depend  upon  her  British  children's
status.

As in Hysaj, at [111], I cannot see how the judge materially  erred  in  law
by not making specific findings on  all  of  these  matters.  The  appellant
simply could not succeed in any of those  matters.  Neither  do  I  see  any
merit in the grounds referring to delay. Contrary to the  assertion  in  the
grounds, the judge gave detailed  consideration  at  [29]  to  [32]  to  the
impact and reasonableness of delay in the deprivation process  and  provided
cogent reasons for  concluding  that  there  was  no  unlawfulness  in  that
regard.

In  conclusion,  the  judge,  having  given  careful  consideration  to  the
arguments put to her, followed  the  correct  approach  in  considering  the
reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation  in  line  with  relevant
caselaw. She was fully entitled to conclude that the consequences  were  not
such that there was a breach of the appellant's Article 8  rights  or  those
of his wife and children and that the respondent, having properly  exercised
her discretion in the matter, was entitled  to  pursue  deprivation  in  the
appellant's case. I find no material errors of law in the  judge's  decision
requiring it to be set aside and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

     Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



Signed:       S Kebede                                19 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

