
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00016/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2020                  |On 8 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                           KAMAL HAMAMIN MUHAMMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Raj
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 9 March 2020, I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision felt to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the appellant as  the  'respondent'  and  the
         respondent as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before
         the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant was  born  on  15  September
         1975 in Iraq. He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
         decision of the Secretary of State dated 8 February 2019  depriving
         him of his British citizenship required by way  of  naturalisation.
         The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 11  September
         2019, allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State now appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains
         errors of law such that it falls to be set aside. My reasons are as
         follows., The judge has failed properly to identify the sub-section
         of section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981 under  which  the
         decision had been taken. At [29], the judge refers to  the  absence
         of any submission made on behalf of the Secretary of State  to  the
         effect that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  is  not
         conducive to the public good. By doing so,  the  judge  appears  to
         believe  that  the  decision  to  deprive  the  appellant  of   his
         nationality had been taken under section 40(2) of the Act;  it  is,
         however, obvious on the face of the decision that it had been taken
         under section 40(3), the Secretary of State  being  satisfied  that
         the registration or naturalisation of the appellant  as  a  citizen
         had been  obtained  by  means  of  fraud  false  representation  or
         concealment of a material fact. It was completely  unnecessary  for
         the judge to address the question as  to  whether  the  appellant's
         presence in United  Kingdom  was  conducive  to  the  public  good.
         Secondly, at [30-31],  the  judge  appears  to  consider  that  the
         appellant faces removal from the United Kingdom as  result  of  the
         decision to deprive him of his citizenship. No removal decision has
         been taken. The Upper Tribunal in BA (deprivation  of  citizenship:
         appeals) [2018] UKUT 00085, provides guidance as follows:

             "In both section 40(2)  and  (3)  cases,  the  fact  that  the
             Secretary  of  State  has  decided  in  the  exercise  of  her
             discretion  to  deprive  P  of  British  citizenship  will  in
             practice mean the  Tribunal  can  allow  P's  appeal  only  if
             satisfied  that  the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequence  of
             deprivation  would  violate  the  obligations  of  the  United
             Kingdom government under the Human Rights Act 1998 and/or that
             there is some exceptional feature of the case which means  the
             discretion in the subsection  concerned  should  be  exercised
             differently."

         Further, the  judge  has  ignored  further  guidance  in  BA  which
         provides:

             "As can be seen from  AB  (British  citizenship:  deprivation:
             Deliallisi considered) (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT  451  (IAC),  the
             stronger P's case appears to the Tribunal to be for  resisting
             any future (post-deprivation) removal  on  ECHR  grounds,  the
             less likely it will  be  that  P's  removal  from  the  United
             Kingdom  will  be  one  of  the  foreseeable  consequences  of
             deprivation."

         Moreover, the judge  appears  to  have  become  distracted  by  the
         judgement of the Supreme Court in Hysaj  [2017]  UKSC  82.  As  the
         Supreme Court made clear at [18] of that judgement, for a grant  of
         citizenship to prove to be a nullity requires the applicant to have
         perpetrated  a  fraud  so  serious  that  the  purported  grant  of
         citizenship would be of no effect. There is no  suggestion  in  the
         instant appeal that any fraud, deception or concealment on the part
         of the appellant fell  into  that  category.  Consequently,  it  is
         unclear why the judge  appears  to  have  attached  weight  to  the
         presenting officer's acknowledgement that the grant of  citizenship
         in had not been a nullity; as section 40(3)  provides,  citizenship
         status validly granted (and,  therefore,  not  a  nullity)  may  be
         removed by order of the Secretary of State. There is no requirement
         in section 40(3) for the grant of citizenship to have been void  ab
         initio, as in Hysaj.

         3.   The effect of the judge's confusion and his misapplication  of
         the appropriate statutory provisions render the  decision  unclear,
         confused and flawed by legal error. I set aside the  decision.  The
         decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal following  a  resumed
         hearing on a date to be fixed. The parties are  urged  to  consider
         the decision in BA and to be in a position to apply it to the facts
         in this appeal at the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  decision
         will be remade in the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at
         a resumed hearing at Bradford on a date to be fixed."

 2. At the resumed hearing Bradford on 25 November 2020, representatives of
    both parties appeared remotely by Skype for Business. I was in court at
    Bradford. Mr Raj, who appeared for the  appellant,  appeared  by  audio
    only. I was, however, satisfied that the  audio  communication  was  of
    sufficient quality for me to comprehend Mr Raj's  submissions.  Mr  Raj
    was able to hear and see both myself and the senior presenting officer.
    Mr Raj expressed no concerns regarding the lack of a video connection.

 3. As I noted in my error  of  law  decision,  the  part  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 under which the decision  was  taken  deprive  the
    appellant of his British nationality subsection 40 (3):

         "40 (3) : The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

         (a) fraud,

         (b) false representation, or

         (c) concealment of a material fact.

         The provision concerning statelessness at section 40 (4)  does  not
         apply to subsection (3) but only to (2) (conducive  to  the  public
         good)."

 4. The Secretary of State's decision  letter  of  8  February  2019  gives
    particulars of the false representations made  by  the  appellant.  The
    fact that  the  appellant  made  those  false  representations  is  not
    disputed. The appellant had claimed at his  screening  interview  on  2
    January 2002 that his name was Aram Akram Walli, that his date of birth
    was 10 August 1975 and that his place of birth/home area  of  Iraq  was
    Jawala in Government Controlled Iraq (GCI) (as it was then  described).
    The appellant's application for asylum had  been  refused  but  he  was
    granted exceptional leave to remain on 23 May 2002 in  accordance  with
    the Secretary of State's policy in force at that time. On 23 July 2008,
    the appellant was issued with a  certificate  of  naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen. In November 2017, when making an application  for  his
    children to be issued with British passports, the appellant had  stated
    that his name was Kamal Hamamin  Muhammad,  his  date  of  birth  is  5
    September 1975 and that he was born in Halabja, Al  Sulaimanayah  which
    is in the Kurdish Autonomous Zone (KAZ). It is  the  respondent's  case
    that the appellant would not have been  granted  exceptional  leave  to
    remain in 2002 had been known that he was from the KAZ  as  opposed  to
    the GCI; at the time, the respondent view, expressed in  its  published
    policy, that those individuals whose home area was the GCI faced a real
    risk if returned whilst individuals from the KAZ did not.

 5.  Having  instructed   legal   representatives,   the   appellant   made
    representations regarding his  reasons  for  using  false  information.
    First, the appellant claims that he used a false name in order to avoid
    detection by supporters of Saddam Hussein at the time active in  Europe
    and the United Kingdom. Secondly, he was aiming to protect  members  of
    his family in Iraq. Thirdly, the  appellant  claims  that  he  did  not
    himself complete the forms submitted to the Home Office and was unaware
    that  he  should  notify  his  correct  name  at  any  stage   in   his
    applications. Finally, the appellant stated that he  believed  that  he
    should not be deprived of his nationality because other applicants  had
    been allowed to amend their names in nationality records without having
    their status revoked.

 6. In the decision letter at [17], the respondent noted that the appellant
    had been asked whether  he  had  used  other  names  in  his  screening
    interview but it made no response. Moreover, the appellant  had  signed
    the form including the declaration 'I have  had  my  name  nationality,
    date birth in my preferred language and dialect read back to me  and  I
    declare that this information is true.' As regards the need to  protect
    his family, the respondent noted [16] that the appellant had  travelled
    to Iraq on at least four occasions prior to 2008 and had used his  true
    name in July 2009 when he had married his second  wife.  At  [15],  the
    respondent also records that, in addition to falsely indicating that he
    was from a part of Iraq to which he could not be returned at  the  time
    of his application for asylum,  by  maintaining  the  use  of  a  false
    identity  he  had  effectively  prevented  the  respondent   from   re-
    documenting the appellant to enable his return to any part of Iraq. The
    appellant's use of the false identity had, therefore, been material  in
    his eventual naturalisation as a British citizen.

 7. At the resumed hearing, Mr Raj submitted that the appellant arrived  in
    the United Kingdom 'in a terrible state.' His position had been similar
    to that of the Jews  fleeing  from  Nazi  Germany  in  the  1930s.  The
    appellant had no choice but to change his identity in order to  protect
    himself from the followers of Saddam Hussein. Mr Raj submitted that any
    deception had to be  shown  to  have  been  central  to  the  grant  of
    citizenship; in the case of the appellant, what had been central to his
    use of a false identity had been his need to protect  himself  and  his
    family; it had not been any need to  deceive  the  British  immigration
    authorities.

 8. I consider the submissions made  by  both  parties  very  carefully.  I
    reject Mr Raj's submission  that  the  use  of  false  details  by  the
    appellant had not been  central  to  the  grant  of  a  certificate  of
    naturalisation to him. I accept submissions made by Mrs Pettersen,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, and the reasoning contained in the
    decision letter from which I quoted above.  I  am  satisfied  that,  by
    giving a false place of birth/home area, the appellant was fully  aware
    that, given the political and security situation in Iraq  the  time  of
    his application for asylum, he would be granted some form of  leave  to
    remain and further that this would  not  have  been  the  case  had  he
    indicated is true place of birth,  namely  the  KAZ  (as  it  was  then
    described). The appellant was aware that is deception would be  central
    to his claim for leave to remain in the United Kingdom whether  or  not
    his primary motive for deceiving the respondent  had  been  to  protect
    himself and his family. Indeed, the appellant's claim that he has faced
    a real risk from the supporters of Saddam Hussein had not been accepted
    by the respondent nor has any finding that  the  appellant's  claim  is
    genuine been made by a judicial decision maker. I do not accept that it
    has ever been established that the appellant  as  ever  had  a  genuine
    subjective fear of the Saddam Hussein regime or its followers nor is it
    likely that any such finding would have been made at  any  time  during
    the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom given that his place of
    origin is the KAZ. I am satisfied, therefore, that, in the  wording  of
    section 40 (3) of the 1981 Act, the appellant obtained a certificate of
    naturalisation by means of  a  false  representation/concealment  of  a
    material fact (i.e. his true place of origin within Iraq).

 9. Since the error of law decision  was  made  in  this  case,  the  Upper
    Tribunal  has  given  further  guidance  in   Hysaj   (Deprivation   of
    Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 128 (IAC). Headnote [7] provides:

         There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the  public  interest  in
         maintaining the integrity of the system by which foreign  nationals
         are naturalised and permitted to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  British
         citizenship. Any effect on day-to-day life that may result  from  a
         person being deprived of British citizenship is  a  consequence  of
         the that person's fraud or deception and, without more, cannot  tip
         the proportionality balance, so as  to  compel  the  respondent  to
         grant a period of leave, whether short or otherwise.

    There is at present no immediate threat to  the  appellant's  continued
    residence within the United Kingdom and  the  question  of  his  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR does not arise. Even if it did, I am not satisfied
    that  the  appellant  has  shown  that  his  rights  would   suffer   a
    disproportionate interference  in  light  of  the  very  strong  public
    interest articulated by the Upper Tribunal in Hysaj.

10. Accordingly, I dismiss the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State's dated 8 February 2019.




    Notice of Decision

    This appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date 27 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

