
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00099/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 June 2020                       |On 19 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                ronald kavuma
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  a  decision
    dated 11 September 2019 to deprive him of his nationality.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal without a  hearing.   The  appellant
    has permission to appeal to this Tribunal.


 2. Directions dated 20 March 2020  were  served  on  the  parties.   Those
    directions indicated that it appeared  that  elements  of  the  present
    appeal could be determined without a hearing.   Paragraph  2  of  those
    directions  set  out  a  timetable  for  the  submission   of   further
    representations by the parties.  Paragraph 3  invited  the  parties  to
    indicate if they thought that a hearing of the appeal was necessary and
    if so to give reasons.


 3. In accordance with paragraph 2 of the  directions  I  have  submissions
    from Mr West, counsel on behalf of the  appellant,  a  response  by  Mr
    Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State, and a reply by Mr West.  No
    submissions have been made under paragraph 3.  It appears  to  me  that
    this is a case suitable for determination  without  a  hearing  on  the
    basis of the material available: the issues are clear, the parties have
    made full written submissions, and I have everything before me that  is
    necessary for the determination of the appeal.  I  determine  it  under
    rule 34(1) with reference to rule 34(2).


 4. The grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the  procedure  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, specifically that Tribunal's decision to proceed to determine
    the appeal without a hearing.


 5. The decision letter dated 11  September  2019  runs  to  38  paragraphs
    including routine content.  It sets out the  following  basis  for  the
    decision.  The appellant  applied  for  and  was  granted  visit  entry
    clearance and obtained entry as a Ugandan national  named  Kato  Rogers
    Ssekimpi born on 12 May 1983.  In the same  name  he  obtained  further
    leave, but was refused indefinite leave.  At some stage after  that  he
    assumed the name of Ronald Kavuma.  That was an identity that had  been
    concocted by a person called Ruth Nabuguzi, who invented a child called
    Ronald Kavumi, born on 20 June 1986, for whom she  obtained  indefinite
    leave to remain, which identity and status she sold to  the  appellant.
    As Ronald Kavuma he obtained indefinite leave to remain on  12  January
    2004 and British citizenship on 26 April 2007.  These  facts  were  the
    basis of charges against the appellant and Ruth Nabuguzi for conspiracy
    to defraud.  The appellant's convictions, on  1  March  2013,  were  in
    relation to the use of the identity of Ronald Kavuma in order to obtain
    British citizenship and Housing and Council Tax Benefits.


 6. Following the appellant's convictions the grant of citizenship  to  him
    as  Ronald  Kavuma  was   declared   null   and   void.    There   were
    representations made by solicitors on behalf of the appellant,  Aldgate
    Immigration, in which the appellant claimed asylum and made a number of
    assertions as to his identity.  He claimed that he  was  really  Ronald
    Kavuma, and had  nothing  to  do  with  a  person  called  Kato  Rogers
    Ssekimpi; but in a number  of  places  in  the  submissions  and  other
    documents said his date of birth was 12  May  1983.   As  the  criminal
    convictions showed beyond reasonable doubt that the identity of  Ronald
    Kavuma was an invention, and as 12 May 1983 was the date  of  birth  of
    the person who had entered the United Kingdom as Kato Rogers  Ssekimpi,
    the Secretary of State decided that  the  claim  to  be  really  Ronald
    Kavuma was not the truth.


 7. The Secretary of State considered the other matters put forward by  the
    solicitors, rejecting  article  8  arguments  and  arguments  going  to
    statelessness, and gave notice of her decision to deprive the appellant
    of his British citizenship, pointing out that a Refugee claim could  be
    made only if the appellant is not a British citizen.   The  letter  set
    out the right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


 8. Throughout,  the  letter  made  reference  to  annexes  containing  the
    information from which the account of the appellant's history had  been
    drawn.  It now said, it  appears,  that  the  letter  as  sent  to  the
    appellant and to Aldgate Immigration, did not have the annexes attached
    (I shall refer to this later).  The copy of the letter available to  me
    does not have them either:  in setting out the  summary  above  I  have
    relied only on the text of the letter itself.


 9. The notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is dated  25  September
    2019, that is to say at the very end of the period of 14  days  allowed
    by the rules, assuming the decision was sent on the day  it  was  dated
    (and nobody has said it was not).  It is said to have been submitted by
    Kofi Aduku of Adukus Solicitors on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  in
    accordance with his instructions.  No grounds of appeal are  specified:
    instead, the space for grounds of appeal  against  the  deprivation  of
    citizenship decision has only the words 'Detailed grounds  to  follow'.
    It is not suggested that there are grounds to be raised under any other
    head.


10. Rule 19(2) of the First-tier Tribunal's procedure rules gives the  time
    limit of 14 days for notice of appeal, and by rule 19(4)(a) the  notice
    of appeal "must set out the grounds of appeal".  There is no  provision
    for disclosure of the grounds to be reserved to a date later than  that
    limited for the notice of  appeal.   There  being  no  grounds  in  the
    notice, a member of staff of the Tribunal wrote to Adukus Solicitors on
    26 September.  The letter is headed "Request for  Grounds  of  Appeal",
    and requires "complete and specific grounds of  appeal,  together  with
    supporting reasons" to be provided by 3 October, and says that  failure
    to comply with this "notice" may result in the appeal  being  dismissed
    without a hearing.


11. Adukus Solicitors responded at 8.42 pm on 2  October  saying  they  had
    received the file from Aldgate Immigration only on 27  September,  that
    they needed to consult the  appellant  and  counsel  in  this  'complex
    matter' and seeking an extension of  14  days.   The  request  was  put
    before a judge, who granted an extension of five working  days  from  3
    October, that is to  say  until  10  October  2019.   No  grounds  were
    received within that time or subsequently.  On 18  October  the  matter
    was put before Judge Kaler.  On that date  there  had  passed  37  days
    since the decision, that is to say over 250% of the time allowed by the
    rules for a notice of appeal with  grounds.   There  were  no  grounds;
    there had been no response to the extension  given  for  lodging  them;
    there had been no request for any further extension; and there had been
    no indication of any difficulty in the  appellant's  dealing  with  the
    material had had available to him.


12. Judge Kaler noted the absence of the grounds and  the  absence  of  any
    explanation for their  absence.   She  noted  the  provisions  of  rule
    25(1)(e) which provides an exception to the requirement for  a  hearing
    where:


         "(e) a party has failed to comply with a provision of these  Rules,
         a practice direction or a direction and the Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that in all the circumstances, including the extent of the  failure
         and any reasons for it, it is appropriate to determine  the  appeal
         without a hearing."


13. She exercised her discretion to determine the appeal without a hearing.
     She summarised the law and  the  facts.   She  concluded  that  having
    considered the papers as a whole and in the absence of any  grounds  of
    appeal there was no reason to depart  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    conclusions or to find that the decision was  made  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules and the law.  Although there  was
    not said even to be any challenge on art 8 grounds, she considered  the
    matter briefly under that head and noted that the appellant's  presence
    in the United Kingdom was connected with his fraud and that he had  not
    put any evidence of his private or family life before her.   There  was
    no reason to suppose  that  the  decision  was  disproportionate.   She
    dismissed the appeal.  Her decision was sent out on 21 October.


14. The appellant submitted grounds of appeal against that  decision.   The
    grounds extend to 12  pages  and  are  substantially  longer  than  the
    decision against which the appeal is brought.   As  I  have  indicated,
    they are based on the procedure adopted in the First-tier Tribunal.  It
    is right to say at once that they contain not a hint that there is  any
    basis upon which the decision of the Secretary of State might  properly
    be  challenged.   Permission  was  granted  by  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson
    because she thought, on  the  basis  of  those  grounds,  that  it  was
    arguable that Judge Kaler had erred in law for the following reasons:


         (a)  there were reasonable circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  an
             inability by the Appellant  to  provide  specific  grounds  of
             appeal as requested by the Tribunal in  the  letter  dated  26
             September, 2019 when detailed  annexes  (as  detailed  in  the
             grounds for permission to appeal) were  not  attached  to  the
             Respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal  and  without   them   the
             Appellant  was  clearly  unable  to  give  or  receive  proper
             instructions in his appeal;


         (b)  whether the Judge had had sight of said annexes in  coming  to
             her decision and


         (c)  in  being  unable  to  provide  an  appeal  bundle  and  other
             supporting documents where the Appellant was not  fully  aware
             of what the case was against him and had only recently changed
             solicitors.


15. The subsequent submissions (11 pages) and reply (5 pages) sent  on  the
    appellant's behalf add nothing of substance to the grounds  themselves,
    but offer some authorities in support of the proposition  that  on  the
    basis of  the  facts  set  out  in  the  grounds  the  Judge  erred  in
    determining the appeal without a hearing.   I  turn  therefore  to  the
    grounds.


16. They set out a chronology, which indicates that counsel, the author  of
    the grounds, received the file from  Adukus  Solicitors  on  7  October
    2019.  He had a meeting with the appellant  and  his  solicitor  on  17
    October.  On 18 October the solicitor wrote to the Secretary  of  State
    asking for the annexes to the  decision  letter  to  be  supplied.   It
    should be emphasised that although on its face the letter as  presented
    to the Tribunal does not have the annexes, this, that  is  to  say  the
    grounds of appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,  is  the
    first indication that the annexes were not provided when the letter was
    originally sent to the appellant  and  his  solicitors.   Further,  the
    assertion that it did not have the annexes is not supported by evidence
    from the appellant or from  his  previous  solicitors,  or  indeed  any
    evidence at all.  Nevertheless, erected on this assertion  are  grounds
    that (i) without the annexes  the  appellant  did  not  know  the  case
    against him and that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    therefore a breach of natural justice, and further that in the  absence
    of the annexes there were reasonable grounds  for  failure  to  provide
    grounds of appeal; (ii) that it was unclear from the  decision  whether
    the judge had  relied  on  annexes  that  were  not  available  to  the
    appellant; (iii) that dealing with the appeal without  the  appellant's
    input and in circumstances where the appellant was unaware of the  case
    against him was unjust and unfair and so  contrary  to  the  overriding
    objective in accordance with which the judge's discretion  should  have
    been exercised.  As can be seen, Judge Grant-Hutchinson considered each
    of those grounds arguable.


17. In order to determine whether those grounds have merit in  establishing
    error by the judge, it is necessary first to  look  at  the  timescale,
    bearing in mind that, for the reasons  indicated,  the  appellant,  his
    solicitors and his counsel all knew the position as to  time.   It  was
    this.  The grounds should  have  been  submitted  with  the  notice  of
    appeal, no later than 25 September.  There had been  an  administrative
    and then a judicial extension of that time limit, to 10 October.   They
    had been reminded that if there were no grounds  the  appeal  might  be
    dismissed without a hearing.


18. Against that background, the solicitors, who had received the  file  on
    27 September, sent it to counsel  on  7  October;  and  the  subsequent
    events  were,  to  everybody's  knowledge,  after  the  last  date  for
    submitting grounds  of  appeal.   At  no  stage  before  Judge  Kaler's
    decision was made was  there  any  suggestion  that  further  time  was
    needed, or that the appellant and those representing him  thought  that
    to proceed as they had been reminded the Tribunal might  proceed  would
    not be a proper approach to the circumstances, although there was ample
    time for contact to be made with the Tribunal if that had been  thought
    necessary.


19. In my view the judge cannot in these circumstances be faulted  for  the
    view she reached about the absence of grounds.  There  were  none,  and
    given the history there was no reason to think that there ever would be
    any.


20. Secondly, there is a real issue about whether the annexes were missing,
    and what the effect of that might be.  As to whether they were missing,
    I have noted above  that  there  is  even  now  no  evidence,  and  the
    appellant and those representing him did not seek to put  any  evidence
    before this Tribunal.  If they were indeed missing from the  beginning,
    it is  very  surprising  indeed  that  it  took  five  weeks  from  the
    furnishing of the decision, sight of the decision by the appellant, two
    firms of solicitors and counsel, and a  further  week's  delay,  before
    they were asked for on 18 October.  But even if they were missing their
    absence is wholly unable to provide any excuse or explanation  for  the
    total lack of any grounds of appeal.  As the letter  makes  clear,  the
    appellant had been dealing with the Secretary of State for many  years;
    he had obtained his leave and his citizenship; he had been convicted of
    the fraud; he had received the decision that his grant  of  citizenship
    was  null  and  void;  he  had  (through   solicitors)   made   further
    representations with documentation.  It is wholly wrong to say, as  the
    grounds do, that the case against him was based on documents  that  the
    appellant had not been sent.  The case was based on the appellant's own
    conduct and experiences of which he was fully aware: the  reference  to
    the documents was not necessary for that, and if the  appellant's  case
    was that the letter was not  accurate  (regardless  of  any  supporting
    documents) he had only to say so by way of grounds of  appeal.   It  is
    inconceivable that when faced with the present decision he  needed  the
    annexes to tell what it was about at all.  This is not a case where  it
    is said that refinement of the grounds would require access to material
    presently unavailable: it is a case where it is said that there  was  a
    reasonable excuse for failure to provide any grounds at all.  I  reject
    that assertion.  The truth of the matter is  that  there  has  been  no
    demonstration of any reason why the basic grounds could not  have  been
    provided with the notice of appeal or, at the latest, by 10 October.


21. It follows that I also reject the assertion in the grounds that without
    the annexes the appellant did not  know  the  case  against  him  to  a
    sufficient extent to meet it.  At the stage in  question,  his  meeting
    the case meant putting in  grounds  of  appeal  showing  the  basis  of
    contest between the parties. He clearly had knowledge  and  information
    enough to do that if he chose.


22. For these reasons, even if the appellant or his previous solicitors  or
    both did not have the annexes (which in the absence of  evidence  I  do
    not accept) the first ground is not made out.


23. The second ground is simply  speculative.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    decision that gives any reason to suppose that the judge  had  material
    not available to the appellant.  As a matter of fact, as I  have  said,
    the Tribunal's copy of the decision letter also lacks the  annexes,  so
    it is ex post facto clear that she did not have them.  That would be no
    answer to grounds of this sort  if  her  decision  hinted  at  external
    knowledge, but it does not.  There is nothing in this ground.


24. The third ground is that based on general principles  of  fairness  and
    the overriding objective.  It is not easy to see that it adds  anything
    not already considered.  It could only be unfair for the appeal  to  be
    considered without the appellant's input if he had had no  opportunity,
    or no meaningful opportunity, to have input.  He had ample opportunity.
     He had not only the opportunity given by the rules to  submit  grounds
    of appeal within 14 days: he had a further opportunity,  not  routinely
    available, more than doubling that time.   He  had  a  decision  letter
    setting out a detailed  case,  even  if  without  supporting  reference
    documents, but consisting in large part of acts and events to which  he
    was said to be a party, and  there  has  been  no  remotely  reasonable
    explanation of why neither he nor his solicitors nor his barrister were
    able to say either that he was not the person involved or that the acts
    and events did not carry the implications alleged in  the  decision  if
    that was the appellant's case.  There was nothing unfair in  proceeding
    without a hearing when the appellant, fully professionally  advised  as
    he was, had not taken  these  opportunities  or  sought  any  (further)
    procedural relief.


25. I therefore reject all the grounds of appeal.  They disclose  no  error
    of law by Judge Kaler.  In reaching that conclusion  as  it  happens  I
    agree with Mr Clarke's submissions.  Those  submissions  were  possibly
    out of time, a matter that has caused Mr West to make  further  lengthy
    procedural submissions, but in fact I have  not  been  informed  by  or
    needed to refer to Mr Clarke's submissions in responding to  Mr  West's
    grounds.


26. I should conclude by noting that the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal
    seek remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for a new decision made  after
    a hearing.  But there are  still  no  grounds  of  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision or any indication of what they  might  be
    or have been.  There  is  therefore,  quite  apart  from  the  detailed
    calculus of determination of error of law by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    no basis at all for any suspicion of error in  the  original  decision,
    and no room for any underlying worry about the appellant's treatment by
    the Tribunal.


27. I order that Judge Kaler's decision shall stand.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 1 June 2020
