
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00016/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2019                            |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         THE HON MRS JUSTICE FARBEY

                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE.



                                   Between

                                  PREL [P]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


      Introduction

   1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      ("FTT") dismissing the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to deprive him of British citizenship  under  section
      40(3)  of  the  British  Nationality  Act   1981   ("the   deprivation
      decision"). The Secretary of State made the  deprivation  decision  on
      the ground that the appellant obtained citizenship by  fraud.  At  the
      appeal before the FTT, the appellant accepted the fraud but  submitted
      (at least  primarily)  that  the  deprivation  decision  breached  his
      children's right to respect for private life under article  8  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights.

   2. The essence of the appellant's submission to  the  FTT  was  that  the
      deprivation decision would cause the appellant to lose his entitlement
      to social welfare benefits which would in turn cause his  children  to
      fall  into  destitution.  That  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate
      interference with their article 8 rights. The FTT judge who heard  the
      appeal rejected that submission but permission to appeal  was  granted
      by a different FTT judge.

      Factual background

   3. The relevant facts are not in dispute. The appellant  is  an  Albanian
      national. He entered the United Kingdom on 6 August 1999  and  applied
      for asylum in a false Kosovo  identity.  He  was  interviewed  by  the
      Secretary of State and provided a written statement in support of  his
      asylum claim. The information that he provided both at  interview  and
      in writing was false.

   4. Following a decision to refuse him asylum, the appellant  appealed  to
      the Immigration Appellate Authority as it then  was.  His  appeal  was
      heard by an immigration adjudicator on 11 October 2000. At the  appeal
      hearing, he gave false evidence, maintaining that he was Kosovan.  The
      adjudicator allowed his appeal. Consequently, on 18 June 2002, he  was
      granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee under the 1951 Refugee
      Convention. On 17 July 2002, he maintained the false Kosovan  identity
      in an application for a travel document.

   5. By application form dated 16 October 2004, the appellant  applied  for
      naturalisation as a British citizen. A certificate  of  naturalisation
      was issued on 23 February 2005. In 2008 the appellant's wife submitted
      an application for entry clearance at the British  Embassy  in  Tirana
      which caused the Secretary  of  State  to  make  enquiries  about  the
      appellant's identity which was by that stage in doubt. In response  to
      a request for information from the Secretary of State,  the  appellant
      stated in a letter dated 22 May 2009 that he had been born and  raised
      in Kosovo.

   6. The Secretary of State sent a further letter to him on 27 January 2018
      when it was again put to him that he had obtained British  citizenship
      as  a  result  of  false  representations.  On  5  February  2018  his
      solicitors responded, giving his correct date of birth and  his  place
      of birth as Albania. The letter confirmed that  he  was  married  with
      children, having been resident in the UK for 19 years. The  solicitors
      submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that   the   deprivation   of
      citizenship would breach article 8 ECHR.

   7. By letter dated 27 March 2018, the Secretary of State gave  notice  of
      the deprivation decision. Acknowledging that  the  appellant  had  two
      British citizen children, the decision letter  demonstrates  that  the
      Secretary of State gave consideration to his duties under  section  55
      of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   The  Secretary
      of State concluded that, while deprivation  might  have  an  emotional
      impact on the children, the deprivation was reasonable in light of the
      seriousness of the appellant's fraud. There had been no  plausible  or
      innocent explanation for  the  misleading  information  which  he  had
      provided. The effects of deprivation on the appellant and  his  family
      members had to be weighed against the public  interest  in  protecting
      the special relationship of solidarity and good faith between  the  UK
      and  its  nationals.  The  decision  to  deprive  the   appellant   of
      citizenship was reasonable and proportionate.

      The FTT's decision

   8. The appellant appealed  to  the  FTT.   His  appeal  was  heard  on  6
      September 2018 by FTT Judge Cassel who heard oral  evidence  from  the
      appellant and his wife. In his oral evidence, the appellant said  that
      he had been in employment until 2009 but now  receives  a  variety  of
      welfare benefits including employment and support  allowance  ("ESA").
      He suffers from terrible headaches and dizziness. He has problems with
      kidney stones. He has a problem in his  right  eye  and  suffers  from
      depression. In cross-examination he said that his wife has a degree in
      economics. She has not worked in the  UK  as  the  children  are  very
      young. She came to the UK illegally  but  regularised  her  status  in
      2013. From that date, she had permission to work. The appellant's wife
      gave oral evidence consistent with his evidence.

   9. The FTT considered a bundle of documents submitted  by  the  appellant
      which included correspondence in relation to an accident at work which
      the appellant very sadly suffered on 12 December  2009.  His  employer
      agreed to pay compensation. The FTT referred to neurological  evidence
      confirming that the appellant has a  history  of  headaches  but  that
      clinical examination reported "no abnormal findings". Medical evidence
      from April 2018 referred to renal  problems  and  a  referral  to  the
      urology stone clinic.

  10. The FTT recorded in its determination that no decision had  been  made
      as to any further grant of leave to the  appellant;  nor  had  removal
      directions been made. The FTT  reminded  itself  that  deprivation  of
      citizenship would not automatically  lead  to  the  expulsion  of  the
      appellant from  the  UK.  His  removal  would  be  governed  by  other
      statutory provisions with specific procedural requirements and rights.

  11. The FTT concluded that there had been no evidence  and  no  submission
      that the appellant was disabled and unable to work by  reason  of  his
      workplace injury. The evidence pointed to a reasonable  foreseeability
      that he would be able to obtain  employment.  It  was  not  reasonably
      foreseeable that he would have no access to income.  His  reliance  on
      welfare benefits at the date of  the  hearing  did  not  lead  to  the
      conclusion that he would remain reliant on benefits in the future.

  12. The FTT took into consideration that it was no fault of  the  children
      that their own British citizenship had been obtained as  a  result  of
      their father's fraud. The children were young (aged 4 and 5 years) but
      the decision to deprive the appellant  of  citizenship  would  not  in
      itself have a significant effect on their best interests  nor  on  the
      appellant's wife. The FTT took into account that the appellant's  wife
      was pregnant and awaiting the birth of their third  child.  There  was
      nothing to suggest that, in due course, she would be  unable  to  work
      albeit that she would need some support in doing so.

  13. There was some discussion before us as to whether the appellant's wife
      had the right to work. However Ms Willocks-Briscoe provided us with  a
      letter from the Secretary of State  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
      wife, dated 20 September 2018, which clearly shows that she does  have
      the right to work in the UK. We have seen nothing to suggest that  she
      did not have the right to work at any time that was  material  to  the
      FTT's consideration of the issues in the appeal.

  14. Having considered the relevant evidence, the FTT went on  to  consider
      the appropriate legal principles.  The FTT  judge  correctly  directed
      himself (at para 25) that there is a balance to be made between public
      policy considerations and individual rights.  He cited BA v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2018] UKUT  00085  (IAC).   In  that
      case, Mr Justice Lane held (at para 44) that in relation to  cases  of
      fraud:

           "Where statelessness is not in issue, it is likely to be only in
           a rare case that the ECHR or some other compelling feature  will
           require the Tribunal to allow the appeal".

  15. The FTT concluded that  there  were  no  compelling  features  in  the
      appellant's case and that the decision to  deprive  the  appellant  of
      British citizenship was reasonable and proportionate.

      Appellant's submissions

  16. Mr Chakmakjian's submission seemed to us, at its highest, to be  that,
      if the appellant were to be deprived of his British  citizenship,  his
      entitlement to ESA would cease.  Either the  appellant  would  not  be
      granted immigration status in the UK, in which case his children would
      face a period of destitution pending  his  removal.  Or  he  would  be
      granted at most discretionary leave  to  remain  and  it  would  be  a
      condition of his stay that he  should  not  have  recourse  to  public
      funds, in which case the children  would  likewise  face  destitution.
      The deprivation decision would therefore amount to a  disproportionate
      interference with article 8 rights when the  children  were  blameless
      for their predicament.

      Analysis and conclusions

  17. We have no hesitation in rejecting Mr Chakmakjian's submission.  As we
      have mentioned, the appellant's wife has at  all  material  times  had
      permission to work in the UK. The FTT was entitled to conclude on  the
      evidence before it that his wife would be able to  work  even  if  the
      appellant was unable to do so.  The FTT relied on  evidence  that  the
      appellant had been able to settle his personal injury claim  and  that
      there was no evidence that the compensation would not be available  to
      him. While it was not in dispute that the appellant was in receipt  of
      ESA, which is a disability benefit, the FTT judge was not bound by any
      assessment of the Secretary of State for Work and  Pensions  that  the
      appellant cannot undertake any paid work.  The  FTT  was  entitled  to
      consider the issue for itself. The judge was entitled to consider  all
      relevant evidence and to reach the conclusions that he did.

  18. As Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed out, should  the  appellant's  wife  be
      unable to find employment, it will be open to  her  to  apply  to  the
      Secretary of State to lift the  condition  that  she  should  have  no
      recourse to public funds ("NRPF").  We  were  taken  to  the  relevant
      policy which indicates that destitution is a ground for lifting  NRPF.
      The Secretary of State would be bound to consider the family's article
      8 rights when deciding any application and would be bound to  consider
      the position of the appellant's children in accordance with article 8.



  19. There was no evidence before the  FTT  that  the  appellant  would  be
      separated from his children if ESA were to cease, or that there  would
      be an  interference  with  family  life.   We  agree  with  the  FTT's
      conclusion that the deprivation  decision  will  have  no  significant
      effect on his children's ECHR rights.

  20. In any event, it was open to the FTT conclude, as  it  did,  that  any
      interference  would  be  proportionate.   The  appellant  committed  a
      sustained fraud in order to obtain  citizenship.  We  agree  with  the
      Secretary of State's position that the relationship between the UK and
      its nationals stands to be damaged by those who obtain citizenship  by
      fraud. It is not in the public interest that the rights   inherent  in
      being a British citizen should be available to those  who  gain  those
      rights by fraud. We take this opportunity to reiterate the  Tribunal's
      conclusion in BA that, where statelessness is  not  in  issue,  it  is
      likely to be only in a rare case that the ECHR, including  article  8,
      will require an appeal to be allowed in cases of fraud.


      DECISION


      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. We do not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands. The appeal is dismissed.





   Signed                                          Date 22/01/2018

   [pic]

   The Hon Mrs Justice Farbey

































