
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00131/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Tuesday 3 August 2021             |On Tuesday 21 September 2021         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                          MR BAKHTIAR HUSSEIN MARIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  C  Holmes,  Counsel  instructed  by   Parkview
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND AND ISSUES

1. By a decision promulgated on 1 April 2021, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
   found an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew
   Davies itself promulgated on 4 March 2020, allowing the Appellant's
   appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 28 November 2019 depriving
   the Appellant of his British citizenship on the basis that he had
   obtained it by deception.  The error of law decision is appended to this
   decision for ease of reference.


2. The hearing before us took place remotely via Microsoft Teams.  There
   were no technical difficulties affecting the conduct of the hearing.   We
   had before us the Respondent's core bundle to which we refer below as
   [RB/[annex]].  We also had the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier
   Tribunal to which we refer below as [AB/[page]].  In response to the
   directions made in the error of law decision, both parties filed further
   documents and skeleton arguments.  We will come to those documents
   relevant to our consideration below.


3. The essential background facts are set out at [2] to [4] of the error of
   law decision and we do not repeat what is there said.  As a result of the
   way in which the hearing before us proceeded and the narrow issue raised,
   we will need to say more about the facts in our discussion below.

4. There was no dispute between the parties as to the legal position.  The
   legal approach is set out at [20] to [23] of the error of law decision.
   Both parties agreed with the analysis there set out.  In particular, it
   was accepted by Mr Holmes that the Supreme Court's judgment in R (oao)
   Begum v Special Immigration Appeals Commission and Anor [2021] UKSC 7
   ("Begum") offers authoritative guidance at least so far as the
   materiality of deception and exercise of discretion is concerned.  We
   remind ourselves that, on those issues at least, we are conducting a
   review of the Respondent's position on traditional public law grounds.
   As we will come to, that does not mean that we do not engage in a fact-
   finding exercise.  However, when considering whether the Secretary of
   State was entitled to reach the view that deprivation is conducive to the
   public good, we have to give weight to the Respondent's view and not
   exercise any discretion for ourselves.   The passage from Begum cited at
   [20] of the error of law decision is particularly instructive in this
   regard.

5. There was no argument before us in relation to the application of
   Article 8 ECHR to the facts of this case.  Nor was there any argument in
   relation to the exercise of any residual discretion. The focus of the
   argument was on the nature of the deception alleged and the materiality
   of that deception.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The Respondent's decision

6. Since we are in the position of reviewing the exercise of the
   Respondent's power to deprive the Appellant of citizenship, we consider
   that the appropriate starting point is the way in which the Respondent
   put her case as to the deception in the decision letter under appeal.  We
   set out the relevant parts of the decision letter below:

    "8.  You entered the United Kingdom and submitted an asylum form dated
    14 February 2002 (Annex A).  You attended an asylum SEF interview on 11
    June 2002 in which you stated your identity as Bakhtiar Hussein Marif
    born 13 March 1978 (Annex B, Page 1, Questions 3-6).  You stated that
    your country of origin as Sulaiman Bage, Tikrit, Iraq (Annex B, Page 1,
    Question 9).  You stated that you understood the interpreter (Annex B,
    Page 1, Question 17)....
    9.   In a letter from the Home Office dated 10 July 2002 you were
    informed that your asylum claim had been refused because it was
    concluded that you had not established a well-founded fear of
    persecution (Annex C, Page 2, Para 8).  You were later informed in a
    letter from the Home Office dated 15 July 2002 that it had been
    decided, because of the particular circumstances of your case you were
    granted Exceptional Leave to Remain in the UK until 10 July 2006 (Annex
    D, Page 1, Para 1).
    10.  You submitted an application for Indefinite Leave to Remain on 31
    May 2006 in the identity Bakhtiar Hussein Marif born 13 March 1978
    (Annex E, Page 1, Section 1.1-1.4).  You signed the declaration section
    of the form which clearly states 'I am aware that it is an offence
    under the Immigration Act 1971, as amended by the Immigration and
    Asylum Act 1999 and the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to
    make to a person acting in execution of any of those Acts a statement
    or representation which I know to be false or do not believe to be
    true, or obtain to seek to obtain [sic] leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom by means which include deception' (Annex E, Page 8, Section 6).
     You were granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on 30 October 2006.
    11.  You submitted an application to naturalise on 6 December 2007 in
    the identity Bakhtiar Hussein Marif born 13 March 1978 (Annex F, Page
    4, Section 1.4-1.10).  You claimed your place and country of birth as
    Slman Bag, Iraq (Annex F, Page 4, Section 1.11-1.12).  It is noted you
    confirmed the same place and country of birth in your asylum SEF
    interview application (Annex B, Page 1, Question 9).  You claimed your
    father's details as Mr Hussein born Slman Bag, Iraq and your mother's
    details Ayesha Mohammad born Dosa, Iraq (Annex F, Page 5, Section 1.21-
    1.28).  You signed the declaration section of the form which clearly
    states 'To give false information on this form knowing or recklessly is
    a criminal offence punishable with up to 3 months imprisonment or by a
    fine not exceeding �5,000 or both (Section 46(1) of the British
    Nationality Act 1981, as amended).  Annex F, Page 14, Section 6.1).
    You confirmed that you read and understood the 'guide to naturalisation
    as a British citizen' (Annex F, Page 14, Section 6.2).  Guide AN (Annex
    G).  You were informed in a letter from the Home Office dated 21
    February 2008 that your naturalisation application was successful
    (Annex H).  You attended your naturalisation ceremony on 18 March 2008.
    12.  HMPO referred your case to the Status Review Unit on 20 June 2018
    after you submitted documents in support of your passport application
    confirming that although you naturalised in the identity Bakhtiar
    Hussein MARIF - born 13/03/1978, in Slman Bag, Iraq, your genuine
    identity is Bakhtiar Hussein MARIF - born 13/09/1978, Mawat,
    Shahrbazar, Sulaymaniyah, Iraq.  It is noted that your claimed place of
    birth, Slman Bag, Iraq was under government control when you entered
    the UK and claimed asylum, whereas your genuine place of birth
    Sulaymaniyah, Iraq, was not under government control.  You were issued
    with a Home Office Investigation letter on 30 November 2018 requesting
    an explanation and further information (Annex I, Page 1, Para 3).
     13. In mitigation from your legal representatives, Ashton Solicitors
    dated 10 December 2018, they claim regarding your date of birth that
    your levels of English were no good and you could neither read or write
    properly.  They state that previous solicitors had not mentioned this
    error to you or to the Home Office (Annex J, Page 1, Para 5).  In
    reference (55.4.1 'False Representation') They claim that your
    incorrect date and place of birth is an innocent mistake (Annex J, Page
    2, Ref (55.4.1)).  They state that you have not concealed any
    information to acquire British citizenship as your asylum claim has
    your correct date and place of birth (Annex J, Page 3 (Ref 55.4.2)).
    It is noted that in your Asylum SEF interview form in 2002 you stated
    that your country of origin as Sulaiman Bage, Tikrit, Iraq (Annex B,
    Page 1, Question 9).  You also confirmed in your application to
    naturalise in 2007 your place and country of birth as Slman Bag, Iraq
    (Annex F, Page 4, Section 1.11-1.12). It is again noted that your
    claimed place of birth, Slman Bag, Iraq was under government control
    when you entered the UK and claimed asylum, whereas your genuine place
    of birth Sulaymaniyah, Iraq, was not under government control.  Your
    legal representatives state that this discrepancy transpired after your
    father registered you as being born in Mawat but are unclear as to why
    he did this.  They also claim it could be that Slman Bag has since been
    destroyed due to violence in the city (Annex J, Page 3 (Ref:
    55.7.10.2)).  They state you show resource about these incorrect
    details (Annex F, Page 4, Para 1).
    14.  In a statement dated 10 December 2018 you claim your identity as
    Bakhtiar Hussein Marif born 13 September 1978 and your place of birth
    Slman Bag (government-controlled area of Iraq) (Annex K, Page 1, Para
    5).  You claim that your late parents used to live in Mawat,
    Sulaymaneyah where your father registered your birth (Annex K, Page 1,
    Para 5).  It is noted that you claimed your father's place of birth as
    Slman Bag, Iraq, in your application to naturalise (Annex F, Page 5,
    1.22).  You apologise for the error in your date of birth and state you
    could not read or write English (Annex K, Page 1, Para 8).  The error
    in your date of birth was not material to your grant of status in the
    United Kingdom however, your place of birth was material as your
    claimed place of birth was material as your claimed place of birth,
    Slman Bag was under Iraq government control.  It is noted that
    paragraph 3.6 of the Iraqi Policy Bulletin 2006 and 2009 states:
    'Although there was no country specific blanket ELR policy it was
    accepted practice that all asylum seekers who were accepted ....as
    being Iraqi nationals, but who were found not to be refugees, from
    April 1991 to 20 October 2000, would be granted 4 years' ELR arising
    from factors such as the severe penalties imposed on those who had left
    Iraq illegally.  From 20 October 2000, in light of the improved
    conditions in KAZ, only claimants who were accepted to come from GCI
    were granted 4 years' ELR. (Annex L, Page 2, Para 3.6).  It is noted
    that you claimed asylum in February 2002 at that time only claimants
    from the government-controlled areas of Iraq were granted 4 years ELR,
    if your genuine place of birth was know [sic] at the time you would not
    have been granted status in the UK.
    15.  Your legal representatives in a letter dated 24 April 2019
    submitted further mitigation again stating you wish to explain the
    discrepancy regarding your place of birth.  They claim that you were
    born in Slman Bag, but your father was from Mawat, Sulaymaneyah and
    claim your father registered your birth one year after your birth
    (Annex M, Page 2, Para 4).  They claim that you never intended to
    mislead the Home Office and that you entered the UK because of your
    fear of persecution.  (Annex M, Page 3, Para 1).  Your legal
    representatives state that you show remorse about the incorrect date
    and place of birth (Annex M, Page 6, Para 8). They claim that you
    should not be deprived of British citizenship because your previous
    solicitors had not informed you of the errors (Annex M, Page 6, Para
    9).
    16.  Genuine Iraq documents submitted to Durham Passport Office on 30
    May 2018 - 1957 family register with certified translation stating your
    place of birth as Mawat, Sulaiymaniya (Annex N).  Marriage entry,
    Sulaimaniya with certified translation (Annex O).  Iraq national ID
    card with certified translation, stating your place of birth as Mawat,
    Sulaimaniya (Annex P).  Iraq Passport No A7717538 (Annex Q).  All
    identity documents confirm your place of birth as Mawat, Sulaimaniya.
    17.  Chapter 55 states that the caseworker should be satisfied that
    there as an intent to deceive.  The evidence shows that you perpetrated
    material fraud claiming to be born in a government-controlled area of
    Iraq in order to acquire status and British citizenship.  Chapter 55
    also states that adults are held responsible for their actions,
    including representations made under their signature (or on their
    behalf) and should be held accountable for them as a consequence.
    18.  Section 9 of the Nationality Staff Instructions in use on the date
    of the naturalisation application deals with deception and dishonesty.
    It is clear that you would have been refused British citizenship under
    S.9.1 and 9.2 had the nationality caseworker been aware that you had
    presented a false place of birth to the Home Office and continued to
    use that place of birth throughout your immigration history (Annex S).
    Your explanations that your father registered your birth a year later
    in Mawat, Sulaimaniya where he previously resided is not credible.
    19.  The fact that you were from liberated and not government
    controlled Iraq is material fraud, had the nationality caseworker been
    aware of this fact you would not have been granted Indefinite Leave to
    Remain and subsequent British citizenship.  Your grant of
    Naturalisation was obtained by means of fraud, false representation and
    the concealment of the material fact that your place of birth is Mawat,
    Sulaimaniya and not Slman Bag as claimed which was a government-
    controlled area of Iraq.  It is a balanced and proportionate step to
    take to pursue deprivation.
    20.  For the reasons given above it is not accepted there is a
    plausible, innocent explanation for the misleading information which
    led to the decision to grant citizenship.  Rather, on the balance of
    probabilities, it is considered that you provided information with the
    intention of obtaining a grant of status and/or citizenship in
    circumstances where your application(s) would have been unsuccessful if
    you had told the truth.  It is therefore considered that the fraud was
    deliberate and material to the acquisition of British citizenship.
    21.  It is acknowledged that the decision to deprive on grounds of
    fraud is at the Secretary of State's discretion.  In making the
    decision to deprive you of citizenship, the Secretary of State has
    taken into account the following factors, which include the
    representations made by your legal representatives in their letters
    dated 10 December 2018, 24 April 2019, 18 March 2019, 5 September 2019
    and 1 October 2019 and concluded that deprivation would be both
    reasonable and proportionate."
    [our emphasis]


The Deception


7. Perhaps unusually, we were not asked to hear evidence from the Appellant
   as regards the deception.  Mr Holmes indicated that the Appellant did not
   concede or accept that he had exercised deception but, in accordance with
   what was said at [32] to [35] of the error of law decision, he considered
   the crucial issue to be the materiality of the deception.


8. As we will come to, however, in order to consider the materiality of the
   deception, particularly in light of the way in which the Respondent has
   framed her case, we do need to make findings as to the deception itself.


9. We do not need to deal with the discrepancy as to the Appellant's date
   of birth for two reasons.  First, we cannot see how the discrepancy
   which, on the face of the documents, exists between March 1978 and
   September 1978 could possibly make any difference to the grant of either
   status or nationality.  It is not the case that, on the wrong date given
   the Appellant would have been a minor but was not if the correct date had
   been given.  Second, and most importantly, the Respondent does not assert
   that this part of the deception alleged was material (see emboldened
   passage at [14] of the decision letter set out above).

10. We turn then to the deception on which reliance is placed by the
   Respondent by reference to the documents cited in the decision letter.



11. We begin with the SEF Interview Form at [RB/B].  At question nine of
   that interview, the Appellant was asked for his "Last Known Address in
   Country of Origin".  The answer given to that question was "Sulaiman
   Bage, Duse Khurmatue, Tikrit (Salahadin) Iraq".  We emphasise that the
   Appellant was not asked for his place of birth but rather his last
   address in Iraq.  He was not asked either for his parent's details.  We
   were quite surprised by the lack of any screening interview which would
   normally ask for details of parents etc but we were assured by Mr Lindsay
   that the Tribunal had all relevant documents which were in the
   Respondent's possession.


12. The document at [RB/E] to which reference is made in the Respondent's
   decision letter and which is said to be the relevant application for
   indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") contains no assertion about the
   Appellant's place of birth in Iraq.  The only assertion is that the
   Appellant's nationality is Iraqi.  We do not understand it to be
   suggested that the Appellant is not an Iraqi.  It is his place of birth
   within Iraq which is in issue.

13. We turn then to the application for naturalisation at [RB/F].  In that
   document, the Appellant asserts his "village, town or city of birth" as
   being "Slman Bag".  At [1.21] of the form, he says that his father was
   also born in "Slman Bag" and at [1.26] that his mother was born in
   "Dosa".

14. The documents on which the Respondent places reliance as disclosing the
   deception are at [RB/N] to [RB/Q] which show the following:

      . [RB/N] - extract from general register for the province of
        Sulaymaniyah: Appellant shown as born on 13 September 1978 in
        Mawat, having married his wife, born in Bazyan, Sulaymaniyah and
        two children born to the couple on 24 November 2013 and 22 August
        2015.  The Appellant's birth was registered in October 1979 and his
        wife's birth was registered in April 1990 (although that is a
        little difficult to understand since she was not apparently born
        until 9 June 1990).  The family's personal ID is shown as dated 12
        April 2017.
      . [RB/O] - marriage entry: Appellant and his wife shown as having
        their marriage registered in Sulaymaniyah on 28 September 2011.
      . [RB/P] - Appellant's identity card registered in Mawat on 12 April
        2017.
      . [RB/Q] - Appellant's Iraqi passport: no relevant details other than
        as to date of birth.


15. The Appellant seeks to explain the discrepancy as to his date and place
   of birth in a statement dated 10 December 2018 ([RB/K] which states as
   follows so far as relevant:


    "1.  Upon arrival in the UK, I had always informed the Home Office that
    my date of birth was 13/09/1978.
    2.   I am not aware that my date of birth was registered as 13/03/1978.
     This is the date now on Certificate of Naturalisation and British
    passport.
    3.   My original Iraqi passport and My original Iraqi ID confirm my
    correct date of birth.
    4.   When I arrived in UK my level of English was poor.  I could not
    read or write in English.  I was not aware that my date of birth has
    been changed in Home Office documents.
    5.   I was not born in an Iraqi hospital and I had difficulties in
    obtaining ..a new version of my birth certificate.  My late parents
    lived in Sulaymaneyah.  My parents used to live in Mawat.  My father
    registered my birth after one year at Mawat.
    6.   I also provide my Copy of General Registry and my family benefit
    book that confirm correct date of birth as 13 September 1978.
    7.   After obtaining my Naturalisation as a British Citizen, I applied
    for my Children's British passport.  I gave my British passport and my
    children's Iraqi passport to the translator to translate the family
    registration book.  The translator followed my date of birth as shown
    in my British Passport.
    8.   I apologise for not bringing this error to the attention of the
    Home Office at an earlier date in subsequent applications for
    settlement and naturalisation the incorrect date of birth was used.  My
    previous solicitors had not mentioned to me anything about my date of
    birth.  I could not read or write in English then.  If I had been
    advised I would not have kept silent about the error.  I would have
    informed the Home Office.
    9.   I am now aware that I should not have done so and should rather
    have made steps to gain additional evidence confirming my true date of
    birth.
    ..."


16. This statement was made at the time that the Appellant's deception was
   discovered by the Respondent.  It appears from the statement that, even
   at this time, the Appellant understood the deception alleged to relate to
   his date of birth and not his place of birth.


17. The position as to the Appellant's place of birth appears in
   representations made by previous solicitors dated 24 April 2019 at
   [RB/M].   The relevant part of the letter reads as follows:


    "..Place of Birth issue and its explanation
    Mr Marif also wishes to explain the discrepancy regarding his place of
    birth.  His naturalisation documents confirm his place of birth as
    Slman Bag, Iraq.  His Iraqi documents confirm his place of birth as
    Mawat, Iraq.  Our client wishes to confirm that he was born in Slman
    Bag but his father was from Mawat.  His late father registered his
    birth one year after his birth when he was an infant in Mawat.  Mr
    Marif is unable to explain why his father took such action, he also
    notes that Slman Bag has been destroyed owing to violence in the
    country and this may be why his father took such action.  He is however
    related to both place in accordance with information he provided to
    Home Office initially as he was born in Slman Bag and his father is
    from Mawat.  Our client further asserts that the security situation in
    Iraq at the time of his birth and at the time of his coming in the UK
    was very bad.
    When he came to the UK, he could not have explained his position well
    as a result he is suffering now.  He never intended to mislead the Home
    Office.  He asserts why will he lie about his place of birth and what
    benefit will he get if he gives incorrect date of birth or place of
    birth to Home Office.  He admits he was careless, negligent, feared and
    was given ill advised or no advise [sic] at all about amending his
    record.  In no circumstances it was his intension [sic] to mislead the
    Home Office..."


18. The Appellant provided further witness evidence in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  His statement is at [AB/3-9] and reads as follows so far as
   relevant:


    "1.  My date of birth is 13 September 1978.  I was born in Slman Bage,
    Duse, Khurmatue, Tikrit (Sulahadin) Iraq.
    ..
    3.   By way of background I was born at home in Slman Bage.
    3.   When I left Iraq I left my parents in Slman Bage.
    ..
    5.   ..My asylum interview took place on 11 June 2002.  I provided the
    Home Office with the correct information detailing my date of birth as
    13 September 1978 and the place of my birth.
    ..
    8.   I applied for naturalisation as a British Citizen on 6 December
    2007 and was granted British Citizenship on 18 March 2008.
    9.   A year later I decided to return to Iraq to hunt down my parents.
    I found my parents to be living in Sulaymaniyah. I stayed with them for
    a whole year.  Whilst I was visiting them, I told them that I wished to
    settle down and in order for me to marry in the UK I had to obtain an
    Iraqi ID card.
    10.  My parents told me that before I was born my parents lived in
    Mawat which is a town north to Sulaymaniyah.  My father was born in
    Mawat and left Mawat because it was not safe at that time and relocated
    to Sulaiman Bage.
    11.  My parents told me that I was born in Slman Bage at home however
    my father did not register my birth in Slman Bage but went to Mawat,
    his home town to register me there because he was afraid.  As my father
    has his own ID issued in Mawat he returned to Mawat and registered my
    birth there.
    12.  My parents also told me that when I left Slman Bage they also left
    soon after because they were in fear of their lives and the town was
    destroyed by violence and they returned to Mawat where my father was
    born.
    13.  Whilst I was in Iraq I met my wife on 20 March 2010 and we started
    a relationship.
    14.  I returned to the UK on 6 May 2010.
    15.  A year later when I returned to Iraq to marry on 28 September
    2011.  I required an Iraqi ID.  I could not travel to Slman Bage to
    obtain the ID as my father had registered my birth in Mawat.  I
    travelled to Mawat and went to the Registry Office.  I obtained a copy
    which confirmed that my father has registered my birth a year later,
    i.e. 25 September 1979.  I took a copy and obtained my Iraqi ID. "


   The statement goes on to explain how the Appellant also obtained the
   other documents from the Iraqi authorities on which reliance is placed by
   the Respondent.  All were issued in Sulaymaniyah.  It continues as
   follows:


    "..32.   In relation to the discrepancy regarding my place of birth, I
    confirm that I was born in Slman Bag but my father registered my birth
    in his home town Mawat as the family was all registered there.  I was a
    child at the time and it was outwith my control where my birth was
    registered.
    33.  I can confirm that when I reunited with my parents, they told me
    that my father was actually born in Mawat and therefore they had a
    connection to the town.  I always had thought that my father was born
    in Slman Bage as I had always lived there since I was born until I left
    Iraq.
    ..
    35.  Despite the information contained on the Iraqi ID and the family
    registration certificate I can confirm that I was born in Slman Bage."


19. As we have already pointed out, the Appellant did not give details of
   his place of birth at his asylum interview as the Respondent asserts.  He
   was asked for his last address in Iraq.  Whatever the documents now
   produced show about place of birth, there is no evidence undermining the
   Appellant's assertion that he lived in Sulaiman Bage, Tikrit before
   coming to the UK.  There was no question in the application for ILR
   regarding the Appellant's place of birth.


20. We accept that the position may be different in relation to the
   application for naturalisation.  The deceptions alleged (aside as to date
   of birth) are that the Appellant lied about his own place of birth and
   that of his father.  In relation to the former, the Appellant's
   consistent position has been that, although his birth was registered in
   Sulaymaniyah, he was not born there; rather his father registered his
   birth there a year after the event.


21. On the face of the document at [RB/N], the Appellant was born in Mawat.
    That is said to be confirmed not by a birth certificate but by a "birth
   deed".  It also appears, consistently with the Appellant's case, that his
   birth was not registered until a year after he was born.  As such, we
   consider it plausible that the Appellant was born elsewhere but his birth
   was registered in Mawat.  We do not consider implausible that the
   Appellant's father would have returned to the place where his own details
   were registered in order to register the birth of his son, even if he was
   at that time living elsewhere.


22. At [AB/10-13] there is a letter stated to have been written by the
   Appellant's wife and thumbprinted by the Appellant's father broadly
   confirming the Appellant's version of events.  It is said to be dated 1
   February 2020.  Some doubts were expressed about the genuineness of this
   document by the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the basis that the
   representations made by Ashwood Solicitors on 10 December 2018 (at [RB/M
   - see above] referred to the Appellant's father as "late".   We accept
   that this is said but there is no reference to this in the Appellant's
   own witness statement.  The solicitors may well have misunderstood the
   position.

23. What we find less easy to accept, however, is that the Appellant had no
   idea of his links to Mawat and Sulaymaniyah generally until after he
   returned to Iraq following the grant of naturalisation.  If he had
   returned to the area from where he came prior to arriving in the UK (that
   is to say Tikrit) and found that his parents were no longer there, it is
   not explained how he would know to look for them in Sulaymaniyah
   generally and Mawat specifically unless he knew of the family's link to
   that area.  We find therefore that he was aware of his and his father's
   links to Sulaymaniyah and Mawat before coming to the UK.  We find it
   likely that he knew himself to be registered in Mawat and that his father
   came from that area.  We accept therefore that he did not tell the truth
   about his father's place of birth even if he himself was not born in
   Mawat but was only registered there.

Materiality of Deception


24. That is though not the end of the matter.  We next need to consider
   what was the impact of the deception on the grant of naturalisation.  It
   is at this juncture that we must give weight to the Respondent's views.
   We must approach this issue by conducting a review of the Respondent's
   decision stating herself to be satisfied that there was a material
   deception.  We did not understand the Respondent to dispute that she
   bears the burden of demonstrating that there was deception and the
   materiality of that deception.


25. We begin by considering Mr Holmes' submissions regarding the policy
   position.  As Mr Holmes submitted and we accept, the letter granting the
   Appellant four years' exceptional leave to remain ("ELR") is silent as to
   the reasons for that grant, save that the grant was based on the
   "particular circumstances" of the Appellant.

26. It was suggested by Mr Holmes that the Respondent had failed in her
   duty of disclosure.  He submitted that there were no documents such as
   caseworker notes showing the basis on which ELR had been granted.  The
   Respondent had failed to produce those documents or explain why they were
   not produced.  If they were lost or destroyed, the Respondent should have
   provided that indication.  Mr Lindsay assured us that all relevant
   documents had been produced.  We accept that assurance.  There would not
   necessarily be electronic case notes dating back as far as 2002.  There
   was a gap of over ten years between the grant of naturalisation and the
   Respondent becoming aware of the potential for deprivation.  It is quite
   possible that documents would have been destroyed during that period.  We
   can however consider the issue only on the evidence before us.


27. It is evident that the grant of ELR was one of four years.  We are also
   aware from documents produced by the Respondent in response to the error
   of law directions, that, in October 2002, there were grants of four
   years' ELR being made in relation to asylum seekers from certain
   countries based on country circumstances.  A general document dated 7
   October 2002 shows that, at that date, there were three country policies
   in place for Liberia, Libya and Somalia.  An ECtHR admissibility decision
   in F v United Kingdom in relation to Libya records the following extract
   from a Country Information and Policy Unit Bulletin (1/2002 - 7 October
   2002):


    "..2.1        In the past country specific ELR policies have been
    introduced where the general humanitarian situation would normally
    preclude removal.  What this has meant in practice is that where asylum
    is refused, ELR has been granted routinely (subject to
    security/criminal considerations) without the particular circumstances
    of the individual's case being examined.  The Home Secretary has
    announced an end to these country specific ELR policies and that in
    future all cases will be decided on an entirely individual basis."


28. That material shows that there were certain country policies in place
   at least in October 2002 giving rise to grants of ELR where removal to
   certain countries (or parts thereof) was not possible.  In response to
   questions raised in Parliament in 2004 about the policies which existed
   historically, a list was produced showing that there was a general policy
   in relation to Iraq from January 1997 to September 2000 only.


29. The Respondent has produced operational guidance notes ("OGNs") in
   force in relation to Iraq from October 2000 to October 2002.  The OGNs
   for October 2000 and April 2001 suggest that those from the Kurdish
   controlled areas of Iraq were unlikely to be successful in their asylum
   claims.  In relation to ELR, however, only three categories are stated as
   having a potential claim to ELR.  None of those applies to the Appellant
   in this case.  It is not until the OGN "version 2" dated October 2002
   that one finds an extended list of categories potentially benefitting
   from ELR but even that list does not appear to apply to the Appellant.


30. The policy position in relation to Iraq is summarised in a country
   bulletin entitled "Iraq Policy Bulletin 1/2009" ("the 2009 Bulletin").
   The section potentially relevant to our consideration is at [3.6] as
   follows:


    "Although there was no country specific blanket ELR policy it was
    accepted practice that all asylum seekers who were accepted as being
    Iraqi nationals, but who were not found to be refugees, from April 1991
    to 20 October 2000, would be granted 4 years' ELR arising from factors
    such as the severe penalties imposed on those who had left Iraq
    illegally.  From 20 October 2000, in light of the improved conditions
    in KAZ, only claimants who were accepted to have come from GCI were
    granted 4 years' ELR.  On 20 February 2003, this changed to 6 months'
    ELR in view of the uncertain situation surrounding Iraq, in particular
    the prospect of imminent military action against Iraq.  On 20 March
    2003 initial consideration of all Iraqi asylum applications was
    suspended following the commencement of military action in Iraq.
    Decision-making on Iraqi asylum claims resumed on 16 June 2003, since
    when all Iraqi asylum applications, regardless of where the claimant
    originated, have been considered on their individual merits."


31. It was suggested by Mr Holmes that we could not place weight on the
   2009 Bulletin because it was written some years later and did not reflect
   the OGNs at that time.  We disagree.  As is evident from what is said
   there and in response to the Parliamentary questions asked in 2004, there
   was no "country specific blanket ELR policy" relating to Iraq after
   September 2000.  It is therefore unsurprising that the OGNs would not
   reflect a general policy position.


32. Furthermore, the 2009 Bulletin reflects the position as it was stated
   to be in two judgments of the Court of Appeal and High Court
   respectively.  As the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of
   State for the Home Department v Rashid [2005] EWCA Civ 744 ("Rashid")
   shows, the issue of the destination of return was part of a policy which
   was not formally set out in any published document and was unknown even
   to some of the Respondent's caseworkers.  That is consistent with the
   fact that there is no mention of it in any of the OGNs at the relevant
   time.  Unpublished policies were not particularly uncommon at that point
   in time.  It was not until 2004 that Mr Rashid became aware of the fact
   that he should have been granted asylum as the caseworker in his case had
   decided that he could internally relocate to the Kurdish controlled part
   of Iraq.  The caseworker should not have relied on internal relocation as
   Mr Rashid was not from that area.  We accept that this is not the factual
   position in relation to this Appellant.  Whether or not he was born in
   Mawat, his birth was registered within the Kurdish controlled area.
   However, that there was a general policy in place at the time of
   returning to the Kurdish area those who were entitled to be admitted is
   self-evident from what is said about the policy at [4] of the judgment in
   Rashid.  We do not accept that the Respondent would have provided this
   information about the practice at the time to the Court of Appeal without
   checking its veracity and accuracy.
33. Moreover, there is no reason other than country conditions why this
   Appellant would have been granted ELR as he was.  There are no personal
   circumstances which could have led to that grant.


34. We are prepared for that reason to infer that what is said about the
   relevant policy in the 2009 Bulletin is correctly stated notwithstanding
   its omission from the OGNs in 2000 to 2002.  We accept therefore that, if
   the Respondent had realised that the Appellant was from the Kurdish
   controlled area or was able to be admitted there, she would not have
   granted ELR as she did.

35. However, we return to our findings about the deception.  The Appellant
   did not lie about his circumstances when he claimed asylum.  He answered,
   we find honestly, that his last address in Iraq was in Tikrit.  He was
   not asked where he was born nor where his parents were born.  The issue
   whether he was born in Mawat or simply registered there and where his
   father was born might have come to the forefront of our consideration had
   the Appellant been asked about his or his father's place of birth but,
   based on the documents we have seen, those were not questions he was
   asked at that time.

36. For those reasons, we are quite unable to accept the Respondent's
   assertion in the decision under appeal that the Appellant stated his
   "country of origin" as Tikrit nor that he confirmed his "place and
   country of birth" as that place.  He did not lie in that regard.
   Applying the approach which we are required to do following Begum, we
   find that the Respondent has taken into account irrelevant information
   or, to put it another way, has misunderstood the underlying factual
   evidence.  It follows that the Respondent was not entitled to conclude
   that the Appellant had lied about "his claimed place of birth" but for
   which he would not have been granted ELR.  There was no assertion in the
   application for ILR about the Appellant's place of birth.  He was merely
   asked for his nationality, and he answered that question truthfully.  It
   follows that the Respondent was not entitled to rely on there being any
   deception which led to the grant of ILR.


37. It was suggested by the Respondent that she did not rely on the chain
   of causation as reason to conclude that naturalisation had been obtained
   by deception.  We are unable to read the decision in any other way (see
   in particular [19] of the decision).


38. The Respondent has argued that she had decided in the alternative that
   the deception in the application for naturalisation was of itself
   sufficient to refuse the application on good character and conduct
   grounds.  We are quite unable to read the decision in that way.  Even if
   [18] of the decision is intended to convey that position, we find that
   this paragraph also is flawed in public law terms because of the
   reference there to the Appellant's "continued ..use [of that] place of
   birth throughout [his] immigration history".  We have found on the facts
   and evidence that there was only one use of deception and that was in the
   application for naturalisation itself.  The reliance placed on any
   earlier deception therefore misunderstands the evidence and fundamentally
   undermines the reasoning of the decision maker.


39. For those reasons, we conclude that, although the Appellant did
   exercise deception at the very least in relation to his father's place of
   birth when applying for naturalisation, the deception has not been shown
   to be material to the Respondent's decision to deprive.  Put another way,
   having reviewed the Respondent's decision under appeal in accordance with
   the principles set out in Begum, we are satisfied that the decision is
   flawed in public law terms.  The Respondent was not entitled based on the
   evidence before her to be satisfied that the grant of naturalisation was
   obtained by means of fraud, false representation or concealment because
   that conclusion is based on her misunderstanding of that evidence.


40. We therefore allow the Appellant's appeal.


DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is allowed.



Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  18 August 2021



                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00131/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 24 March 2021                 |                                |
|                                           |................................|
|                                           |.......                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                          MR BAKHTIAR HUSSEIN MARIF
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  C  Holmes,  Counsel  instructed  by   Parkview
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference, I
      refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
      Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Andrew Davies promulgated on 4 March 2020 ("the Decision"). By the
      Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the
      Respondent's decision dated 28 November 2019 depriving the Appellant
      of his British citizenship on the basis that he had obtained it by
      deception.


   2. The Appellant is accepted to be a national of Iraq.  He came to the UK
      in February 2002 and claimed asylum.  He claimed that he was from
      Tikrit.  He gave his real name and a date of birth of 13 March 1978.
      His asylum claim was refused but he was granted four years exceptional
      leave to remain ("ELR") based on his circumstances.  It is the
      Respondent's case that the Appellant would not have been entitled to
      leave to remain if he had disclosed that, although he had lived in
      Tikrit at some point prior to leaving Iraq, he was born in
      Sulaymaniyah (which was not under the control of the Government of
      Iraq).  There is a dispute about that issue.


   3. Following the grant of four years' ELR, on 30 October 2006, the
      Appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain ("ILR").  Having had
      ILR for over twelve months, the Appellant applied for citizenship and
      was granted it on 21 February 2018.  When he made a passport
      application in June 2018, the Appellant disclosed his true date of
      birth (13 September 1978) and enquiries suggested he was born in
      Sulaymaniyah. The Appellant disputes this and maintains that he was
      born in Tigrit and lived there immediately before coming to the UK.


   4. The Appellant has a wife and two children living in Iraq.  According
      to [64] of the Decision, the Appellant met his wife in Iraq in March
      2010.  They married there in September 2011.  The Appellant's children
      were born in November 2013 and August 2015.  The children are British
      citizens due to the Appellant's status when they were born.  Their
      status is unaffected by the deprivation decision.  The Judge recorded
      at [64] of the Decision that the Appellant "has spent some lengthy
      periods in Iraq with his family over a period of years."


   5. At [56] of the Decision the Judge reached the conclusion "on the
      balance of probabilities that there is a material link between the
      dishonesty and the grant of exceptional leave to remain and,
      thereafter, indefinite leave and citizenship".  The dishonesty was
      "maintained throughout"


   6. At [74] of the Decision, the Judge found the Respondent's decision not
      to be disproportionate.  Deprivation did not therefore breach Article
      8 ECHR.


   7. However, the Judge, at [75] to [82] of the Decision went on to
      undertake what he termed a "Further Balancing Exercise" and, having
      exercised discretion which he understood was for him to exercise, he
      concluded at [82] of the Decision that "deprivation would not be seen
      as a balanced and reasonable step to take taking into account the
      misrepresentation involved and what the misrepresentation was
      attempting to hide".


   8. The Respondent appealed the Decision on the grounds that the Judge had
      provided inadequate reasons for his conclusion and had materially
      misdirected himself in law. I do not need to go into the grounds in
      more detail as it is now accepted that there is an error in the
      Decision for other reasons as I come to below.


   9. Permission to appeal was said to be granted by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Parkes on 11 August 2020 as follows (so far as relevant):


             "... 3.  It is arguable that, having found operative deception
             and that the Appellant clearly retains strong ties to Iraq
             where his family live, the Judge erred in finding deprivation
             would be disproportionate.  The Judge does not appear to have
             applied the guidance in the relevant case law, if the decision
             was proportionate under article 8 it is not at all clear how
             it could be disproportionate in some other way.
             4.   The grounds disclose no arguable errors of law and
             permission to appeal is refused."


  10. As is evident from the foregoing, the grant of permission is
      problematic.  The permission grant is consistent with what is said at
      [3] but [4] is consistent with a refusal.  What matters though is the
      decision itself and not the reasons for it.  Where, as here, there is
      a discrepancy between the two the Tribunal has to consider what was
      meant by the Judge.  Given what is said at [3], the Judge clearly
      intended to grant permission and included paragraph [4] in error.  It
      was not suggested by the Appellant that permission had not been
      granted.  Moreover, that interpretation of the permission to appeal
      decision was confirmed by Upper Tribunal Judge Frances in a Note and
      Directions sent on 27 August 2020.  She therefore reviewed the
      decision under rule 31 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008.


  11. Judge Frances also reached the provisional view that the error of law
      decision could be determined without a hearing on the papers.
      However, following consideration of the Appellant's Rule 24 reply
      ("the Rule 24 Notice") dated 19 August 2020, UTJ Mandalia again
      reviewed the file and listed the error of law issue for determination
      at a remote hearing.


  12. The Appellant in the Rule 24 Notice challenged the Judge's conclusions
      on the two issues on which he had failed, namely materiality of the
      deception and the rejection of the human rights grounds.  I accept
      that following the Tribunal's decision in Smith (appealable decisions;
      PTA requirements; anonymity) Belgium [2019] UKUT 216 (IAC), the
      Appellant is entitled to cross-appeal in this way without any formal
      application for permission.


  13. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
      Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
      make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
      so.  There were no technical issues affecting the course of the
      hearing. I had before me a core bundle of documents relating to the
      appeal, the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal and
      bundles of authorities relied upon by both parties.

  14. At the outset of the hearing, following discussions between the
      parties, I was informed that the Appellant conceded that there was an
      error of law in the Decision on the discretion issue which was the
      basis for allowing the appeal.  Mr Clarke also agreed that there was
      an error of law disclosed by the Appellant's Rule 24 Notice.  I set
      out the reasons for those concessions and my acceptance of them below.



  15. Following those concessions, I agreed that the appropriate course was
      to set the Decision aside in its entirety.  Mr Holmes asked that the
      appeal thereafter be remitted.  Mr Clarke requested that it be
      retained in the Upper Tribunal.  As I explain below, the issue
      relating to the exercise of discretion, now has to be resolved in the
      light of recent case-law of the Supreme Court.  The position may be
      legally complex.  The factual issues however are not.  Most of the
      facts, with the exception of the nature and extent of the alleged
      deception, are undisputed.  There are limited factual findings
      required.  Having regard to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-
      tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in
      this Tribunal, I have concluded that it is more appropriate to retain
      the appeal for re-making in this Tribunal.  I have given directions at
      the end of this decision for the re-making.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   The Respondent's Case

  16. The Judge's reasons for allowing the appeal are as follows:


             "Further Balancing Exercise
             75.  However, notwithstanding my conclusions above, I must
             consider whether the Secretary of State should have exercised
             his discretion differently and I must carry out the balancing
             exercise referred to in KV.  I remind myself that it is not
             just a matter of whether the decision was rational, it must
             also be right.
             76.  The published Nationality Instructions do deal with the
             matter of whether the deprivation is proportionate.  At
             paragraphs following 55.7.10 under the heading of
             'Reasonable/Balanced' the caseworker is advised to consider
             whether deprivation would be seen to be a balanced and
             reasonable step to take, taking into account the seriousness
             of the fraud, misrepresentation or concealment.
             77.  Caseworkers are also advised (paragraph 55.7.11 onwards)
             to take account of mitigating circumstances.  The examples
             considered there do not assist the Appellant.  The guidance
             emphasises that where advice to provide false details is
             relied upon or the person claims that someone such as a family
             member acted on their behalf (thereby exonerating him from
             responsibility) that is not be regarded as constituting
             mitigation.  On the other hand, the caseworker is exhorted to
             take account of Article 8 rights and to consider granting
             leave in accordance with the guidance on family and private
             life.  This does take account of the fact that a person
             deprived of citizenship does not revert to the stage before
             citizenship (indefinite leave) but effectively returns to the
             start point.
             78.  I have taken account of the fact in assessing
             proportionality that the Respondent has not followed his own
             guidelines because there is little evidence within the
             decision letter of any sort of careful balancing exercise in
             reaching a decision about using his discretion in a different
             way.
             79.  The Respondent did not deal with whether the deprivation
             decision would represent a reasonable and balanced approach.
             At paragraph 55.7.9 of the Nationality Instructions it is
             stated that the caseworker must consider that issue.  There is
             no evidence in the decision letter of a full evaluation
             carried out.
             80.  There are practical legal consequences of deprivation of
             citizenship including the loss of voting rights.  The
             Appellant would be forced to start his applications for leave
             all over again.  While it is likely that the Appellant would
             be given limited leave to remain and it is highly unlikely
             that he will be removed from the UK, the process will
             inevitably cause uncertainty and worry.  There may be an
             impact on the Appellant's position in the labour market.  The
             Appellant will lose the right to a British passport.  There
             may be more travel difficulties.  There will be the loss of
             the opportunity to make a choice (subject to the income and
             other eligibility matters) about where the family should live.
             81.  Above all, I take account of the fact that the Appellant
             has lived in the UK for 18 years.  While for the purpose of
             Article 8 his private life was developed while his position in
             the UK was in effect precarious (because of his deception)
             nonetheless he has made the UK his home over very long period
             of time.  I also take account of the fact that at the time
             when the original asylum claim was made and rejected Iraq as a
             whole was facing a very turbulent future with the likelihood
             of war.  Although the Kurdish areas had the advantage of a no-
             fly zone enforced by the international community, they had
             suffered years of difficulties at the hands of the Saddam
             regime.  That is not to excuse the dishonesty involved in the
             exercise but taken with the longevity of the Appellant's
             residence in the UK together with the impact of deprivation on
             other aspects of his life I am satisfied that the Secretary of
             State should have exercised discretion differently.  I have
             given considerable weight to the public policy issues at large
             here and in particular the importance of maintaining the
             integrity of the system in place for granting leave to remain,
             indefinite leave to remain and citizenship.  However, the
             Secretary of State has not followed his own guidance in
             considering the balancing exercise.
             82.  For those reasons, to use the words of the Respondent's
             own guidelines, deprivation would not be seen as a balanced
             and reasonable step to take taking into account the
             misrepresentation involved and what the misrepresentation was
             attempting to hide."


  17. Even without the recent case-law which led the Appellant to concede
      this issue, I would have found an error of law in that passage for the
      following reasons.  First, it is not right to say that the Respondent
      had not considered the exercise of discretion. That is considered at
      [21] to [30] of the decision letter.  The consideration takes into
      account Article 8 ECHR, the impact on the children and statelessness.
      It also covers the next step of considering limited leave.


  18. That leads me on to the second difficulty with the Judge's analysis.
      He appears to have assumed that the Appellant will be permitted to
      stay.  It is not clear why that should be so.  As the Judge reminds
      himself, the Appellant has only been here for eighteen years.  He does
      not even meet the period of residence under paragraph 276ADE of the
      Immigration Rules.  On the Judge's finding concerning deception, it is
      also unlikely that he could succeed on suitability grounds.
      Consideration of that issue also needed to take account of the earlier
      findings in relation to Article 8 ECHR.  The Appellant has lived with
      his family in Iraq for lengthy periods.  It is not clear why the Judge
      thought, in those circumstances, that removal would be
      disproportionate based on the Appellant's private life alone
      (particularly given that the Appellant had failed on the Article 8
      ground).  Admittedly the Appellant has British citizen children, but
      they live outside the UK and have always done so.  They are now aged
      seven and four years.


  19. The reason for the Appellant's concession however concerns the legal
      approach adopted.  In this regard, the Judge cannot be faulted for his
      self-direction as the law stood at the time of the Decision.  The self-
      direction in relation to the exercise of discretion appears at [26] to
      [30] of the Decision as follows:


             "26. The Tribunal is in a position to make its own findings as
             to whether the requirements of subsection (3) are satisfied.
             The Upper Tribunal in BA confirmed this but also added that if
             the requirements were satisfied then the tribunal would be
             required to put significant weight on the fact that the
             Secretary of State had decided, in the public interest, that a
             person who had employed deception to obtain British
             citizenship should be deprived of that status.  Where
             statelessness is not in issue, it is likely to be only in a
             rare case that the ECHR or some very compelling feature will
             require the Tribunal to allow the appeal.
             27.  Subsequent to BA the Court of Appeal gave its decision in
             KV [2018] EWCA Civ 2483.  At paragraph 6, the Court endorsed
             the principles of law set out in BA and also in Deliallisi
             [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC).  It may be helpful to summarise the main
             points.
             28.  An appeal under section 40A involves a full
             reconsideration of the decision to deprive a person of
             citizenship.  A tribunal may find relevant facts whether or
             not the evidence in question was before the Secretary of
             State.  It is necessary to establish whether the condition
             precedent in section 40(2) or 40(3) is established.  If so,
             the tribunal must ask whether the Secretary of State's
             discretion should have been exercised differently.  For this
             purpose, it is necessary to determine the reasonably
             foreseeable consequences of deprivation.
             29.  If a person's rights under Article 8 of the European
             Convention on Human Rights are engaged, it is necessary to
             consider the question as to whether deprivation amounts to
             disproportionate interference in a person's rights under
             Article 8.  However, even if Article 8 is not engaged, the
             tribunal must still consider whether the discretion should
             have been exercised differently.  As Parliament has charged
             the Secretary of State with making decisions about deprivation
             of citizenship, his view and any published policy regarding
             how the policy should be exercised should be given
             considerable weight.
             30.  In KV the Court of Appeal held at paragraph 16 that the
             decision maker, whether the Secretary of State or the
             tribunal, must form a view not just whether it was rational to
             make such an order but whether it was right to do so.  The
             evaluation should take account of the public interest in
             deprivation of citizenship as against any competing interests
             and considerations of the person affected including the impact
             upon his legal status."


  20. The self-direction as there set out is also consistent with the
      guidance given very recently by this Tribunal in Hysaj (Deprivation of
      Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 00128 (IAC).  However, since that
      decision, the Supreme Court has had occasion to consider deprivation
      of citizenship (albeit in the slightly different context of a SIAC
      appeal) in R (oao Begum) v Special Immigration Appeals Commission and
      Anor [2021] UKSC 7 ("Begum").  Mr Clarke drew my attention to what is
      said at [66] to [71] of the judgment which I set out below:


           "66.             In relation to the nature of the decision under
           appeal, section 40(2) provides:
           '(2)     The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of
           a citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
           deprivation is conducive to the public good.'
           The opening words ('The Secretary of State  may  ...')  indicate
           that decisions under section 40(2) are made by the Secretary  of
           State in the exercise of his discretion. The discretion  is  one
           which Parliament has confided to the Secretary of State. In  the
           absence of any provision to the contrary, it must  therefore  be
           exercised by the Secretary of State and by no one else. There is
           no indication in either the 1981 Act or the  1997  Act,  in  its
           present form, that Parliament  intended  the  discretion  to  be
           exercised by or at the direction of  SIAC.  SIAC  can,  however,
           review the Secretary of State's exercise of his  discretion  and
           set it aside in cases where an appeal is allowed,  as  explained
           below.
           67.             The statutory condition which must be satisfied
           before the discretion can be exercised is that 'the Secretary of
           State is satisfied that deprivation is conducive to  the  public
           good'. The  condition  is  not  that  'SIAC  is  satisfied  that
           deprivation is conducive to the public good'. The existence of a
           right of  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
           enables his conclusion that he was satisfied to  be  challenged.
           It does not, however, convert the statutory requirement that the
           Secretary of State must be satisfied  into  a  requirement  that
           SIAC must be satisfied. That is a further reason why SIAC cannot
           exercise the discretion conferred upon the Secretary of State.
           68.             As explained at paras 46-50, 54 and 66-67 above,
           appellate courts and tribunals cannot  generally  decide  how  a
           statutory discretion conferred upon the  primary  decision-maker
           ought  to  have  been  exercised,  or  exercise  the  discretion
           themselves,  in  the  absence   of   any   statutory   provision
           authorising them to do so  (such  as  existed,  in  relation  to
           appeals under section 2 of the 1997 Act, under section  4(1)  of
           the 1997 Act as originally enacted, and under sections 84-86  of
           the 2002 Act prior to their amendment in 2014: see paras 34  and
           36 above). They are in general restricted to considering whether
           the decision-maker has acted in a way  in  which  no  reasonable
           decision-maker could have acted, or whether he  has  taken  into
           account some irrelevant matter or has disregarded  something  to
           which he should have given weight, or has erred on  a  point  of
           law: an issue which encompasses  the  consideration  of  factual
           questions, as appears, in  the  context  of  statutory  appeals,
           from Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v Bairstow [1956] AC 14. They
           must also determine for  themselves  the  compatibility  of  the
           decision with the obligations of the  decision-maker  under  the
           Human Rights Act, where such a question arises.
           69.             For the reasons I have explained, that  appears
           to me to be an apt description of the role of SIAC in an  appeal
           against a decision taken under section 40(2). That is not to say
           that SIAC's jurisdiction is supervisory rather  than  appellate.
           Its jurisdiction is appellate, and references to  a  supervisory
           jurisdiction in this context are capable of being  a  source  of
           confusion. Nevertheless, the characterisation of a  jurisdiction
           as appellate does not determine the principles of law which  the
           appellate body is to apply. As has been explained,  they  depend
           upon the nature of the decision under appeal  and  the  relevant
           statutory provisions. Different principles may even apply to the
           same decision, where it has a number of aspects giving  rise  to
           different   considerations,   or   where   different   statutory
           provisions are applicable. So, for  example,  in  appeals  under
           section 2B of the 1997 Act against decisions made under  section
           40(2) of the 1981 Act, the principles to be applied by  SIAC  in
           reviewing the Secretary of State's exercise  of  his  discretion
           are largely the same as those applicable in administrative  law,
           as I have explained. But if a question arises as to whether  the
           Secretary of State has acted incompatibly with  the  appellant's
           Convention rights, contrary to section 6  of  the  Human  Rights
           Act, SIAC has to determine that matter objectively on the  basis
           of its own assessment.
           70.             In considering whether the Secretary  of  State
           has acted in a way in which no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State
           could have acted, or has  taken  into  account  some  irrelevant
           matter, or has disregarded something to  which  he  should  have
           given weight, SIAC  must  have  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
           discretionary power in question, and the  Secretary  of  State's
           statutory responsibility for deciding whether the deprivation of
           citizenship is conducive to the public good. The exercise of the
           power conferred by section 40(2)  must  depend  heavily  upon  a
           consideration of relevant aspects of the public interest,  which
           may include  considerations  of  national  security  and  public
           safety, as in the present case. Some aspects of the Secretary of
           State's assessment may not  be  justiciable,  as  Lord  Hoffmann
           explained in Rehman. Others will depend, in many  if  not  most
           cases, on an evaluative judgment of matters, such as  the  level
           and nature of the risk posed by the appellant, the effectiveness
           of the means available to address it, and the  acceptability  or
           otherwise of the  consequent  danger,  which  are  incapable  of
           objectively verifiable assessment, as Lord Hoffmann pointed  out
           in Rehman and Lord Bingham of Cornhill reiterated in A, para 29.
           SIAC has to bear in mind, in relation to matters of  this  kind,
           that the Secretary of  State's  assessment  should  be  accorded
           appropriate respect, for reasons both of institutional  capacity
           (notwithstanding  the  experience  of  members  of   SIAC)   and
           democratic   accountability,   as   Lord   Hoffmann    explained
           in Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A, para 29.
           71.             Nevertheless, SIAC has a  number  of  important
           functions to perform on  an  appeal  against  a  decision  under
           section 40(2). First, it can assess  whether  the  Secretary  of
           State has acted in a way in which  no  reasonable  Secretary  of
           State  could  have  acted,  or  has  taken  into  account   some
           irrelevant matter, or has  disregarded  something  to  which  he
           should have given weight, or has been guilty of some  procedural
           impropriety. In doing so, SIAC has to bear in mind  the  serious
           nature of a deprivation of citizenship, and the severity of  the
           consequences which can flow from such a decision.  Secondly,  it
           can consider whether the Secretary of State has  erred  in  law,
           including whether  he  has  made  findings  of  fact  which  are
           unsupported by any evidence or are based  upon  a  view  of  the
           evidence which could not reasonably be  held.  Thirdly,  it  can
           determine whether the  Secretary  of  State  has  complied  with
           section 40(4), which provides that the Secretary  of  State  may
           not make an order under section 40(2) 'if he is  satisfied  that
           the order would make  a  person  stateless'.  Fourthly,  it  can
           consider whether the Secretary of State has acted in  breach  of
           any other legal principles applicable to his decision,  such  as
           the obligation arising in appropriate cases under section  6  of
           the Human Rights Act. In carrying out those functions, SIAC  may
           well have to consider relevant evidence. It has to bear in  mind
           that some decisions may involve  considerations  which  are  not
           justiciable, and  that  due  weight  has  to  be  given  to  the
           findings, evaluations and policies of the Secretary of State, as
           Lord Hoffmann explained in Rehman and Lord Bingham  reiterated
           in A. In reviewing compliance with the Human Rights Act, it has
           to make its own independent assessment."


  21. The Begum case was, as the extract set out above shows, concerned with
      a decision under section 40(2) British Nationality Act 1981.  I am
      here concerned with section 40(3) of that Act.  However, the
      principles are the same.  The Supreme Court concluded as much at [41]
      to [46] of the judgment in Begum.  That section of the judgment
      (including the preceding paragraphs to set it in context) reads as
      follows:

             "39.             Section 2B has also undergone amendment,  as
             have the other provisions with which it  is  interlinked.  The
             version which is currently in force provides:
             'A person  may  appeal  to  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
             Commission against a decision to make an order  under  section
             40 of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c 61) (deprivation  of
             citizenship) if he is not entitled  to  appeal  under  section
             40A(1) of that Act because  of  a  certificate  under  section
             40A(2) (and section 40A(3)(a) shall have effect in relation to
             appeals under this section).'
             40.  There does not appear ever to  have  been  any  statutory
             provision relating to the grounds on  which  an  appeal  under
             section 2B may be brought, the matters to  be  considered,  or
             how the appeal is to be determined (as mentioned  in  para  34
             above, section 4 of the 1997 Act was repealed on the same date
             as section 2B came into force; and sections 84-86 of the  2002
             Act were not applied to appeals under section  2B).  The  same
             appears to be true of an appeal to the Tribunal under  section
             40A of the 1981 Act.
             41.  In relation to the scope of the jurisdiction  created  by
             section 2B, counsel for Ms Begum and for Liberty  referred  to
             some decisions of the Upper Tribunal in which the jurisdiction
             of the First-tier Tribunal in an appeal under section  40A  of
             the  1981  Act  was   considered.   The   earliest   of   them
             is Deliallisi  v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) (unreported) given 30 August
             2013, which was  concerned  with  deprivation  of  citizenship
             under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act.  That  provision  applies
             where   the   citizenship   results   from   registration   or
             naturalisation and 'the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that
             the registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of  -
             (a) fraud, (b) false representation, or (c) concealment  of  a
             material fact'.
             42.  In that case, the First-tier Tribunal concluded  that  it
             had no power to exercise the Secretary of  State's  discretion
             differently, since such a power could  only  be  conferred  by
             express statutory provision. Subject to  compliance  with  the
             Human Rights Act, the scope of an appeal under section 40A  of
             the 1981 Act, in the view of the First-tier Tribunal,  was  to
             examine the facts on which the Secretary  of  State  made  the
             decision, examine the evidence and determine whether the basis
             upon which the decision was made was made out.
             43.  The Upper Tribunal, chaired by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane,
             adopted the opposite approach, holding (para  31)  that  '[i]f
             the legislature confers a right of appeal against a  decision,
             then, in the absence of express wording limiting the nature of
             that appeal, it should be treated as requiring  the  appellate
             body to exercise afresh any judgement or  discretion  employed
             in reaching the decision against which the appeal is brought'.
             The judge found support  for  that  position  in  the  earlier
             judgment  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in Arusha  and   Demushi
             (Deprivation of Citizenship) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC); [2012] Imm
             AR 645, another case concerned  with  a  decision  made  under
             section 40(3). However, the judge mistakenly  understood  the
             judgment in that case to have  'approved'  (para  28)  remarks
             made by the First-tier Tribunal, which the Upper Tribunal  had
             in reality merely  recorded  (see  paras  11  and  14  of  its
             judgment). The judge also found support in remarks made  by  a
             minister in the course of a debate during the passage  of  the
             2002 Act through Parliament, which he mistakenly treated (para
             34) as revealing Parliament's  intention,  applying Pepper  v
             Hart [1993] AC 593 in a manner which was disapproved in Wilson
             v First County Trust Ltd (No 2) [2004] 1 AC 816, paras 58-60.
             The judge also cited textbook authority that a fresh  exercise
             of  judgment  was  excluded  if  the   decision   involved   a
             consideration  of  matters  which  were  non-justiciable,  and
             stated that that could not possibly  be  said  of  a  decision
             under section 40: a questionable proposition so  far  as  some
             decisions under section 40(2) are concerned, but one which can
             be  accepted  in  relation  to  section  40(3).  However,  the
             apparent reasoning, that (1) an appellate body's ability to re-
             take a discretionary decision  is  excluded  if  the  subject-
             matter is non-justiciable, and (2) the subject-matter of  this
             decision is not non-justiciable, therefore (3)  this  decision
             can be re-taken by  the  appellate  body,  is  fallacious.  It
             depends on the unstated premise that  an  appellate  body  can
             always re-take a discretionary decision  unless  the  subject-
             matter is  non-justiciable:  a  premise  which,  as  explained
             below, is incorrect. The judge also referred in Deliallisi to
             a number of potentially helpful authorities concerned with the
             scope of appellate jurisdiction, but did not discuss them.  It
             will be necessary to return to some of those authorities.
             44.  A different approach was adopted by the  Upper  Tribunal,
             chaired by Mr C M  G  Ockelton,  in Pirzada  (Deprivation  of
             Citizenship: General Principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC); [2017]
             Imm AR 1257. He stated at para 9 of his judgment that  section
             84 of the 2002 Act did not apply to appeals under section  40A
             of the 1981 Act, but added that  the  grounds  of  appeal,  in
             appeals under section 40A of the 1981 Act, must be directed to
             whether the Secretary of State's  decision  was  empowered  by
             section 40, and that '[t]here is no suggestion that a Tribunal
             has the power to consider whether it is satisfied  of  any  of
             the matters set out in sub-sections (2) or (3); nor  is  there
             any suggestion that  the  Tribunal  can  itself  exercise  the
             Secretary of State's discretion.'
             45.  In BA (Deprivation of Citizenship: Appeals) [2018] UKUT
             85 (IAC); [2018] Imm AR 807 the Upper Tribunal,  chaired  by
             Lane J, repeated what had been said in Deliallisi and stated
             that the passage just cited from Pirzada was accordingly not
             to be followed. In support of his view of the proper ambit of
             an appeal under section 40A, Lane J cited the decision of this
             court  in Ali  v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799. However,  that
             decision was not concerned with an appeal under  section  40A,
             but with an immigration appeal subject to the pre-2014 version
             of section 84 of  the  2002  Act  (para  36  above),  and  was
             therefore not in point.
             46.  Before considering  the  authorities  concerned  directly
             with appeals to SIAC,  it  is  worth  considering  some  other
             authorities   concerned   with   the   scope   of    appellate
             jurisdiction, most of which were cited in Deliallisi.  It  is
             apparent from them that the principles to  be  applied  by  an
             appellate body, and the powers available  to  it,  are  by  no
             means uniform. At one  extreme,  some  authorities,  concerned
             with licensing appeals to courts of summary jurisdiction, have
             held  that  such  appeals  should  proceed   as   re-hearings,
             reflecting the terms  of  the  relevant  legislation  and  the
             procedures  followed  by  such  courts.   Other   authorities,
             concerned  with  appeals  to  the  Court  of  Appeal   against
             discretionary decisions by lower courts, have  held  that  the
             scope of the appellate jurisdiction  was  much  more  limited.
             Modern  authorities  concerned   with   the   scope   of   the
             jurisdiction   of   tribunals    hearing    appeals    against
             discretionary decisions by administrative decision-makers have
             adopted varying  approaches,  reflecting  the  nature  of  the
             decision  appealed  against   and   the   relevant   statutory
             provisions. Two examples were mentioned in Deliallisi."


       Having reviewed cases in other jurisdictions, the Supreme Court
       returned to the context of decisions under section 40(2) of the 1981
       Act and set out its conclusions at [66] to [71] set out above.


  22. Although as Mr Clarke accepted, the Supreme Court did not expressly
      state that this Tribunal's decisions in Dellialisi and BA are no
      longer to be followed, that is no doubt because the Court was not
      concerned in Begum with that type of case.  Its comments are merely
      part of the legal landscape against which the Supreme Court considered
      the jurisdiction and powers of SIAC.  It is clear from what is said by
      the Supreme Court at [43] and [45] of its judgment, however, that it
      disapproved the approach taken in Dellialisi and, flowing from that
      case, in BA on which case the Judge here relied.  As Mr Clarke pointed
      out, the reasoning of the Supreme Court at [66] to [71] of its
      judgment starts from the premise that the statutory provision requires
      the Secretary of State "to be satisfied".  In Begum, the Secretary of
      State had to be satisfied that deprivation was conducive to the public
      good whereas under section 40(3), the Secretary of State has to be
      satisfied that registration was obtained using fraud or false
      representation (in broad summary) but both section 40(2) and 40(3) are
      expressed in permissive terms (indicating an exercise of discretion)
      and both turn on the matters being established to the satisfaction of
      the Secretary of State as primary decision maker.


  23. I have also considered what is said at [124] to [126] of the judgment
      concerning the role of the Tribunal or Court where a public authority
      has failed to follow its policy.  I do not need to set out that
      section of the judgment as, as I have indicated above, the Judge's
      criticism on this point is not validly made in this case.  In any
      event, if the Secretary of State had failed to follow her policy, the
      role of the Tribunal is still to review the decision; it is not for
      the Tribunal to take the decision for itself.


  24. For the foregoing reasons, although I accept that Judge Davies was
      following the case-law as he understood it to be at the time of the
      Decision, he has nonetheless erred in law as the approach which he
      took is no longer correct in law.  That is particularly the case in
      relation to the self-direction at [30] of the Decision.


  25. For that reason, I am satisfied that the Appellant's concession in
      relation to the exercise of discretion is rightly made.  The Judge has
      erred in allowing the appeal on the basis he did for the reasons he
      gave.


   The Appellant's Case


  26. I turn then to consider the Appellant's grounds of cross-appeal as
      contained in the Rule 24 Notice.


  27. The first ground of challenge is that, when considering the
      materiality of the deception, at [53] and [56] of the Decision, the
      Judge has erred in failing to recognise that the burden of proof lies
      with the Secretary of State and that, although the Respondent had
      taken issue with the Appellant's place of birth, she had not taken
      issue with his residence thereafter within the government-controlled
      part of Iraq.  It is said that the focus of the Respondent's policy is
      on home area and not place of birth.  It is asserted that the
      Respondent had never disputed that the Appellant lived for most of his
      life in the government-controlled region of Iraq.


  28. The Judge considered the Respondent's policy and materiality of the
      deception at [53] to [56] of the Decision as follows:


         "53. On the face of it there is a direct connection between the
         dishonest representation and the ultimate acquisition of British
         citizenship.  Mr Holmes however referred me to paragraph 3.6 of the
         UK Border Agency Country Policy Bulletin for Iraq dated January
         2009.  Section 3 sets out the background and at 3.6 there is a
         succinct history of the policy regarding exceptional leave to
         remain.  Mr Holmes submitted that there was a material distinction
         to be drawn between the place of birth and the home area.  The
         important point concerned whether a claimant came from a government
         controlled area.  The focus in the case (by the Respondent) had
         been on the place of birth.  It was the home area that was
         important for protection purposes.  Effectively, as I understand
         the point, even if the Appellant had been wrong about his place of
         birth, it did not really matter because it was his home area that
         was material.  I acknowledge that it is the Appellant's case that
         he fled Sulaiman Bage because he did not wish to be conscripted
         into Saddam's personal force albeit that his claim was rejected by
         the decision maker dealing with his asylum claim.
         54.  I accept that the emphasis in the decision letter is mainly on
         the place of birth.  However, on the basis of the evidence I have
         reviewed, I am not satisfied that I can make a finding that the
         Appellant's home area was Sulaiman Bage.
         55.  In his first statement, the Appellant stated that his late
         parents lived in Sulaymaniyah.  In the next sentence he stated that
         they used to live in Mawat.  In the submissions the Appellant's
         legal advisers referred to the registration of his birth in Mawat
         while he was an infant in that town.  In his 2018 statement that
         accompanied the submissions he did not mention his parents living
         in Sulaiman Bage.  In the statement purportedly thumb printed by
         his father it was stated that in 1978 the family were expelled and
         'thrown to the middle and south of Iraq areas' but nonetheless was
         able to make a flying visit in secret to register his son's birth.
         That in turn is entirely inconsistent with the statement that the
         Appellant was registered while an infant in Mawat.  Moreover, there
         are serious concerns about the provenance of the letter allegedly
         from his late father.
         56.  I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there is a
         material link between the dishonesty and the grant of exceptional
         leave to remain and, thereafter, indefinite leave and citizenship.
         The dishonesty was maintained throughout."


  29. The Respondent's policy guidance at the time of the grant of ELR to
      the Appellant is not in evidence.  What is in evidence is a document
      entitled Iraq Policy Bulletin 1/2009 ("the Policy Bulletin").  That
      summarises the policy said to be in existence at the time as follows:


         "3.6 Although there was no country specific blanket ELR policy it
         was accepted practice that all asylum seekers who were accepted as
         being Iraqi nationals, but who were found not to be refugees, from
         April 1991 to 20 October 2000, would be granted ELR arising from
         factors such as the severe penalties imposed on those who had left
         Iraq illegally.  From 20 October 2000, in light of the improved
         conditions in KAZ, only claimants who were accepted to have come
         from GCI were granted 4 years' ELR.  On 20 February 2003 this
         changed to 6 months' ELR in view of the uncertain situation
         surrounding Iraq, in particular the prospect of imminent military
         action against Iraq.  On 20 March 2003 initial consideration of all
         Iraqi asylum applications was suspended following the commencement
         of military action in Iraq.  Decision-making on Iraqi asylum claims
         resumed on 16 June 2003, since when all Iraqi asylum applications,
         regardless of where the claimant originated, have been considered
         on their individual merit."


  30. Mr Holmes drew my attention to a country guidance decision issued in
      2004 - GH (Former Kaz - Country Conditions - Effect) Iraq CG [2004]
      UKIAT 00248 ("GH").  At [29] of the decision in GH, reference is made
      to a submission on behalf of the appellant relying on what was said to
      be a general policy of granting ELR to Iraqi asylum seekers in March
      2000.  It was said that if the claim in that case had been dealt with
      timeously, the appellant in that case would have been granted ELR.  At
      [31] of the decision, on behalf of the Secretary of State it was said
      that there was no such general policy in March 2000 or subsequently.
      For that reason, Mr Holmes submitted that the summary as set out in
      the Policy Bulletin could not be relied upon.  Mr Clarke in reply
      indicated that, although not currently in evidence, the policy
      documents at the relevant times could in fact be produced.


  31. I was not assisted by the decision in GH for two reasons.  First, as I
      pointed out to Mr Holmes, at the time of the policy said to have been
      in existence and when the decision in GH was issued, policies were
      often unpublished.  As a result, even the Secretary of State's
      caseworkers were known on occasion to be unaware of individual
      policies (see for example the Court of Appeal's judgment in R (oao
      Rashid) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ
      744).  Second, whilst it might have been surprising if the Secretary
      of State had been unaware of her policies when presenting a country
      guidance case, the policy as summarised in the Policy Bulletin
      expressly states that it was not a general policy.


  32. I accept however that the Decision does contain an error of law on the
      issue of the materiality of the deception.  Mr Clarke conceded as
      much.  He did not specify exactly why he was making that concession.
      However, in my view, the Judge addressed this issue erroneously for
      the following reasons.


  33. First, while the Judge correctly self-directed himself in relation to
      the burden of proof at [19] of the Decision, it is not clear that he
      applied the correct burden when assessing the materiality of the
      deception and indeed the question whether there was deception at all.
      He appears to have considered that it was for the Appellant to show
      that his home area was Sulaiman Bage ([54] of the Decision) whereas
      the real issue was whether the Appellant had given correct or
      misleading or false information and, if so, whether innocently or
      dishonestly.


  34. Second, as the Appellant points out in his grounds, the Respondent's
      case was that the Appellant was born in the Kurdish area and not that
      he lived there.  That might not make any difference if, as the Policy
      Bulletin suggests, the question is whether the Appellant "comes from"
      that area.  That however was the crucial question for the Judge (at
      least on the Respondent's case) and not where was the Appellant's home
      area.  I anticipate that the wording of the policy is premised on an
      ability to return an individual to that area which might not require a
      person to have been ordinarily resident in that area in order to
      qualify for return.


  35. Third, the issue for the Judge was the materiality of deception, if it
      was accepted that there was deception.  I accept that the Respondent's
      case was that the Appellant would not have obtained ELR if he had told
      the truth about his place of birth, would not then have qualified for
      ILR and would not then have been able to apply for citizenship.  This
      may be the relevant question on the Respondent's case in this instance
      and applying the guidance in Sleiman (deprivation of citizenship;
      conduct) [2017] UKUT 00367 (IAC). However, as is made clear in Pirzada
      (deprivation of citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT 196
      (IAC), the central question is whether "[t]he deception referred to
      ... motivated the grant of ... citizenship" and not whether it
      materially affected prior grants of leave to remain.


  36. For those reasons, I accept that the Judge has erred in his approach
      by failing properly to resolve the right questions when determining
      the materiality of the deception.


  37. I am unimpressed by the Appellant's ground relating to Article 8 ECHR.
       It is submitted that the Judge has erred by failing to consider that
      if, as he found would be likely to be the case, the Appellant would be
      permitted to remain in the UK based on his private life, the Appellant
      would only have limited leave to remain and therefore would be unable
      to sponsor his wife and children joining him here.


  38. As I have already noted at [18] above, it is unclear why the Judge
      found as he did regarding the Appellant's ability to remain in the UK.
       The Appellant has been in the UK for less than twenty years.  The
      deception, if accepted to be such, would mean that he would likely
      fail on suitability grounds.  As such, it may be more likely that the
      Appellant would not be granted leave to remain.  His wife and children
      remain living in Iraq.  The Appellant has returned there and spent
      periods living back in that country.


  39. For those reasons, however, and although the errors in the Judge's
      reasoning in this regard are in the Appellant's favour, given that I
      consider that the Decision must be set aside and that the Article 8
      issue needs to be revisited based on the position at the time of re-
      hearing, I do not consider it appropriate to retain the Judge's
      findings in this regard.


   Conclusion


  40. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision contains
      errors of law.  I therefore set aside the Decision and give directions
      below for the re-making of the Decision.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew Davies promulgated on 4
March 2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law.  I therefore
set aside the Decision and give directions for the re-making of the
decision in this Tribunal as follows:

   1) Within 28 days from the date when this decision is sent, the parties
      shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the other party any further
      evidence on which they seek to rely at the resumed hearing.  In
      particular, the Respondent should file and serve any evidence within
      her possession concerning the four years' ELR policy in relation to
      Iraqi asylum seekers said to have been in existence at times which are
      relevant to this appeal.


   2) Within 14 days from the filing and service of any evidence in [1]
      above, the Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the
      Respondent a skeleton argument setting out the issues for the Tribunal
      to determine and any case-law relied upon.  The Appellant shall also
      produce and file and serve an indexed, paginated bundle containing all
      relevant documents to be referred to at the hearing.


   3) Within 14 days from the filing and service of the Appellant's skeleton
      argument at [2] above, the Respondent shall file with the Tribunal and
      serve on the Appellant her written submissions in response.


   4) The appeal will be listed for re-hearing on a face-to-face basis on
      the first available date after two months from the sending of this
      decision (time estimate � day).  No interpreter will be booked unless
      requested.

   5) Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions may  be
      sent by, or attached to, an email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
      reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the subject
      line.  Attachments must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This  address  is  not
      generally available for the filing of documents which should  continue
      to be sent by post.  It is anticipated that the resumed  hearing  will
      be considered by a panel.  Accordingly, hard copy documents should  be
      filed in duplicate.

   6) Service on the Secretary of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  on  the
      Appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by use  of  any
      address apparent from the service of this decision and directions.


   7) The parties have liberty to apply to the Tribunal for further
      directions or variation of the above directions, giving reasons if
      they face significant difficulties in complying.




Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  30 March 2021

