
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00035/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8 August 2017                      |On 27 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between


                  secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MAHMUD MOHAMMED TABRINI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Nizami, instructed by Good Advice UK.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Malone  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the appeal to the respondent, whom we
    shall call "the claimant" against the Secretary of State's decision  on
    31 October 2016 to deprive him of his citizenship.  We  can  deal  with
    the matter quite briefly; we have heard submissions on the Secretary of
    State's behalf from Mr Jarvis; we have not needed to call on Ms  Nizami
    for the claimant, who appeared before us, as she did before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The difficulty which led to the Secretary of State's decision  is  that
    the  claimant  is  a  person  whose  photograph  was  attached  to   an
    application for a passport in the name of his  brother  Fuad,  made  in
    2008.  There is, it is fair to say,  no  doubt  now  that  that  was  a
    fraudulent  application  and  that  the  appellant's   photograph   was
    submitted as part of an application in the name of Fuad.  The  passport
    itself, of course, was not part of the process by  which  the  claimant
    sought to obtain nationality.  But in his application  for  citizenship
    the claimant answered, as he was required to do, question 3.12  on  the
    form, seeking to know whether there was  any  reason  of  character  or
    conduct why the Secretary of State  might  pause  before  granting  him
    citizenship, if we may so express it.  He  said  that  there  was  not.
    The Secretary of State took the view that  the  claimant  himself  must
    have been involved in the obtaining of that passport in 2008, that  the
    explanations he had given for his  photograph  being  on  the  passport
    where unsatisfactory, and  that  he  had  therefore  obtained  his  own
    citizenship by concealment of a material fact, that is to say,  by  not
    revealing his part in the production of that passport.

 3. The statutory authority for a decision  along  those  lines  is  in  s.
    40(3)(c) of the British Nationality Act 1981:-


             "The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status  which  results  from  his  registration  or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that  the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -
                ...
                (c) concealment of a material fact."

 4. Judge Malone heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  his
    brother.  He did not accept the entirety of the evidence of  either  of
    them.  He reached a clear conclusion that the Secretary  of  State  had
    not established that the claimant himself was complicit in  the  events
    of 2008.  That decision appears to us to have been reached on the basis
    of the evidence he heard, and it is fully reasoned.

 5. The Secretary of State's appeal as presented this morning by Mr  Jarvis
    is along the following lines:

             "The judge should have appreciated that it was the claimant and
             not his brother who had the chief motivation for there being  a
             fraudulent passport containing the claimant's own photograph."

 6. That may be so.  Mr Jarvis is unable to point to  any  indication  that
    that was specifically argued before the judge.  There can, however,  be
    no doubt that it was amongst the things that the judge had in mind when
    considering, as he did, with great care, the evidence and what  has  to
    be said, the perhaps unlikely story that he was  presented  with.   His
    conclusion  was  perfectly  clear:  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the burden of proving any fraudulent conduct, deception,  or
    concealment by the claimant.  The Secretary  of  State's  grounds,  and
    argument, amount merely to  disagreement  with  the  judge's  perfectly
    lawful conclusion.  There is no basis in law for reversing  or  setting
    aside the judge's conclusion, which we shall therefore order to  stand,
    and dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.









                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 12 September 2017








