
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: dc/00018/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th September 2018                        |On 13th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                RASHID SHARIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented.
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent on 6 July 2017 giving notice that  the  Secretary  of
    State had decided to make  an  order  under  s  40(3)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981.  The effect of such an order would be to  deprive
    the appellant of  his  British  citizenship  on  the  ground  that  his
    registration or naturalisation was obtained by means  of  fraud,  false
    representation, or concealment of a material fact.

 2.  The  appellant  entered  the  Netherlands  in  1993,  overstayed   his
    permission  to  be  there  and  apparently  lived  unlawfully  in   the
    Netherlands for about eight years.  He then moved to Portugal, entering
    unlawfully, but soon thereafter obtaining a work permit.  Whilst he was
    in Portugal he met and married [MF].  A few weeks later  she  moved  to
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant joined her in the United Kingdom  as
    her husband in November 2004.  In March 2005 Ms [F] made an application
    for a residence document as an EEA National, and included the appellant
    in her application as her husband.

 3. In 2009 the appellant applied  for  permanent  residence  as  Ms  [F]'s
    family member, on the basis of having completed  five  years  residence
    under the EEA Regulations.  That application was granted on 2  February
    2010.  On 18 February 2011 the appellant applied for naturalisation  as
    a British citizen.  The application was granted on 11 May 2011.   On  2
    July 2012 the appellant's marriage to Ms [F] was  dissolved.   In  2013
    [SR]  was  granted  entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    appellant's  spouse.   Subsequent  investigation  revealed   that   the
    appellant had married her in Pakistan on 13 December 2002 and had  four
    children by her, born on 8 October 2004, 29 July 2006, 10 November 2008
    and 13 December 2010.  Further, [SR] had applied for entry clearance to
    the United Kingdom on 1 June 2006, with the eldest child and, as can be
    seen from the date, heavily pregnant with the second.  The  application
    was refused.  The sponsor was not named  as  the  appellant  but  as  a
    person who was said to be [SR]'s cousin.

 4. The Secretary of State invited the appellant to  explain  why  he  had,
    throughout his previous dealings with the Home  Office,  including  the
    grant of citizenship, failed  to  mention  his  wife  and  children  in
    Pakistan.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied with the  responses
    and  took  the  view  that  the  appellant  had  deliberately  withheld
    information about his wife and  children  in  Pakistan  from  the  Home
    Office, in order to enable him to obtain naturalisation  as  a  British
    citizen.  That was the basis of the decision  to  deprive  him  of  his
    British citizenship.

 5. The appeals to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  subsequently,  to  this
    Tribunal, have raised a number of issues that may be  regarded  as  not
    entirely central to the determination of the appellant's case.   It  is
    convenient to start with the central issues.  In her decision,  reached
    after  a  hearing  on  13  April  2018,  at  which  both  parties  were
    represented, the appellant by Mr Robertson, Advocate, Judge J C  Grant-
    Hutchinson reviewed the evidence before her and reached findings  which
    were in almost all respects adverse  to  the  appellant.   Amongst  the
    documents in the appellant's inventory of productions is a  certificate
    of the registration of his marriage to [SS] on 13 December 2002.  There
    is also a certificate of his marriage to [SR] on 20 February 2013.  (It
    is perhaps worth pointing out  that  in  the  latter  certificate,  the
    appellant's age is misstated, and his and his wife's marital status  is
    entered as "virgin"  although  by  then  they  had  had  four  children
    together.)  There was evidence before the judge  about  the  nature  of
    rukhsati and the date of the rukhsati following the marriage  in  2002.
    The judge rejected the appellant's account that his  relationship  with
    [SR] was simply "a physical relation for sexual enjoyment and just pass
    my time when I visit in Pakistan".    She concluded that there  was  no
    doubt that he was married to [SR], and had been since  2002,  and  that
    they had genuine relationship including the begetting of children, whom
    the appellant said that he loved and was responsible for  and  involved
    in their upbringing, and that when the appellant  was  in  Pakistan  he
    lived with them.  The judge reached the clear view that  the  appellant
    was seeking to distance himself from his relationship with [SR] for his
    own purposes in the  course  of  the  appeal,  and  that  his  evidence
    purporting to explain that he had not mentioned his marriage to [SR] to
    the Home Office because he did not regard it as a proper  marriage,  or
    did not regard it as a marriage that had been registered,  or  did  not
    regard it as anything other than a temporary sexual  relationship,  was
    not to be believed.  Her conclusion was that the appellant was  married
    to more than one woman at the same time and that if that  evidence  had
    come to light he would have been refused  permanent  residence  on  the
    basis  of  his  marriage  to  Ms  [F]  and  would  have  been   refused
    naturalisation.  The judge concluded as follows:

         "In terms of Section 40(3) of the British Nationality  Act  1981  I
         find that the Appellant has for the  reasons  given  concealed  the
         fact that he was married to  two  women  at  the  same  time.   The
         Appellant would not have met the requirements for naturalisation as
         a British citizen."

 6. In her preparation for the hearing, the judge had appreciated that  the
    appellant, whose solicitors were by then Marks &  Marks  Solicitors  of
    Harrow, had complaints about his previous solicitors, R. H.  Solicitors
    of Glasgow.  R. H. Solicitors had  represented  the  appellant  in  the
    period leading up to the decision under appeal, and  had  set  out,  in
    letters to the Home Office, why the appellant thought that he  did  not
    need to mention his Pakistani marriage to his Portuguese wife.  Marks &
    Marks had raised a number of questions with  R.  H.  Solicitors  during
    March 2018, following notice to the Tribunal on 20 February  2018  that
    they now represented the appellant.  The correspondence between the two
    firms of solicitors shows that Marks & Marks had taken the view that R.
    H. Solicitors should provide an explanation to the Tribunal about their
    conduct of the appellant's affairs, and, in particular, the  source  of
    some of the information that they had included in letters  and  Witness
    Statements prepared for the appellant.  It then became apparent that, a
    member of the firm of R. H. Solicitors being  present  in  the  Hearing
    Centre that day, the appellant's representatives proposed to  call  him
    as a witness.  The judge decided to convene a meeting of  the  parties'
    representatives before the hearing proper, at which she  could  explain
    that it was not the role  of  the  Tribunal  to  deal  with  complaints
    against solicitors, and to attempt to narrow down the issues  to  those
    which  properly  belonged  in  the  appealed  hearing.   There  was  no
    complaint about the fact that that meeting took place, nor indeed could
    there properly be any complaint: it was obviously an appropriate way of
    dealing with the circumstances that arose.  We shall have  to  look  in
    some more detail at some of what  is  said  to  have  happened  at  the
    meeting.

 7. Following the meeting, the hearing took  place.    The  appellant  gave
    oral evidence and was cross examined.  There was no other witness: [SR]
    did not attend the hearing.  There were submissions from  both  parties
    and, shortly after the hearing, the judge issued her  written  decision
    dismissing the appeal.

 8. The application for permission to appeal has  grounds  drafted  by  the
    appellant himself, supported by a letter  from  Graham  Robertson,  the
    Advocate, to a member of the firm of Marks  &  Marks  solicitors.   The
    grounds make various assertions about the  judge's  use  of  documents.
    The assertions in the  grounds  are  not  entirely  coherent,  and  are
    closely tied in with the appellant's complaints about R. H. Solicitors.
     The letter from Mr Robertson,  dated  25  April  2018  and  bearing  a
    signature which is typed, not written, responds to what was evidently a
    request from the solicitor to provide information about  what  happened
    at the hearing.  After setting out the preliminary meeting, the  letter
    continues as follows:

         "2.  When the case commenced proper it emerged that  two  documents
             had not been given sight of to the Appellants  representative.
             These were, a) Mr  Sharif's  interview  of  2007,  and  b)  Mr
             Sharif's wife's refusal document of 2006.  We were then  given
             an opportunity to consider and discuss both documents with  Mr
             Sharif.  We did so in a separate consultation room.

         3.   The hearing recommenced  and  Mr  Sharif  gave  evidence.   He
             accepted that his 20 page statement was true and accurate  and
             had been prepared by the present  Solicitors.   He  was  asked
             very few questions by the Judge and nothing of a controversial
             nature emerged.  He was then cross-examined by Mr Clark a Home
             Office presenting officer.  He was not re-examined by myself.

         4.   We were not given Mr Sharif's statement  of  4/1/2018  or  the
             expert report.  Both of these documents had been prepared  and
             requested by his  previous  Solicitors.   They  had  not  been
             provided to us at all.   We did not have sight  of  them.   Mr
             Sharif was not asked, to my recollection at  all,  whether  he
             accepted the contents of either of these documents and whether
             he had ever considered them.  The  only  document  by  way  of
             statement that he accepted was his 20 page statement  prepared
             by his present Solicitor Mr Malik.

         5.   It appears to me that the Judge has come to a decision on  the
             basis of important documents that were not properly introduced
             into evidence.  His present representative had not been  given
             sight of these documents.  To compound the difficulty  serious
             criticisms lay at the heart of these  documents  as  was  made
             plain in  Mr  Sharif's  20  page  statement  and  the  lengthy
             correspondence between his present and his previous Solicitors
             which  was  documented  in  the  Appellants   bundle.    These
             criticisms of the previous Solicitor  and  their  implications
             was the reason why the Judge  wished  to  have  a  preliminary
             meeting as in paragraph 1 above."

 9. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal  was  granted  on  the  following
    grounds:

         "1.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal complained  that  the
             FtTJ relied on two documents (a  witness  statement,  dated  4
             January 2018, and an expert report) which were not provided to
             the  appellant.   The  appellant's  complaint  on  this  score
             receives support from the letter prepared by Mr Robertson, his
             advocate at the hearing.  There is therefore an arguable issue
             about procedural fairness.

         2.   I also note that, whilst  she  considered  the  evidence  with
             great care and thoroughness, the FtTJ  directed  herself  that
             the burden of proof rested on the appellant.   The  respondent
             had the burden of showing fraud under section 40(3) BNA 81.

         3.   The grounds seek to open the issue of whether the appellant is
             stateless as a result of the deprivation of citizenship.  That
             does not appear to have been raised at the hearing  and  I  do
             not consider the point arguable."

10. At the hearing before us the appellant was unrepresented.  He had  some
    language difficulties but coped well and we were confident that we were
    able to understand what he told us.  He took us through the history  of
    his representation.  It was clear that he still had concerns about  the
    way his previous representatives had treated him.  In the interests  of
    ensuring that we had given him the fullest opportunity to put his  case
    we heard him on these issues.  In  relation  to  the  points  on  which
    permission had been granted, he asserted that a Witness Statement dated
    4 January 2018 and sent to the Tribunal by R.  H.  Solicitors  did  not
    represent his case or his evidence.  He asked us to determine his  case
    on the basis of the statement made,  through  the  agency  of  Marks  &
    Marks,  shortly  before  The  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   He  also
    referred to a comprehensive supplementary statement that  he  had  made
    for the purposes of the hearing before us.  In it, he repeats  that  he
    never accepted the contents of the statement dated 4 January  2018  and
    the expert report: "they do not belong to me and the IJ never asked  me
    about" them.  Mrs O'Brien referred to a response to the  grounds  which
    had been lodged under rule 24.  A copy of the Presenting Officer's note
    of the proceedings was attached: we note that it has not  been  subject
    to any query or dispute since it was lodged.  In relation to the burden
    of proof, Mrs O'Brien recognised that paragraph  10  of  the  decision,
    indicating that the burden of proof was on the  appellant,  posed  some
    difficulties, but said that the judge's careful treatment  of  all  the
    evidence before her and the conclusion she had reached  meant  that  it
    was inevitable that the decision would have been against the appellant.

11. We consider first the allegation relating to procedural unfairness.  It
    is extremely difficult to ally the assertions made by the appellant and
    by Mr Robertson on his behalf with  the  documentation  that  has  been
    provided.  The letters between Marks &  Marks  and  R.  H.  Solicitors,
    which were put in evidence, demonstrate that Marks & Marks  were  aware
    of the Witness  Statement  dated  4  January  2018,  because  they  ask
    questions about it although they have not sought  a  copy  of  it.   In
    these circumstances the suggestion that it was  not  available  to  the
    appellant's representatives before the First-tier Tribunal  appears  to
    us to be simply wrong.  We appreciate that there might nevertheless  be
    an argument that it was unfair for the judge to take it into account if
    the appellant's representatives did not know that she had it.  That  is
    not what is said; and it would  also  be  wrong,  because  one  of  the
    complaints made by Marks & Marks (and indeed by the appellant  himself)
    is that R. H.  Solicitors  had  sent  the  appellant's  bundle  to  the
    Tribunal in support of his case at a time which coincided very  closely
    with a time when they withdrew their representation of him.   In  these
    circumstances there was of course every opportunity for  Mr  Robertson,
    who represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal,  to  make
    enquiries as to the contents of that bundle and as  to  the  extent  to
    which it fell to be taken into evidence.  It does not appear  that  any
    such enquiries were made.  In the circumstances, and  bearing  in  mind
    that he or those instructing him knew about the Witness Statement  and,
    at the very least, that it had been sent to the Tribunal apparently  on
    behalf of the appellant, there is nothing in  the  ground  relating  to
    that document.  There was no procedural unfairness in  taking  it  into
    account.

12. The same appears to apply to the "expert opinion", which  is  also  the
    subject of reference throughout the appellant's,  and  Marks  &  Marks'
    complaints about, and enquiries of, R. H. Solicitors.

13. In any event, the part that either of those  documents  played  in  the
    hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  minimal.   The  "export
    report" appears to have provided  some  information  to  the  judge  on
    Muslim marriage customs and on rukhsati.   These were all matters  upon
    which it would have been proper to proceed on  the  basis  of  judicial
    knowledge.  The Witness Statement of 4 January 2018 is mentioned by the
    judge only in the context of  a  difference  in  the  question  of  the
    appellant's surprise or otherwise at discovering his marriage had  been
    registered: but that is not  the  point  because  in  the  more  recent
    statement which he adopted in full before  the  Tribunal,  he  accepted
    that he was told about the registration in January 2004.   Further,  as
    the judge notes, his knowledge of the registration was  not  the  issue
    anyway.

14. It is right further to look at the matter a little more  broadly.   The
    position is that, as the evidence, including in particular  substantial
    evidence  produced  by  the  appellant  demonstrates,  he  underwent  a
    marriage to his Pakistani wife in 2002, a marriage which  was  a  valid
    Islamic marriage with or  without  registration  and  with  or  without
    rukhsati, and during which four children were born.  In his application
    for naturalisation he was specifically asked the question whether there
    were any marriages before that to Ms [F] and he did not  disclose  that
    there were.  The documents to which reference is made in the grounds do
    appear to have  been  in  the  proceedings  to  the  knowledge  of  the
    appellant's side; do not appear to have influenced  the  judge  to  any
    noticeable extent; and do not  bear  on  any  matter  material  to  the
    determination of the appeal.

15. Once the fact of the appellant's marriage to [SR] is  established,  the
    only remaining question is whether he deliberately  kept  it  from  the
    respondent, so that it could be said that his obtaining of  nationality
    was by deception.  We agree with Mrs O'Brien that  despite  the  judges
    misplacing of the burden of proof in paragraph 10, her determination as
    a whole shows that she was confident, on the material before her,  that
    the concealment was deliberate.  At no point does she suggest,  by  her
    wording or by her reasoning, that she regarded it  as  the  appellant's
    job to demonstrate that it was not.  We further  take  the  view  that,
    given that the appellant accepted that he was  married,  gave  positive
    evidence about his relationship with his children, and had visited  and
    had marital relationships with his wife and during the  subsistence  of
    his marriage to Ms [F], the suggestion that he was not  aware  that  he
    should mention it as a marriage on his application  for  naturalisation
    verges on the absurd.  Even if the judge had not  specifically  reached
    that view, it is difficult to see that any other view would be  merited
    by the evidence.

16. That is sufficient to deal with the grounds upon  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted.   We  do  not  need  to  say  any  more  about  the
    appellant's complaints about any of his previous representatives.   The
    appeal to this Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 5 February 2019





