
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00018/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 2 July 2019               |On Wednesday 17 July 2019l           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE MURRAY
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MUHAMMAD NAJAT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nizami, Counsel instructed by Rahman & Co
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  For ease of reference, we refer below to  the  parties
         as they were in the First-tier Tribunal albeit that  the  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department is technically  the  Appellant  in
         this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a  decision
         of First-Tier Tribunal Judge PMS Mitchell promulgated on  30  April
         2019 ("the Decision") allowing the Appellant's appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision dated 13  April  2018  depriving  the
         Appellant of British citizenship.  The appeal is under section  40A
         British Nationality Act 1981.

      2. The Appellant was granted British citizenship following  the  grant
         of four  years'  exceptional  leave  to  remain  ("ELR")  and  then
         indefinite leave to remain ("ILR").  It is common ground that, when
         applying for both ELR and ILR (and also when making the application
         for citizenship), the Appellant used a false name,  date  of  birth
         and place of birth.  He is from Iraq and of Kurdish  ethnicity  and
         both  of  those  factors  were  correctly  disclosed.   The   false
         declarations came to light only when  applications  were  made  for
         British passports on behalf of his children.  We  record  also  for
         completeness that the Appellant and his family  currently  live  in
         Iraq where the Appellant has spent most of the past ten years.

      3. Although the Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  made  false
         declarations as asserted by the Respondent in relation to his name,
         date and place of birth, he concluded  that  the  use  of  a  false
         identity was not a factor which led the Respondent to  be  deceived
         in relation to the Appellant's  entitlement  to  citizenship.   Put
         another way, he did not accept that the use  of  false  information
         was causative of the  grant.   For  that  reason,  he  allowed  the
         appeal.

      4. The Respondent appeals on two grounds.  First,  he  says  that  the
         Judge's acceptance of the Appellant's evidence that he had  changed
         his name by deed poll to his real name by the time of the grant  of
         British citizenship was not relevant to the issues and  should  not
         have been taken into account when deciding  the  appeal.   He  says
         that, even if that were correct, the Respondent was unaware of  the
         change.  Second, he says that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for
         his conclusion and/or that  the  conclusion  is  perverse.   Having
         accepted that the Appellant used a false identity, he says that  it
         is "wholly perverse" to suggest  that  the  Respondent  would  have
         granted the application for citizenship if he  had  been  aware  of
         that fact.   He  also  says  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
         Appellant did not conceal a material fact  is  perverse  given  the
         Appellant's acceptance that he failed to disclose that the identity
         he was using at the time was false.

      5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chohan in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "2. In short, the grounds  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by
             allowing the appeal having found that the appellant had  given
             false  details  to  the  respondent  application  for  British
             nationality was made.

             3.  The judge concludes paragraph 33 of the decision that  the
             appellant's use false name and date of birth was not a  factor
             which led the respondent to be deceived into granting  British
             citizenship.  Curiously, the judge concludes that by the  time
             British citizenship had been granted the appellant and changes
             name to his real name  by  deed  poll.   It  is  difficult  to
             understand how  that  had  any  bearing  on  the  exercise  of
             deception.  It does seem that the respondent  granted  British
             citizenship based on the false details.

             4.  There is an arguable error of law."

      6. The matter comes before us to decide whether the Decision  contains
         a material error of law and, if we so conclude, to  either  re-make
         the Decision or remit the Decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
         re-making.




    THE DECISION

      7. The way in which the Respondent puts his case against the Appellant
         is probably most conveniently expressed in the Decision as follows:

             "12.      The Secretary of State now says that they would  not
             have granted leave to him if they had known he originated from
             the Kurdish Autonomous  Area.   It  was  safe  to  return  the
             appellant to Erbil which is in  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Area
             (Kurdistan).

             13. The appellant now accepts that he gave a  false  name  and
             date of birth when he arrived in the United Kingdom  therefore
             it is unnecessary to  replicate  all  the  credibility  issues
             raised by the Secretary of State.

             14. The appellant's false claim that he was  born  married  in
             Kirkuk and his incorrect date of birth were fundamental in his
             claim for international protection.  It is apparent  from  the
             applications made for his  children  to  come  to  the  United
             Kingdom that  he  was  not  born  or  lived  in  Kirkuk.   The
             appellant's explanations  of  being  exhausted  confused  were
             unsatisfactory.  The appellant has not  provided  a  plausible
             explanation for his deceptions.

             15. It was considered that even if the decision to deprive the
             appellant  on  fraud  grounds  under  section  40(3)  had  the
             consequence of rendering the appellant stateless it  would  be
             in all the circumstances reasonable  and  proportionate  given
             the seriousness of the fraud.  The appellant was a national of
             Iraq when he became a  British  citizen.   The  appellant  can
             apply for  reinstatement  of  his  citizenship  to  the  Iraqi
             authorities."

      8. The Judge made findings that the Appellant had used  a  false  name
         and date of birth but found that "the salient parts  of  his  claim
         are substantially accurate".  Those were that he was Iraqi, that he
         claimed asylum in that nationality and based also on his  ethnicity
         (which was his true ethnicity) and that he was from Kurdistan.  The
         Judge also accepted that, although the Appellant was born in Erbil,
         he had lived in Kirkuk before coming to the UK.  The Judge accepted
         that the Appellant had given  an  explanation  for  providing  some
         false details in relation to his first wife and that, in any event,
         that had no bearing on the Respondent's decision to grant ELR.   He
         dealt at [32] of the Decision with the Appellant's case as  regards
         his marriage in Iraq which the Judge found  was  probably  a  proxy
         marriage which the Appellant did not attend.  We  do  not  need  to
         deal with that further as  no  issue  is  taken  with  the  Judge's
         findings in that regard.

      9. Having  made  those  findings,  the  Judge  reached  the  following
         reasoned conclusions:

             "33.      Much of this though is somewhat  otiose  as  regards
             this decision.  The fact is that the appellant arrived in  the
             United Kingdom was refused asylum on the basis of  credibility
             and yet was immediately granted exceptional leave  to  remain.
             There have been various times in the past  when  it  has  been
             possible to return people to Iraq or Kurdistan.  Neither party
             has been able to provide this  tribunal  with  any  definitive
             timescales as to when this may  have  occurred.   Irrespective
             that  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  appellant  was  granted
             exceptional leave to remain in 2002 immediately  after  having
             been refused a claim for asylum.  If the  Secretary  of  State
             had been able to return the appellant to Iraq they would  have
             done so at that  time.   The  appellant  has  been  consistent
             throughout that he is Kurdish.  The appellant was found not to
             be credible at his asylum appeal  and  yet  the  Secretary  of
             State having been put on notice that the appellant claimed  to
             come from Kurdistan still allowed the appellant's  exceptional
             leave to run its course until the appellant was able to obtain
             British citizenship in 2008.  The basis on which the appellant
             was granted British citizenship was on the basis of him  being
             granted exceptional leave to remain and then indefinite  leave
             to remain in 2007 and having undertaken the appropriate tests.
              The fact that the appellant used a false  name  and  date  of
             birth initially does not appear to have been  a  factor  which
             led to the Secretary of State being deceived  as  regards  the
             grant of British citizenship.  The appellant had by deed  poll
             at the time of being granted British citizenship  changed  his
             name to his real name.

             34. I do not consider that Secretary of State has  shown  that
             the basis of the grant of British citizen to the appellant was
             on the basis of fraud or that the appellant's false  name  and
             date of birth was even relevant to that decision.   I  do  not
             consider that there has been a fraud, false representation  or
             concealment of a material fact  which  led  to  the  grant  of
             British Citizenship.  I allow the appeal."




    THE LEGAL AND POLICY BACKGROUND

     10. Section 40(3) British Nationality Act 1981 is as follows:

             "The Secretary of State may by order deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status which  results  from  his  registration  or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

             (a) fraud,

             (b) false representation, or

             (c) concealment of a material fact."

     11. The Judge referred to two decisions of this Tribunal  at  [17]  and
         [18] of the Decision.  The relevant parts of the guidance given  in
         the headnote of those two decisions are set out below to assist  in
         explaining our later conclusions:

             Pirzada  (Deprivation  of  citizenship:  general   principles)
             [2017] UKUT 00196 (IAC)

             "(i)      The Secretary of State has two  separate  powers  of
                  deprivation, exercisable on different grounds, as set  out
                  in sub-ss (2) and (3) of s 40 of the  British  Nationality
                  Act 1981.

             ...

             (iii)     The  power  under  sub-s  (3)  arises  only  if  the
                  Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  registration  or
                  naturalisation was obtained by fraud, false representation
                  or concealment of a material fact. The deception  referred
                  to must have motivated the grant of (in the present  case)
                  citizenship,  and  therefore  necessarily  preceded   that
                  grant.

             ...

             (v) The restrictions on the rights of appeal imposed by  s  84
                  of the 2002 Act do not apply to appeals  against  a  s  40
                  decision:  therefore,  any  proper  ground  of  appeal  is
                  available to an applicant.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are,
                  however, limited by the formulation of s 40  and  must  be
                  directed to whether the Secretary of State's decision  was
                  in fact empowered by that section. There is no  suggestion
                  that a Tribunal has the power to consider  whether  it  is
                  satisfied of any of the matters set out in sub-ss  (2)  or
                  (3); nor is there any suggestion  that  the  Tribunal  can
                  itself exercise the Secretary of State's discretion."

             BA (deprivation of citizenship:  appeals)  [2018]  UKUT  00085
             (IAC)

             "(1)      In an  appeal  under  section  40A  of  the  British
                  Nationality Act 1981, the Tribunal  must  first  establish
                  whether the relevant condition precedent in section  40(2)
                  or (3) exists for the exercise of the Secretary of State's
                  discretion to deprive a person (P) of British citizenship.

             ...

             (3)       In a section 40(3) case, the Tribunal must establish
                  whether one or more of the means described  in  subsection
                  (3)(a), (b) and (c) were used by  P  in  order  to  obtain
                  British citizenship. As held in Pirzada  (Deprivation  of
                  citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC) the
                  deception must have  motivated  the  acquisition  of  that
                  citizenship.

             (4)       In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the  fact  that
                  the Secretary of State has decided in the exercise of  her
                  discretion to deprive P of  British  citizenship  will  in
                  practice mean the Tribunal can allow P's  appeal  only  if
                  satisfied that the reasonably foreseeable  consequence  of
                  deprivation would violate the obligations  of  the  United
                  Kingdom government under the Human Rights Act 1998  and/or
                  that there is some exceptional feature of the  case  which
                  means the discretion in the subsection concerned should be
                  exercised differently."

     12.  Our  attention  was  also  drawn  to  the  decision   of   Sleiman
         (deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 00367 (IAC) where
         UTJ Kopieczek provided guidance that  "[i]n  an  appeal  against  a
         decision to deprive a person of a citizenship status, in  assessing
         whether the appellant obtained registration or  naturalisation  'by
         means of' fraud, false representation, or concealment of a material
         fact, the impugned behaviour  must  be  directly  material  to  the
         decision to grant citizenship."

     13. The Respondent relies also on the case of Ivey  v  Genting  Casinos
         (UK) Ltd [2017] UKSC 67 at [74] as follows:

             "... When dishonesty is in question the fact-finding  tribunal
             must first ascertain (subjectively) the actual  state  of  the
             individual's  knowledge  or  belief  as  to  the  facts.   The
             reasonableness or otherwise of  his  belief  is  a  matter  of
             evidence (often in practice determinative) going to whether he
             held the belief, but it is not an additional requirement  that
             his belief must be reasonable; the question is whether  it  is
             genuinely held. When once his  actual  state  of  mind  as  to
             knowledge or belief as to facts is established,  the  question
             whether  his  conduct  was  honest  or  dishonest  is  to   be
             determined by the  fact-finder  by  applying  the  (objective)
             standards of ordinary decent people. There is  no  requirement
             that the defendant must appreciate that what he has  done  is,
             by those standards, dishonest."

         That is a  case  concerning  deception  in  a  context  other  than
         applications for citizenship.

     14. Mr Clarke, in his submissions,  referred  us  to  the  Home  Office
         guidance  concerning  deprivations  and  Chapter  55  thereof,   in
         particular at [55.7] as follows:

             "Material to the Acquisition of Citizenship

             55.7.1 If the relevant facts, had they been known at the  time
             the application for citizenship  was  considered,  would  have
             affected the decision to grant citizenship via  naturalisation
             or registration the caseworker should consider deprivation.

             55.7.2 This will include but is not limited to:

             .   Undisclosed convictions or other information  which  would
             have affected a person's ability to meet  the  good  character
             requirement

             .   A marriage/civil partnership which is found to be  invalid
             or void, and so would have affected a person's ability to meet
             the requirements for section 6(2)

             .   False details given  in  relation  to  an  immigration  or
             asylum application, which led to that status being given to  a
             person who would not otherwise have qualified,  and  so  would
             have affected a person's ability to meet the residence  and/or
             good character requirements for naturalisation or registration



             55.7.3 If the fraud, false representation  or  concealment  of
             material fact did not have a direct bearing on  the  grant  of
             citizenship, it will not be appropriate to pursue  deprivation
             action.

             55.7.4 For example,  where  a  person  acquires  ILR  under  a
             concession (e.g. the family ILR concession) the fact  that  we
             could show the person had previously lied about  their  asylum
             claim may  be  irrelevant.  Similarly,  a  person  may  use  a
             different  name  if  they  wish  (see  NAMES  in  the  General
             Information section of Volume 2 of  the  Staff  Instructions):
             unless it conceals criminality, or other information  relevant
             to an assessment  of  their  good  character,  or  immigration
             history  in  another  identity  it  is  not  material  to  the
             acquisition of ILR or citizenship. However,  before  making  a
             decision not to deprive, the  caseworker  should  ensure  that
             relevant character checks are undertaken in  relation  to  the
             subject's true identity to ensure that the  false  information
             provided  to  the  Home  Office  was  not  used   to   conceal
             criminality or other information relevant to an assessment  of
             their character.

             ..."




    SUBMISSIONS AND DISCUSSION

     15. Mr Clarke adopted the Respondent's grounds and expanded  upon  them
         as follows. In relation to ground one, he submitted that  the  fact
         of the change of name by deed poll could not be relevant since  the
         Respondent was unaware of the change of name  until  2016  when  an
         application was made for passports for  the  Appellant's  children.
         The Judge had also not made a finding whether  the  deed  poll  was
         ever disclosed to the Respondent.  We did not understand Ms  Nizami
         to dispute that the deed poll was not relevant.  However, she  said
         that whether or not and when the Appellant communicated his  change
         of name to  the  Respondent  was  not  material  to  the  grant  of
         citizenship.  As we understood the Appellant's case, therefore,  it
         is that any error in this regard is not material.

     16. In relation to ground two, Mr Clarke  submitted  that  the  correct
         approach for the Tribunal faced with the clear, factual  matrix  in
         this   case   was,   first,   to   consider   whether   the   false
         representation/concealment was dishonest (applying  Ivey),  second,
         whether the Respondent had correctly exercised  his  discretion  in
         light of the Chapter 55 guidance and,  third,  whether  there  were
         reasonably foreseeable consequences that would render deprivation a
         disproportionate interference with the  Appellant's  human  rights.
         We can discount that latter stage as the Appellant did  not  assert
         that the  Respondent's  decision  to  deprive  breached  his  human
         rights.

     17. Ms Nizami submitted that the threshold for perversity is a high one
         and that the Respondent had not shown it to be met.  In truth,  the
         grounds  were  a  mere  disagreement  with   the   Decision.    The
         Appellant's case is that he was granted ELR and later ILR and  then
         citizenship for reasons which had nothing  to  do  with  the  false
         information which he had given.

     18. In discussions with Mr Clarke, he accepted that he could not pursue
         a  case  at  this  stage  that  the  false  information  given,  in
         particular in relation to place of birth, had affected the grant of
         ELR to the Appellant as that  was  not  part  of  the  Respondent's
         pleaded case.  We surmise that the false information about place of
         birth may have had some causative link.  The grant of  ELR  appears
         to have been based on a country policy (given its timing and length
         and since it could not have been on either asylum or  human  rights
         grounds on the facts of this case).  Mr Clarke agreed that this was
         probably so, in particular if one takes into account the history of
         Iraq and Home Office policies at that time as recorded for  example
         in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rashid [2005]  EWCA
         Civ 744.  It is at least possible that there would be a  difference
         between a person claiming to be from Erbil and one claiming  to  be
         from Kirkuk, particularly as an ethnic Kurd.   However,  Mr  Clarke
         accepted that there was no evidence put before the Judge about this
         nor was it dealt with in the Respondent's decision letter.  As  the
         Judge put it at [28] of the Decision  "[t]he  lack  of  clarity  as
         regards that grant of ELR does not assist  the  respondent  in  his
         arguments".

     19. As it was, therefore, the Judge was left  with  findings  that  the
         Appellant had used a false name (apparently only his first name), a
         false date of birth and a false place of birth but in circumstances
         where the Judge accepted that the Appellant had at least  lived  in
         Kirkuk although born  in  Erbil  and  where  both  places  were  in
         Kurdistan.

     20. Mr Clarke submitted though that there remained an error because the
         Judge  had  failed  to  reach  any  finding  in  relation  to   the
         Appellant's conduct and whether that was dishonest.   We  disagree.
         The Judge reaches an express finding at [26] of the  Decision  that
         "[i]t is quite clear that the appellant  when  he  arrived  in  the
         United Kingdom deliberately used a false  name  and  details."   He
         went on to say however that it was "a reasonable  explanation  that
         he was influenced by the people  who  brought  him  to  the  United
         Kingdom and the advice that they gave him". Whilst that  might  not
         have  been  a  conclusion  we  would   draw   from   the   evidence
         (particularly given the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to  give  his
         correct details at any time after he had been given leave to remain
         in the UK), the Judge did make a finding and it is a finding  which
         it was open to him to make.  As the Judge  there  observed  "[m]any
         people take the advice given to them  by  such  'agents'  who  have
         little long term interest in the asylum seeker's  welfare  but  are
         keen to distance themselves from and obfuscate  the  situation  for
         the British authorities." The conduct may still  be  dishonest  but
         excused by the reason given for it.  That  is  the  effect  of  the
         Judge's finding.

     21. It is appropriate  for  us  to  deal  at  this  juncture  with  the
         Respondent's first ground.  We agree that the Judge's reference  to
         the Appellant changing his  name  by  deed  poll  at  [33]  of  the
         Decision is not relevant.  Speaking for ourselves, if anything,  it
         is a factor weighing against the Appellant.   He  had  no  need  to
         change his name to his real name by deed poll unless he  wished  to
         perpetuate the fraud and  might  suggest  conduct  which  was  more
         deliberately dishonest  than  the  Judge  found  to  be  the  case.
         However, in the context in which it  is  relied  upon,  the  remark
         which is something of an afterthought, makes no difference.  It  is
         not a material error.

     22. Dealing then with ground two, and Mr Clarke's submission  that  the
         Judge failed to deal with Chapter 55, we were  at  something  of  a
         loss to understand this point.  We have set out the  relevant  part
         of Chapter 55 at [14] above.  That appears to us to  be  consistent
         with the case-law to which we have  also  referred  above,  namely,
         that consideration must be given when looking at  the  exercise  of
         discretion to the materiality of the false representations  at  the
         time of the grant of citizenship.

     23. Mr Clarke may be right to say as he did that there has  been  undue
         focus in the Decision on the previous grants of  ELR  and  ILR  and
         whether those would have been given if  the  true  facts  had  been
         known.  However, it cannot be the case as  Mr  Clarke  appeared  to
         suggest that any knowledge of false  representations  would  affect
         the grant of citizenship because of the impact of the fraud on  the
         applicant's character and conduct.  If that  were  the  case,  then
         there would be no need  to  consider,  as  the  guidance  suggests,
         whether the false representation had a direct bearing on the  grant
         of citizenship.

     24. We can well see that  certain  sorts  of  false  representation  or
         concealment, for  example,  in  relation  to  failure  to  disclose
         criminal convictions may be more likely than not  to  lead  to  the
         exercise of the Respondent's discretion to  deprive.   However,  we
         cannot accept that all instances of making a  false  representation
         are likely to lead to that result purely on character  and  conduct
         grounds as otherwise the guidance would not be  worded  as  it  is.
         The interpretation we place on the guidance is also consistent with
         what is said in the case-law to which we have referred.  The  Judge
         has referred to that case-law and there was no need to  refer  also
         to the Chapter 55 guidance which is consistent  with  the  approach
         set out in the case-law.

     25. Mr Clarke's point that the false representations were  relevant  to
         consideration of the discretion is also  answered  by  the  Judge's
         acceptance at [26] of the Decision  that  there  was  a  reasonable
         explanation for the dishonesty.  As we have said,  that  is  not  a
         finding which we would have made on these facts, but we are here to
         judge whether there is an error of law in the finding made and  not
         whether we would have reached the same  finding.   The  Judge  gave
         reasons for the finding he made and for the conclusions he reached.
          The high threshold required to show perversity is not met.  We are
         satisfied that there is no error of law  in  that  finding  and  no
         error of law in the Judge's conclusions at [33]  and  [34]  of  the
         Decision save for the one reference to the deed poll which,  as  we
         have concluded, was not material.




    CONCLUSION

     26. For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied  that  the  Decision
         does not contain an  error  of  law.  Accordingly,  we  uphold  the
         Decision.




    DECISION

    We are satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material error of
    law. We uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  PMS  Mitchell
    promulgated on 30 April 2019 with the consequence that the  Appellant's
    appeal remains allowed.

      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 11 July 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
