
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00048/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2019                        |On 7 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Annas [B]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Shanghard, JM Wilson Solicitors


                   DECISION AND REASONS (given ex tempore)

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department  ('SSHD')  has  been
         granted permission to appeal against a decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FtT'), which allowed Mr [B]'s appeal against a  decision
         dated 4 September 2018, in which  the  SSHD  deprived  him  of  his
         British citizenship under section 43 of the British Nationality Act
         1981 ('the 1981 Act').





Background

      2. The appellant was born in the Gambia and entered the United Kingdom
         ('UK') on 26 October 2001.  His wife is also a Gambian citizen  but
         was born in Sweden.  She entered the UK at the  same  time  as  her
         husband.  They had married in Gambia prior to their arrival in  the
         UK, but had their first child ('A') in  the  UK.   A  was  born  in
         Manchester in  July  2002.   On  20  February  2003  Her  Majesty's
         Passport Office  ('HMPO')  received  a  first-time  child  passport
         application for A, signed and submitted by Mr [B].  The application
         was accompanied by a short-form birth certificate that did not show
         his or his wife's place of birth.  Mr [B] gave his place  of  birth
         as London and his nationality as Gambian.  He gave his wife's place
         of birth as London and her nationality  as  British.   For  present
         purposes, it suffices to state that the  SSHD  relied  upon,  inter
         alia, Mr [B]'s contention within that application that his wife was
         British as  amounting  to  a  false  or  dishonest  representation.
         Although references have been made to places of  birth,  and  there
         was a degree of confusion regarding those, they did  not  form  the
         subject of the grounds of appeal relied upon by Miss Young.

      3. On 27 January 2009 Mr [B] submitted  a  naturalisation  application
         for himself, in which he signed the standard  declaration.   On  23
         October 2010 Mr [B] submitted a  passport  renewal  application  on
         behalf of A.  Again he claimed that his  wife  was  British.   That
         passport renewal application came after Mr  [B]'s  application  for
         naturalisation, and after the  successful  naturalisation  decision
         itself on 28 March 2010.  Mr [B]'s wife  made  an  application  for
         naturalisation on 13 April 2012.  In a statement prepared  for  the
         FtT hearing Mr [B] said this:

             "I confirm that again this was under the mistaken belief  that
             because my wife was born in Sweden had been residing in the UK
             that she was British  it  was  only  sometime  later  when  we
             realised  she  was  not  British  and  proceeded  to  make  an
             application for her to be naturalised as  a  British  citizen.
             If we had known  this  sooner  we  would  have  made  a  joint
             application.  Again I confirm that I did  not  make  dishonest
             representations in support of my  daughter's  application  and
             the error relating to my  wife's  nationality  was  a  genuine
             mistake which we only later realised."

      4. I was also told that Mr [B] applied for a further  renewal  of  A's
         passport in 2015.  This was rejected on the basis that she was  not
         entitled to British citizenship because at the time  of  her  birth
         her mother was not British.  That of course  is  self-evident  from
         the mother's 2012  application  to  be  naturalised  as  a  British
         citizen.  The child was however registered  as  a  British  citizen
         under section 1(3) of the 1981 Act on 20 January 2016.

The FtT findings

      5. The FtT heard evidence from Mr [B] who was  cross-examined  by  the
         Home Office Presenting Officer, Miss  Edwards.   The  FtT  accepted
         much of Mr [B]'s evidence but in particular found that only one  of
         the SSHD's impugned submissions predated Mr [B]'s  own  application
         for naturalisation i.e. the only relevant matter that Mr [B]  could
         have been dishonest  about  when  making  his  2009  naturalisation
         application was his daughter's 2003 passport application, in  which
         he stated that A's mother was British (when she was not).  The 2010
         renewal application on behalf of  A  post-dated  that  application.
         With that in mind, the FtT made the following findings:

             "55. Only  one  of  the  impugned  applications  predates  the
                  appellant's own application for naturalisation and  so  is
                  the only alleged fraudulent  misrepresentation  which  can
                  possibly have had a direct  bearing  on  the  decision  to
                  issue the appellant with a certificate of  naturalisation.



             56.  Contrary to the respondent's notice to the  appellant  he
                  did not misrepresent any information  about  himself.   He
                  did however give incorrect details about his wife.

             57.  The appellant claims that he mistakenly put  a  place  of
                  birth of London  because  they  had  recently  moved  from
                  London.  In fact it would appear from the application form
                  that the family moved to Manchester on 24  July  2002.   I
                  note also that the appellant gave his wife's correct place
                  of birth on subsequent applications  and  I  am  satisfied
                  that this was an innocent mistake.

             58.  The appellant claims that he stated  that  his  wife  was
                  British because he  believed  that  she  was  entitled  to
                  British nationality on the basis  that  she  was  born  in
                  Sweden and was living in the United Kingdom.  I note  that
                  the appellant claimed that his wife was British  again  in
                  the renewal application in 2010.  It was only in 2012 that
                  Mrs [B] applied to be naturalised as British.  I accept on
                  balance that the couple were labouring until 2012 under  a
                  genuine misapprehension as to  Mrs  [B]'s  entitlement  to
                  British citizenship.

             59.  I considered it also relevant  that  no  application  was
                  made to register Aisha  as  a  British  citizen  until  21
                  October 2015 after the appellant was informed that she was
                  not  already  a   British   citizen.    A   naturalisation
                  application could  have  been  made  any  time  after  the
                  appellant's own naturalisation (Section 1(3A)) or at least
                  at her 10th birthday (Section 1(4)).  I accept on  balance
                  that no earlier application  had  been  made  because  the
                  couple believed that Aisha was already entitled to British
                  citizenship through her mother.

             60.   In  any  event  the  appellant  was  not  asked  in  his
                  naturalisation application whether he  had  submitted  any
                  prior fraudulent applications.  His application was in  no
                  way dependent  on  his  daughter  already  having  British
                  citizenship.   The  general  declaration  signed  by   the
                  appellant cannot in my judgment  require  him  to  confess
                  undetected crimes.  As Judge Hopkins said in Pirzada in an
                  approach approved by  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  privilege
                  against self-incrimination is an established principle  of
                  law supported by Article 6 ECHR.

             61.   Therefore  even  if  Aisha's  first  passport  had  been
                  procured by fraud that fraud  was  not  operative  on  the
                  appellant's application for naturalisation  as  a  British
                  citizen and so Section 43 is not made out.  Consequently I
                  allow the appellant's appeal."

Grounds of appeal

      6. In three grounds of appeal the SSHD challenged the FtT's  findings.
         In her oral submissions before me Ms Young confirmed that ground  3
         did not add anything of substance and  she  focused  entirely  upon
         grounds 1 and 2.  Ground 1 submits  that  the  alternative  finding
         that any fraud was not material was an error of law  and  ground  2
         submits that the FtT provided inadequate reasoning for finding that
         the assertion that the wife was British was an innocent mistake and
         failed to give reasons for accepting the couple's claim  that  they
         only realised this in 2012.

      7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge  EB  Grant  who  made
         this observation:

             "It  is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  erred  in   law   by
             misapprehending the evidence placed before him  in  particular
             failing to take into account the passport  fraud  relating  to
             the appellant's daughter which led to the appellant's daughter
             being granted a British passport  after  which  the  appellant
             sought his status based on hers.  Not only is it arguable that
             material evidence has not been taken into account by the judge
             but it is arguable that the judge has given inadequate reasons
             for his findings at paragraphs 44 to 61."

      8. For the avoidance of doubt it has not been submitted that Mr  [B]'s
         naturalisation application was based upon  his  daughter's  British
         passport.  Ms Young made it clear that the SSHD submitted  that  in
         providing false information regarding the A's mother's  citizenship
         that reflected adversely upon Mr [B] such that he  could  not  meet
         the good character provisions  and  that  was  the  reason  he  was
         deprived of his nationality.   During  her  submissions,  Ms  Young
         quite rightly focused first of all on ground 2, i.e. the failure to
         provide or the alleged failure to provide adequate reasons for  the
         finding that the reference  to  the  child's  mother  in  the  2009
         passport application and the 2010 renewal application were innocent
         mistakes.

Discussion

      9. I turn to ground 2 first because that reflects  the  FtT's  primary
         findings of fact.  As  I  have  already  indicated  the  FtT  heard
         evidence from Mr [B].  That was accompanied by a  detailed  witness
         statement  which  sought  to  explain  why  he  stated  within  his
         daughter's 2009 passport application that her mother  was  British.
         This is referred to expressly by the judge at [58] where the  judge
         summarises Mr [B]'s misapprehension that his wife was  entitled  to
         British nationality because she was born in Sweden, that is  within
         the EU, and was living in  the  UK.   The  judge  noted  that  this
         mistake was  repeated  in  the  renewal  application  in  2010  but
         accepted that it was only in 2012  that  the  wife  applied  to  be
         naturalised as British.  The question that is asked rhetorically on
         behalf of the SSHD is why did the wife have this sudden  'epiphany'
         in 2012 that she was not entitled to British citizenship, when  the
         family had maintained that she was in 2009 and 2010.  The answer to
         that question can be found in Mr [B]'s witness  statement  evidence
         and in his  evidence  provided  to  the  FtT.   That  evidence  was
         considered by the FtT and on balance the  FtT  accepted  "that  the
         couple were labouring until 2012 under a genuine misapprehension as
         to Mrs [B]'s entitlement to British citizenship".   In  short,  the
         FtT heard evidence regarding the specific  and  discrete  point  in
         dispute and preferred Mr [B]'s evidence to the SSHD's  analysis  or
         construction of that evidence.   Although  the  FtT's  reasons  are
         brief they are in my judgment adequate.

     10. Ms Young also drew my attention to the submission that Mr  [B]  had
         not explained what prompted the 2012 application  by  his  wife  or
         explained why the mistake had been made in 2009 and 2012.  I reject
         those submissions because in my judgment the short explanation  for
         both those matters can be found within the witness  statement  that
         he relied upon which the FtT was entitled to accept.

     11. I now turn to the first ground  of  appeal  which  relates  to  the
         alternative finding that even if Mr [B] had perpetrated  some  sort
         of fraud or relied upon a false representation when completing  his
         daughter's passport application in 2009, that was not  material  to
         his own application and could not be said to be operative  when  he
         made his own application in 2010.  Although this ground raises some
         interesting legal issues, in my view it is unnecessary to deal with
         it in this decision because on the  FtT's  findings  of  fact,  the
         appeal was bound to succeed and it would not be helpful to go  into
         those additional arguments in the circumstances of this case.

Notice of decision

12. The FtT decision does not contain a material error of law and I do  not
    set it aside.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 20 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

