
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00028/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |On 12 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               mimoza shabani
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. At this stage of proceedings Ms Shabani is to be treated  and  referred
    to once again as the appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's case  following
    my error of law decision, promulgated on 3 September 2020, in  which  I
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law when  allowing  her
    appeal against the respondent's decision to deprive her of her  British
    citizenship pursuant to section 40(3) British Nationality Act 1981,  as
    amended ("the 1981 Act").  The error of law decision is annexed to this
    remake decision.

 3. At the error of law hearing, both representatives  expressed  the  view
    that the remaking of the decision could be undertaken without a further
    hearing, pursuant to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  In my error of law decision, I set out why I had concluded
    that a further hearing was, subject to any further representations from
    the parties, unnecessary.  The reasons were:

              i. both parties had expressed a view that proceeding by way of
                 written submissions only may well be appropriate;




             ii. the core facts relating  to  the  appellant's  history  and
                 current circumstances in the United  Kingdom  were  not  in
                 dispute;




            iii. the legal framework was clear;


             iv.  the  question  of  the  foreseeable  consequences  of  the
                 deprivation of citizenship (as it relates both to Article 8
                 and the general discretion) could be dealt with by  way  of
                 written submissions, despite the fact that  the  judge  did
                 not address this issue in his decision;


              v. there had been no notice  from  the  appellant  under  rule
                 15(2A) of the Procedure Rules to adduce further evidence.

 4. I  issued  directions  to  the  parties  in  order  to  give  them  the
    opportunity to make representations as to why a further  hearing  might
    be required and/or to provide any further submissions as to the  merits
    of the case.

 5.  In  the  event  nothing  has  been   received   from   either   party,
    notwithstanding a chasing email sent to the appellant's  solicitors  on
    20 October 2020 and a check with the Upper  Tribunal's  records  on  17
    December 2020.

 6. In reaching a final conclusion as to how to proceed, I have  taken  all
    of  the  above  circumstances  into  account.   In  addition,  I   have
    considered the overriding  objective,  the  guidance  set  out  by  the
    Supreme Court in Osborn v The Parole Board  [2013]  UKSC  61,  and  the
    recent judgment of Fordham J in JCWI  v  The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2020] EWHC 3103.

 7. I have concluded that it is fair and appropriate to remake the decision
    in this appeal without a further hearing.



Background

 8. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in  June  1998.   Stating  her
    correct name and date of birth, but claiming to be Kosovan, she made an
    asylum claim.  On this basis, she  was  recognised  as  a  refugee  and
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 7 July 1999.  She was naturalised
    as a British citizen  on  8  December  2004.   Following  what  may  be
    described as investigatory letters from  the  respondent  in  July  and
    September 2008 (acting upon information received), on 17 November  2008
    the appellant accepted that she was in fact a citizen  of  Albania  and
    had previously lied about her true nationality.  In February 2018,  the
    respondent informed her that action might be taken to  deprive  her  of
    her British citizenship.  The decision to do so was taken on  22  March
    2019.  The basis for this decision was section 40(3) of the  1981  Act,
    section 40(3) of which provides:

          "The Secretary of State may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
          citizenship  status  which  results  from  his  registration   or
          naturalisation if the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that  the
          registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -

                   a) fraud,




                   b) false representation, or




                   c) concealment of a material fact."

 9. It is common ground that the appellant's admitted use of deception  was
    material  to  the  acquisition  of  British  citizenship.   Thus,   the
    condition precedent under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act has been proved
    by the respondent.

10. As at the date of the error of law hearing there was no dispute  as  to
    the following factual matters:

              i. she is married to a British citizen;




             ii. the couple have three British  citizen  children,  born  in
                 2003, 2006, and 2017;




            iii. in September 2016 she purchased a property in London;




             iv. she is a Senior Lecturer  in  Financial  Economics  at  the
                 University of East London (having completed a PhD at SOAS).

11. At the time of writing this decision I have not been provided with  any
    evidence to suggest that these circumstances  have  materially  changed
    and I find that they have not.



The appellant's case

12. The appellant's case is straightforward.  First, it is  said  that  the
    discretion to deprive should be exercised in her favour.  This is based
    largely on what is said to be a very serious delay on the  respondent's
    part between the discovery of the appellant's deception in 2008 and the
    making of the deprivation decision in 2019.  This delay had the claimed
    effect of depriving the appellant of the opportunity  to  benefit  from
    what was, until August 2014, a  policy  which  provided  those  in  her
    situation would "normally" not be deprived of their citizenship if they
    had resided in the United Kingdom for at least 14 years.

13. The second basis  of  the  appellant's  case  is  that  the  impact  of
    depriving her of her British citizenship would be such as to breach her
    protected Article 8 rights.

14. These arguments were put forward on the appellant's behalf by  Mr  Kerr
    to the First-tier Tribunal and maintained (albeit in the context of the
    Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal) at the error of  law
    hearing. I have taken them as representing her case at  this  stage  as
    well.

15. During the currency of  the  proceedings  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    decision  of  the  Presidential  panel   in   Hysaj   (Deprivation   of
    Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 00128 (IAC) was  promulgated.   At  the
    error of law hearing, Mr Kerr submitted  that  this  case  was  wrongly
    decided and was not fatal to the appellant's case.




The respondent's case

16. The respondent asserts that in all the circumstances discretion  should
    not be exercised in the appellant's favour and that Article 8 would not
    be breached by the deprivation of citizenship.  In  particular,  it  is
    said that the appellant's children, as British citizens, would  not  be
    significantly affected by loss of their mother's British citizenship.

17. The decision in Hysaj is, asserts the respondent, correct and  it  very
    much counts against the appellant's case.

18. Whether, following the deprivation of citizenship, the appellant  might
    nonetheless be entitled to a grant of limited leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of Article 8 rights, is said to be a matter to be  considered  in
    due course.



Discussion and conclusions

19. The essential factual matrix which I now apply to  the  relevant  legal
    framework is that set out in paragraphs 9 and 10, above.  It  is  also,
    as a matter of simple fact, the case that there was a delay between the
    detection of the appellant's deception in 2008 and the issuance of  the
    deprivation decision in 2019.

20. In terms of  the  legal  landscape,  I  reiterate  what  is  stated  at
    paragraphs 22 and 23 of my error of law decision, namely that Hysaj  is
    not wrong in law and that its conclusions  should  be  applied  to  the
    appellant's case.

21. The main factor said to warrant  the  exercise  of  discretion  in  the
    appellant's favour is the delay  in  the  respondent  acting  upon  the
    detection of deception in 2008.  In light of Hysaj, and for the reasons
    set out in paragraph 28 of my error of law decision,  I  conclude  that
    the delay does not assist the appellant in  showing  that  this  factor
    constituted  an  exceptional  feature  of  her  case.   There  was   no
    illegality on the respondent's part in pursuing the  so-called  nullity
    route, which was finally ruled out by the Supreme Court in its judgment
    of 21 December 2017 in Hysaj [2017] UKSC 82; [2018] 1 WLR 221.  Nor was
    there any legitimate expectation that the appellant would have had  her
    case decided within a particular timeframe, or that it would have  been
    considered in light of a policy which, as  of  August  2014,  had  been
    withdrawn.  There was no legitimate  expectation,  or  that  from  some
    unspecified point in  time  the  respondent  would  not  seek  to  take
    deprivation action against her.

22. It follows from this that there was no "historic injustice"  applicable
    to the appellant's case and no substance to the argument that the delay
    caused unpredictable and inconsistent outcomes.

23. I turn to  consider  other  factors  which  do  clearly  weigh  in  the
    appellant's favour when considering whether depriving the appellant  of
    British citizenship would constitute  a  disproportionate  interference
    with her protected Article 8 rights or  whether  discretion  should  be
    exercised in her favour.

24. In respect of the primary consideration of the best  interests  of  her
    three children, I note that they are all themselves  British  and  will
    continue to enjoy the benefits of their nationality.  The children will
    continue to be able to reside with both of their parents.  I find  that
    there  would  be  no  significant  detriment  to  the  children's  best
    interests.

25. The appellant has resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  considerable
    period of time.  She has married and had three  children.   Her  family
    life ties are clear.  By way of career, she has established herself  in
    a strong academic role at the University of East London, having clearly
    flourished as a committed student prior to this.   In  these  respects,
    the appellant can be said to  have  contributed  to  the  economic  and
    educational wellbeing of this country.

26. I accept that if deprivation were to occur, the appellant would be left
    without an alternative form of status in the United Kingdom.  This  may
    have an adverse impact upon her employment and other related matters.

27. On the other side of the balance sheet, the family life and educational
    career referred to above have both been established at a time when  the
    appellant was enjoying the  benefits  of  citizenship  which  had  been
    procured by deception (  as  had  the  obtaining  of  leave  to  remain
    previously).   It  is  this  inescapable  fact  which   underpins   the
    respondent's decision to seek deprivation as a  means  of  safeguarding
    the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  United
    Kingdom's immigration system and the rights  which  flow  from  British
    citizenship.  I place considerable weight on this factor.

28. There is no evidence before me to indicate that the family unit  would,
    as a result of deprivation and the relatively  short  period  before  a
    decision is taken on whether to remove the appellant or grant her leave
    to  remain,  be  placed  in  a  position  of   destitution   or   other
    circumstances such as to result in a disproportionate interference with
    Article 8 rights.  I am satisfied that on the facts  of  this  case,  a
    relatively short period of what may be described as "limbo"  would  not
    require the grant of leave  to  remain  in  order  to  avoid  breaching
    Article 8 rights.

29. Having regard to Chapter 55 of the respondent's guidance on deprivation
    (published  on  27  July  2017),  I  see   no   applicable   mitigating
    circumstances in this case.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
    as an adult.  There is no evidence that she was coerced into  providing
    false information and then maintaining the deception thereafter.  There
    are no material health issues in this case.

30. Taking  all  the  circumstances  into  account,  I  conclude  that  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences of making a deprivation order would
    not result in a breach of Article 8.

31. Beyond that, and considering the exercise of discretion for  myself,  I
    conclude that there are no exceptional features in this case  which  me
    to find in favour of the appellant.

32. It follows that the appellant's appeal falls to be dismissed.

33. I would expect the respondent to abide by the timeframe set out in  the
    decision letter of 22 March 2019 in respect of considering  whether  to
    instigate removal action or to grant the appellant some form  of  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  The nationality and ages of her three
    children will no doubt be a central feature of that consideration.




Anonymity


34. I make no anonymity direction in this case.



Notice of Decision

35. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

36. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  17 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date:  17 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00028/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 August 2020                            |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mimoza shabani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr S Kerr, Counsel, instructed by Karis Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease  of  reference  I  shall  refer  to  the  appellant  in  these
    proceedings as the Secretary of State and to the respondent as MS.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  21
    October 2019, by which he allowed MS' appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision of 22 March 2019, depriving her of her British citizenship.

 3. MS entered the United Kingdom in June 1998.  Stating her  correct  name
    and date of birth, but claiming to  be  Kosovan,  she  made  an  asylum
    claim.  On this basis, she was recognised  as  a  refugee  and  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 7 July 1999.  She was  naturalised  as  a
    British citizen on 8 December 2004.  Following what may be described as
    investigatory letters from the Secretary of State in July and September
    2008 (acting  upon  information  received),  on  17  November  2008  MS
    accepted that she was in fact a citizen of Albania and  had  previously
    lied about her true nationality.  In February 2018,  the  Secretary  of
    State informed MS that action might be taken  to  deprive  her  of  her
    British citizenship.  The decision to do so was taken on 22 March 2019.
     The  basis  for  this  decision  was  section  40(3)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981, as amended.  Section 40(3) provides as follows:

          "The Secretary of State may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
          citizenship  status  which  results  from  his  registration   or
          naturalisation if the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that  the
          registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -

                   a) fraud,




                   b) false representation, or




                   c) concealment of a material fact."

 4. Section 40(4) of the 1981 Act relates  to  statelessness,  but  is  not
    relevant in these proceedings.

 5. MS' appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was brought under section 40A  of
    the 1981 Act.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. There was no dispute as to the establishment of the condition precedent
    that MS had obtained her  British  citizenship  by  fraud,  namely  her
    original assertion that she was Kosovan and her subsequent  reassertion
    of this (or at  least  her  failure  to  have  disclosed  the  original
    fraudulent assertion) when applying for naturalisation.  There  was  no
    dispute as to the materiality of that fraudulent conduct in relation to
    the obtaining of British citizenship.

 7. Whilst not expressly set out by the judge in his decision, there was no
    dispute between the parties as to MS'  personal  circumstances  in  the
    United Kingdom, which were as follows:

              v. she was married to a British citizen;




             vi. the couple have three British  citizen  children,  born  in
                 2003, 2006, and 2017;




            vii. in September 2016 she purchased a property in London;




           viii. she was a Senior Lecturer in  Financial  Economics  at  the
                 University of East London (having completed a PhD at SOAS).

 8. MS' case was essentially put forward on the  following  general  bases:
    first, that the appeal should succeed on Article 8 grounds  because  of
    the reasonably foreseeable consequences of the effect of  the  decision
    to deprive her of her British citizenship; second, that  in  any  event
    the discretion under section 40(3) of the 1981  Act  should  have  been
    exercised differently.  Within these  'umbrella'  submissions,  it  was
    argued that the Secretary of State was guilty of a very  serious  delay
    between 2008, when the fraud perpetrated  by  MS  was  discovered,  and
    2019, when the deprivation decision was eventually  made.   This  delay
    had, it was said, caused MS very real prejudice in that  she  had  been
    denied the chance of benefiting from what was,  until  August  2014,  a
    policy which provided that those in her situation would "normally"  not
    be deprived of their citizenship if they  had  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least 14 years.  This  argument  was  described  as  the
    "historic  injustice"  point.   In  addition,  it  was  said  that  the
    Secretary  of  State's  inaction  had  effectively  given  rise  to   a
    reasonable belief on MS' part that deprivation  proceedings  would  not
    occur.  In respect of Article 8, the impact  of  depriving  MS  of  her
    British  citizenship  would,  in  all   the   circumstances,   have   a
    disproportionate  effect  on  her  private  and/or  family  life.   The
    Secretary of State's delay reduced the public interest in deprivation.

 9. The judge observed at two points in his reasoning that the Secretary of
    State had not put forward any reason for the lengthy  delay  in  making
    the deprivation decision (see [19] and [26]).   He  took  note  of  MS'
    conduct and her wish (inferred from the submissions made on her behalf)
    to rely on different periods of delay for different reasons.   At  [25]
    the judge concluded that MS had,  as  a  result  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's delay, not been  treated  the  same  as  other  people  in  her
    situation who had been able to benefit from the 14-year  policy  before
    its withdrawal in August 2014.  In the next paragraph, he concluded  as
    follows:

                 "Although her challenge to a decision made in 2008 of  2009
                 may have carried little weight, at the time she reached  14
                 years residence in July 2012 she was  entitled  to  believe
                 that the lack of action prior to that time and  the  policy
                 in effect at that time, meant that the Secretary  of  State
                 would not make a decision to revoke her  citizenship.   Her
                 unchallenged evidence was that she was "fully aware of  the
                 policy at that time".  It is reasonable for her belief that
                 no action would be taken to strengthen in each of the  next
                 passing seven years before a decision was finally  made  to
                 revoke the citizenship in 2019."

10. At [27], the judge found that the deprivation  decision  had  not  been
    made within a "reasonable period of time" following  MS'  admission  of
    fraud, and that, "[r]easonably believing that she would not  have  that
    status [her British citizenship]  revoked  after  July  2012,  she  was
    permitted to strengthen her ties to the country of  nationality."   The
    judge then sets out a number of aspects of MS'  personal  circumstances
    in the United  Kingdom  relating  to  the  purchase  of  property,  her
    children, and her educational and employment decisions and achievements
    over time. [27] ends with the conclusion that:




           "All of these factors combine to  form  an  exceptional  feature
           which has great weight when considering whether  the  discretion
           should be exercised differently."




11. In summary, [28]-[30] continue the theme of delay, citing  EB  (Kosovo)
    [2008] UKHL 41; [2008] 3 WLR 178 and containing the  conclusions  that:
    the Secretary of State's delay had led to  an  "unpredictable  outcome"
    for MS because she did not know when, if ever, a  deprivation  decision
    would be made; the delay led to "inconsistent outcomes" because she had
    been deprived of the ability to rely on  the  14-year  policy  and  had
    strengthened her ties in the United Kingdom during the period of delay;
    and that the case disclosed "exceptional  features"  which  constituted
    "strong reasons" for departing from the Secretary of State's policy  on
    deprivation.  The judge  concluded  that  whilst  that  policy  carried
    "weight" (described previously as  a  "strong  public  interest"),  the
    discretion should have been exercised differently and the  appeal  fell
    to be allowed.  Nothing was said about  Article  8  and  the  so-called
    "limbo" argument.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

12. In summary, the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal assert that  the
    judge erred in respect of the overall delay issue and failed  to  place
    "significant weight" on the public interest  in  depriving  MS  of  her
    British citizenship.

13. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds by Designated Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal MacDonald on 29 January 2020.

The parties' written submissions

14. On behalf of the Secretary of State, written submissions, dated  5  May
    2020, were filed and served.  Neither  representative  had  a  copy  of
    these at the remote hearing, but I read out the material  passages  and
    Mr Kerr and Mr Whitwell confirmed that they were content to proceed  in
    those circumstances (during the course of the hearing Mr  Whitwell  was
    able to find the submissions helpfully email them to Mr Kerr).

15. The submissions rely heavily on the decision of a Presidential panel in
    Hysaj (Deprivation of Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 00128 (IAC).   It
    is said that the conclusions of the Tribunal in that case  showed  that
    the matters relied on by the judge when allowing  MS'  appeal  had  all
    been authoritatively addressed and none of them could have  constituted
    legally sound bases for allowing  her  appeal.   In  particular,  Hysaj
    showed that the judge could not  have  relied  on  the  delay/"historic
    injustice"/reasonable belief points when  concluding  that  there  were
    "exceptional features" in MS' case.

16. In a detailed written response dated 29 May 2020,  Mr  Kerr  sought  to
    meet the issues dealt with in Hysaj head-on.  It is said that that  the
    Tribunal was essentially wrong  to  have  decided  that  the  "historic
    injustice" point could not benefit a person in the decision of MS  (her
    circumstances being in some  respects  similar  to  that  of  Mr  Hysaj
    himself).  The Secretary of State's  decision  to  pursue  the  nullity
    route was unlawful, and this, combined with the prejudice  to  MS,  was
    sufficient for the judge in the present case  to  have  concluded  that
    there were "exceptional features".  The judge had taken full account of
    the strong public interest in depriving MS of her British  citizenship.
    Finally, it is said that the  judge  took  a  number  of  factors  into
    account when concluding that the discretion should have been  exercised
    differently.

The hearing

17. MS attended the hearing on a remote basis and I explained  to  her  the
    nature of proceedings.  Other than a  minor  technical  glitch  at  the
    outset, the hearing proceeded without any difficulties.

18. Mr Whitwell relied on the Secretary of State's written submissions  and
    the grounds of appeal.  In summary, and with  reference  to  paragraphs
    61, 63, 66, 67, 74-76, and 110 of Hysaj, he submitted that the  judge's
    conclusions were unsustainable.  He submitted that the judge's decision
    should be set aside, the decision remade, and the appeal dismissed.

19. Mr Kerr relied on his written submissions.  In  essence,  he  submitted
    that Hysaj was wrongly decided in material respects  and  that  in  any
    event the  judge's  decision  was  sustainable  on  the  basis  of  the
    conclusions at [27].  Whilst the judge stated  that  the  Secretary  of
    State  had  failed  to  provide  a  reason  for  the  delay,  Mr   Kerr
    acknowledged (in my view, realistically) that in light of paragraph  19
    of the decision letter, its cause had in fact been the pursuance of the
    nullity route and the previous Hysaj litigation which  ended  with  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in 2017 (see [2017] UKSC 82; [2018] 1 WLR
    221).  Whether the delay was caused by an unlawful course of action  or
    simple  administrative  inaction,  the  judge  had  been  justified  in
    concluding that the lengthy delay constituted an "exceptional feature".
     The Tribunal's rejection  of  the  "historic  injustice"  argument  at
    paragraphs 74-75 of Hysaj was wrong and had the effect of enabling  the
    Secretary of State to adopt what Mr Kerr described as  an  "open-ended"
    decision-making  process.   MS  had  clearly  been  prejudiced  by  the
    Secretary of State's  delay  and  had  acted  upon  the  inaction  when
    strengthening her ties in the United Kingdom.  Mr Kerr  made  reference
    to Article 8 and the "limbo" issue, accepted that  the  judge  had  not
    dealt with this, but also acknowledged that there was no "cross-appeal"
    put forward by MS.

Decision on error of law

20. I wish to express my gratitude to both representatives  in  this  case.
    Their focused submissions have been of real assistance.  I also wish to
    state that although I was a member of the panel which decided Hysaj,  I
    have  considered  Mr  Kerr's  submissions  in  the  present  case  very
    carefully and on their own merits.

21. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that the judge did materially
    err in law when allowing MS' appeal, and that his decision must be  set
    aside.

22. Having read Hysaj critically, I conclude that it was decided  correctly
    in all material respects, and for the reasons set out  in  the  panel's
    decision.  Without intending any disrespect to Mr Kerr's  arguments,  I
    do not propose to set those reasons out here as both parties  are  very
    well-aware of them.

23. In light of this primary conclusion, the judge's decision falls  to  be
    assessed in light of the law as set out in Hysaj.

24. Although the judge was of the view that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to put forward any explanation for  the  lengthy  delay,  it  is
    tolerably clear that the cause was indeed the pursuance of the  nullity
    route to deprivation  which  was  ultimately  deemed  unlawful  by  the
    Supreme Court.  Paragraph 19 of the decision letter specifically refers
    to that  litigation.   Whilst  the  Presenting  Officer  may  not  have
    referred to this in her submissions to  the  judge,  the  inference  is
    relatively strong, particularly in light of the facts.   MS'  admission
    of fraud occurred in 2008, at much the same time as that by  Mr  Hysaj.
    The nullity route was being employed by the Secretary of State at  that
    time and for some years thereafter.   Following  the  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in December 2017, a decision to deprive Mr Hysaj  of  his
    British citizenship under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act  was  taken  in
    July 2018, whilst in MS'  case  this  occurred  in  March  2019.   This
    chronology establishes a link in the present case between  the  nullity
    route and its consequent  litigation,  and  the  delay  in  making  the
    deprivation of citizenship decision.

25. For the avoidance of any doubt, the judge's belief that  there  was  no
    such underlying  reason  for  the  delay  makes  no  difference  to  my
    conclusions.

26. The judge clearly relied on the delay  issue  in  its  wider  sense  in
    several respects: first, that it had  resulted  in,  to  a  greater  or
    lesser extent, "historic injustice" in the sense that it  had  deprived
    MS of any benefit from the 14-year policy; second, that it resulted  in
    MS holding the reasonable belief that deprivation action would  not  be
    taken against after July 2012 (once she had been residing in the United
    Kingdom for 14 years); third, that  it  had  allowed  MS  to  establish
    greater  ties  in  this  country;  fourth,  that  it  had  led  to   an
    unpredictable and inconsistent outcome for MS in that  she  was  unsure
    whether, if at all, deprivation action would be taken against, and that
    she had not been able to benefit from the favourable policy  before  it
    was withdrawn in August 2014.

27. With respect to the judge, and acknowledging that he was deciding  this
    appeal when the law remained unsettled (at least in terms  of  guidance
    from the Upper Tribunal), each aspect of  his  reliance  on  the  delay
    issue is legally unsustainable.

28. There was no illegality on the Secretary of State's part as  result  of
    her pursuing the nullity route (see paragraphs 61  and  63  of  Hysaj).
    There was no legitimate expectation that MS would  have  had  her  case
    decided within a particular timeframe, that her case  would  have  been
    considered in light of a policy withdrawn some years earlier, or  that,
    from any particular point in time, no  deprivation  action  would  have
    been taken against (see paragraphs 66 and 67).  Thus,  the  "reasonable
    belief"  attributed  to  MS  by  the  judge  could  not  have  properly
    constituted an "exceptional feature".  As there was  no  illegality  by
    the Secretary of State, MS could not rely on any claimed prejudice: the
    "historic injustice" argument could not have aided her  (paragraph  74-
    76).  It also follows from the  foregoing  that  the  judge  could  not
    properly have concluded that the delay had  led  to  unpredictable  and
    inconsistent outcomes for MS.

29. Thus, to the extent  that  the  judge  relied  on  matters  which  were
    subsequently addressed and  decided  by  the  Tribunal  in  Hysaj,  his
    conclusions cannot stand.

30. I turn to Mr Kerr's alternative argument, namely that even if Hysaj was
    correctly decided and that certain aspects of the judge's decision  are
    flawed, his conclusion that the factors set  out  at  [27]  constituted
    "exceptional features" is nonetheless sustainable.

31. I reject this submission.  The various points set out at [27] certainly
    show that MS has established significant ties in the United Kingdom and
    has been a productive member of society.  Her current employment  as  a
    Senior Lecturer says much about  her  abilities  and  value  to  Higher
    Education in this country.  However, the matters relied on by the judge
    are all predicated on the premise  that  MS  was  entitled  to  hold  a
    "reasonable belief" that deprivation action would not be taken  against
    after she reached the 14-year threshold in 2012.  For the  reasons  set
    out in paragraph 28, above, and with reference to Hysaj,  that  premise
    was flawed.

32. In summary, the delay issue (which encompassed  the  points  concerning
    "historic injustice", EB (Kosovo), and the strengthening of ties in the
    United  Kingdom)  was  not,  on  the  judge's  reasoning,  capable   of
    constituting  an  "exceptional  feature"  of  the  case  which  legally
    justified the conclusion that the discretion under section 40(3) of the
    1981 Act should have  been  exercised  differently.   Given  that  that
    conclusion was the sole basis for allowing MS' appeal  (Article  8  not
    having been addressed), the judge's decision must be set aside.

Disposal

33. At the hearing I canvassed the views of the representatives as to  what
    should happen if I were to set the judge's decision aside for error  of
    law.  There is no question of a remittal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Mr Kerr and Mr  Whitwell  both  acknowledged  the  possibility  of  the
    decision in this appeal being remade by the Upper Tribunal on the basis
    of further written submissions only.

34. There is a discretion for the remaking decision to take place without a
    hearing, pursuant to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  This discretion must be exercised with some caution and in
    light of the overriding objective, the nature of the  issues  involved,
    the views of the parties, and the guidance set out in Osborn  v  Parole
    Board [2013] UKSC 61.

35. I have concluded that, subject  to  any  further  representations,  the
    remaking of the decision  in  this  appeal  can  fairly  be  undertaken
    without a hearing.  I say this for the following reasons:

             vi. both parties have expressed a view that proceeding  by  way
                 of written submissions only may well be appropriate;




            vii.  the  core  facts  relating  to  MS'  history  and  current
                 circumstances in the United Kingdom are not in dispute;




           viii. the legal framework, as it currently stands, is clear (I am
                 aware that there is an application for permission to appeal
                 to the Court of Appeal in Hysaj, but of course the  outcome
                 of this is plainly uncertain and any further litigation  is
                 highly likely to take a fairly significant amount of time);


             ix.  the  question  of  the  foreseeable  consequences  of  the
                 deprivation of citizenship (as it relates both to Article 8
                 and the general discretion) can be dealt  with  by  way  of
                 written submissions, despite the fact that  the  judge  did
                 not address this issue in his decision;


              x. there has been no notice from MS under rule 15(2A)  of  the
                 Procedure Rules to adduce further evidence.

36.  I  propose  to  adopt  this  course  of   action,   subject   to   any
    representations received from the parties (see my directions, below).

Anonymity


37. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  I have
    not been asked to make one at this stage.  Although MS has minor
    children, they have not been identified in my decision and in all the
    circumstances there is no reason for me to make an anonymity direction
    of my own volition.


Notice of Decision

38. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


39. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the parties

   1. No later than 5 days after this decision is sent out, MS may file  and
      serve in electronic form any further representations  as  to  why  the
      remaking of the decision in this appeal should not take place  without
      a hearing;

   2. No later than 10 days after this decision is sent out,  the  Secretary
      of State may file and serve in  electronic  form  a  response  to  any
      representations provided by MS in respect of direction 1;

   3. If any objections are raised by either party as to the remaking of the
      decision in this  appeal  being  undertaken  without  a  hearing,  the
      TRIBUNAL shall consider these, make a final decision on the issue, and
      make further directions as appropriate;

   4. If no such objections  are  raised  by  either  party,  the  following
      directions shall apply:

              i. No later than 21 days after this decision is sent  out,  MS
                 shall file  and  serve  in  electronic  and  physical  form
                 written submissions addressing all matters relevant to  the
                 remaking of the decision in this appeal and in light of the
                 error of law decision;


             ii. No later than 35 days after this decision is sent out,  the
                 Secretary of State shall file and serve in  electronic  and
                 physical form written submissions in response;

            iii. MS may, no later than  7  days  following  receipt  of  the
                 Secretary of State's response, file and serve in electronic
                 and physical form a reply;

   5. With liberty to apply.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 13 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
