
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00035/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28-29 November 2019, 7 January    |On 19 March 2020                     |
|2020                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                DINJAN HYSAJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Sonali Naik QC, Helen Foot,  Counsel,  instructed  by
                    Oliver & Hasani Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Robert Palmer QC, Julia  Smyth,  Counsel,  instructed
                    by Government Legal Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Griffith ('the Judge'), issued on 26 October  2018,  by  which
    the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to
    deprive him of British citizenship under section 40(3) of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 ('the 1981 Act') was refused.

 2. By way of a decision dated 19 November 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lambert granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal on all grounds.

Facts

 3. The appellant was born in 1977 and is a citizen of Albania. He  entered
    this country in 1998 and claimed asylum. He provided the United Kingdom
    authorities with his correct name, but falsely claimed to be a  citizen
    of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to have been born and resided
    in the autonomous province of Kosovo, which at the time he entered this
    country was subject to armed conflict. He falsely claimed to have  been
    born  in  1981  and  presented  to  the  British  authorities   as   an
    unaccompanied minor escaping the conflict. He  was  accepted  to  be  a
    refugee and granted indefinite leave to remain ('ILR') in 1999. In 2004
    he applied for and was granted naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen,
    using the same personal details he had provided in his application  for
    international protection. It is common ground between the parties  that
    the appellant obtained his British citizenship by fraud. He was  issued
    with a British passport in 2004.

 4. The appellant travelled to Albania and married his wife, a  citizen  of
    Albania, on 18 July 2007.  Eight  days  later  his  wife  submitted  an
    application to the British Embassy in Tirana for entry clearance as the
    spouse of a British citizen. She was interviewed on 14  September  2007
    and disclosed the appellant's true date of birth and that he  was  born
    in Shkoder, Albania.

 5. On 27 August 2008, the respondent wrote to the appellant  and  notified
    him that she was considering depriving him of his British  citizenship.
    The appellant admitted his deception by means of a letter sent  to  the
    respondent by his  solicitors  on  15  September  2008.  Correspondence
    flowed between the appellant's solicitors and the respondent, with  the
    appellant being informed that a decision as to deprivation  was  likely
    to be made by the end of March 2010.

 6. In June 2010 the appellant fell into a disagreement over a  spilt  pint
    with another man in a public house in Hemel Hempstead. Staff  sent  him
    out of the building into the beer garden to calm down. Having smoked  a
    cigarette, he re-entered the building and, with a  pint  glass  in  his
    hand, tapped the shoulder of his victim, who turned around  to  receive
    the pint glass in his face,  which  shattered  on  impact.  The  victim
    sustained several cuts, including one that went all the way through his
    cheek and cut the back of his tongue. He required over  forty  stitches
    and was left with a degree of scarring. The appellant was convicted  by
    a jury at St Albans' Crown Court and  on  20  May  2011  HHJ  Catterson
    sentenced to him to five years' imprisonment for wounding  with  intent
    to do grievous bodily harm and  12  months'  imprisonment  for  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm, concurrent.

 7. On 7 July 2012, whilst a serving prisoner, the appellant reached the 14-
    year mark of his residence in this country. The respondent wrote to the
    appellant  on  13  February  2013  informing  him  that  his  grant  of
    nationality was a nullity as he had used false particulars when  making
    his application. On 8 April 2013 the respondent served  notice  of  her
    intention to deport the appellant and on 9 April 2013  the  application
    of the appellant's wife for entry clearance was refused. The  appellant
    was released from custody on 18 November 2013. His  wife  entered  this
    country clandestinely in 2014, with their eldest child who is a British
    citizen by descent. Upon their arrival they resided with the appellant.
    Two further children were born in this country and all  three  children
    continue to possess British citizenship.

 8. The appellant challenged the decision  to  declare  the  grant  of  his
    British citizenship a nullity and was ultimately successful before  the
    Supreme Court: R (Hysaj) v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 82; [2018] 1 W.L.R. 221.

 9. The respondent withdrew her decision to treat the  appellant's  British
    citizenship as a nullity on 10 February 2018 and subsequently issued  a
    decision on 3 July  2018  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his  British
    citizenship under  section  40(3)  of  the  1981  Act.  The  respondent
    detailed that the appellant would not have been recognised as a refugee
    and granted ILR on the ground of  possessing  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution as a Kosovan if his Albanian nationality  had  been  known.
    Further, the appellant was only able to apply for  citizenship  on  the
    basis  that  he  possessed   settled   status   arising   from   fraud.
    Consequently, the respondent decided that the exercise of deception was
    material to the grant of  citizenship.  The  decision  detailed,  inter
    alia;

         'At the time your client's deception had been discovered  in  2007,
         your client had not been present in the UK for more than 14  years.
         Furthermore, it is noted that your client was sentenced to 5  years
         in prison on 20/05/2011. At that time, given he had  less  than  14
         years residence, applying the principle of discounting  periods  of
         imprisonment from the residence  calculation  for  long  residence,
         your client would not have been considered to have accrued 14 years
         residence until significantly later than  2014  when  the  14  year
         concession in the nationality guidance was withdrawn. As such,  the
         assertion that your client should now benefit from this  concession
         is not accepted.'

         ...

         'Your client fraudulently obtained his leave to remain and  British
         citizenship and maintained  this  deception  until  the  fraud  was
         revealed in 2007. It is also noted that he also received a sentence
         of 5 years  imprisonment  for  grievous  bodily  harm  and  assault
         occasioning actual bodily harm in 2011. It  is  not  accepted  that
         your client should now be considered to be of good character simply
         on the basis of the time that has passed.'

         ...

         'For the reasons given above it is not accepted  that  there  is  a
         plausible, innocent  explanation  for  the  misleading  information
         which led to the decision to  grant  citizenship.  Rather,  on  the
         balance  of  probabilities,  it  is  considered  that  your  client
         provided information with the intention of  obtaining  a  grant  of
         status and/or citizenship in circumstances  where  his  application
         would have been unsuccessful if your client had told the truth.  It
         is therefore considered that the fraud was deliberate and  material
         to the acquisition of British citizenship.'

The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Following a  hearing
    in October 2018, the Judge refused the  appeal.  As  to  the  issue  of
    delay, the Judge decided at [73]:

         'On 13 February 2013, the appellant was informed that those appeals
         had not yet  been  determined.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the
         respondent in order to make a decision examined the case  law  and,
         on the basis of the law as it then  stood,  decided  to  annul  his
         citizenship. The appellant exercised his right of  judicial  review
         and in December 2017 it was determined that the  decisions  in  the
         Court of Appeal were wrong.  Albeit,  therefore,  the  decision  of
         February 2013 was unlawful, the respondent acted in accordance with
         the law at the time. Although this case has been  ongoing  for  ten
         years, I am not satisfied that there has been any  unreasonable  or
         unaccountable delay on the part of the respondent that falls within
         the type contemplated in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.'

11. The Judge considered the reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of  the
    deprivation of the appellant's British citizenship and found  at  [69]-
    [71]:

         'I consider it reasonably foreseeable that the respondent would not
         take action to remove or deport the appellant but would  grant  him
         leave taking into account his family circumstances. He was  granted
         ILR in the past and,  whilst  he  would  not  automatically  become
         entitled to such leave on deprivation, there  are  factors  in  his
         favour which make it less likely that he would  be  removed.  These
         include the fact that his  wife  has  very  recently  been  granted
         limited leave to remain in the UK and is entitled to work (but  has
         chosen not to do so) and that he has three British citizen children
         who are entitled  to  the  benefits  of  such  citizenship.  It  is
         recognised that it is in the  best  interests  of  children  to  be
         brought up by their parents. I cannot speculate on what conditions,
         if any, would be attached to any period of leave  if  granted.  The
         family would remain as a family unit with  some  means  of  support
         even if that might entail a change of accommodation  or  change  of
         school for the eldest child.

         On the other hand,  the  respondent  might  decide  to  deport  the
         appellant in light of his conviction in 2011. If so, the  appellant
         will be able to make representations and bring  a  challenge  under
         article 8 at that stage. The relevant provisions he  will  have  to
         meet are found in paragraph 398, 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration
         Rules together with the public interest considerations  in  section
         117 of the 2002 Act. Owing to the length of his sentence  he  falls
         within paragraph 398(c) and  will  need  to  show  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those identified in  those  paragraphs
         if the public interest in his deportation is to be outweighed.

         I cannot pre-judge the outcome of such challenge but  as  suggested
         in  Aziz  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1884,  I  should  make  a  'predictive
         assessment'. The threshold to be met is a very high one  but  there
         are factors in the appellant's favour which could act  to  tip  the
         balance in his favour. These include the length of stay in the  UK,
         now 20 years and amounting to half  his  lifetime;  his  change  of
         circumstances; changes to his home  country  in  the  interim;  the
         significant difficulties he is likely to have to  overcome  if  re-
         establishing a life there and the fact that he  has  three  British
         citizen children, two of whom were born here. Also, he has not been
         in any further trouble with the authorities since the incident that
         led to his conviction  in  2011  which  appears  to  have  been  an
         isolated and out of character episode. Taking into account all  his
         circumstances  I  do  not  find  it  reasonably  foreseeable   that
         deprivation will result in his deportation.'

12. As to whether the application of the public interest was to be  reduced
    consequent to the existence of historic injustice, the  Judge  reasoned
    at [74]:

         'It was submitted that the appellant has  been  prejudiced  by  the
         actions of the respondent because, had  a  decision  under  section
         40(3) been made earlier, he could have benefited under the fourteen
         year rule which was included in the old policy, withdrawn in August
         2014. The relevant paragraph 55.7.2. stated:

             'In general, the  Secretary  of  State  will  not  deprive  of
             British citizenship in the following circumstances:

                . If a person has been resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  more than fourteen years we will not normally  deprive  of
                  citizenship.'

         It is clear from the use of the word 'normally' that there is not a
         guarantee that fourteen years' residence will mean that citizenship
         will not be deprived but rather that discretion may  be  exercised.
         The appellant completed fourteen years' residence in 2012, at which
         time he was serving a prison  sentence  for  an  offence  involving
         violence. In light of public interest  considerations,  that  is  a
         factor that might have militated against the exercise of discretion
         in his favour. It is therefore speculative to say that he would not
         have been deprived of his citizenship under the old policy based on
         his length of residence had a decision been made to deprive him  of
         citizenship under the old policy.'

13. The Judge concluded at [77] of her decision:

           'The  public  interest  in  depriving  this  appellant   of   his
         citizenship is high. I have  found  above  that  it  is  reasonably
         foreseeable that he will not be removed, and I have not  been  able
         to find any exceptional circumstances that are likely to result  in
         breach of his article 8 rights. It follows that I do not find  that
         there would be a disproportionate interference to  the  appellant's
         article  8  rights  as  a  result  of  depriving  him  of   British
         citizenship, which he obtained through  deception.  Accordingly,  I
         find no reasons why the respondent should have exercised discretion
         differently.'

Appeal to this Tribunal

14. The appellant relies upon five grounds of appeal,  asserting  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal:

      1. Misdirected itself as to delay and the respondent's  reliance  upon
         the nullity doctrine.

      2. Unlawfully limited its consideration as to 'limbo'  and  reasonably
         foreseeable consequences.

      3. Failed to address a preliminary issue as to whether  the  appellant
         would be left  without  any  leave  pending  any  decision  by  the
         respondent as to whether to deport him.

      4. Applied an erroneous exceptionality test in  its  consideration  of
         article 8.

      5. Conflated relevant tests and failed to assess the question  of  the
         respondent's  exercise  of   discretion,   independently   of   the
         assessment of article 8.

15. For the sake of clarity, permission to appeal was granted upon the four
    grounds originally advanced  by  the  appellant.  Ground  3  above  was
    initially incorporated within ground 2 and  Ms.  Naik  QC  was  granted
    permission at an earlier  hearing  to  advance  it  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant as a stand-alone ground.

16. Before this Tribunal, the respondent concedes that the Judge  erred  in
    law by failing to properly engage  with  the  appellant's  argument  in
    relation to his loss of status on deprivation, but asserts that it is a
    non-material error because ultimately the failure could not  have  made
    any difference to the outcome of the appeal.

The relevant statutory regime

17. Section 20 of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1948  ('the  1948  Act')
    provided  at  section  20(2)  that  a  person  who  had  registered  or
    naturalised as a Citizen of the UK  and  Colonies  ('CUKC'),  the  main
    nationality status at the time, could be deprived of his citizenship on
    the basis  of  fraud,  false  representation  and  the  concealment  of
    material facts. A person  who  had  naturalised  as  a  CUKC  could  be
    deprived of his citizenship if the respondent was satisfied  that  they
    had shown themselves to be disloyal or disaffected towards His Majesty,
    unlawfully traded or communicated with or assisted an enemy during war,
    been sentenced to  at  least  12  months'  imprisonment,  or  had  been
    ordinarily resident in a foreign country for seven or  more  continuous
    years: section 20(3) and (4). The Act provided that the respondent  had
    to be satisfied that it would not be conducive to the public  good  for
    the person to continue to be a CUKC.

18. Section 40 the  1981  Act  established  four  grounds  upon  which  the
    respondent could by order deprive  of  citizenship  a  person  who  had
    acquired British citizenship  by  registration  or  naturalisation,  if
    satisfied:

       . Registration or naturalisation had been obtained  by  fraud,  false
         representation or concealment of material fact: section 40(1);

       . The person had shown disloyalty or disaffection towards Her Majesty
         by act of speech: section 40(3)(a);

       . The person had unlawfully traded  or  communicated  with  an  enemy
         during any war in which Her Majesty was engaged or been engaged  in
         or associated with any business carried out to assist an  enemy  in
         that war: section 40(3)(b); or

       . The person had been sentenced in any country to  twelve  months  or
         more imprisonment within five years of the date  of  naturalisation
         or registration and the person would not become stateless:  section
         40(3)(c); section 40(5)(b).

19. The respondent could not deprive a person of  his  British  citizenship
    unless satisfied that it was not conducive to the public good that that
    person should continue to be a British citizen. Such  powers  reflected
    the deprivation powers in place under the 1948 Act.

20. A wholly new 'section 40'  was  inserted  into  the  1981  Act  by  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and entered into force  on
    1 April 2003. Three of the specific  grounds  listed  in  the  original
    section 40 were replaced by a  general  power  for  the  respondent  to
    deprive a person of his citizenship if satisfied that  the  person  has
    done anything seriously prejudicial  to  the  vital  interests  of  the
    United Kingdom or a British  overseas  territory:  section  40(2).  The
    power to deprive  a  person  of  citizenship  because  registration  or
    naturalisation was obtained by means of fraud, false representation  or
    concealment of a material fact was retained  and  set  out  in  section
    40(3). During the Act's passage through Parliament, the then Government
    confirmed that it  intended  to  sign  and  ratify  the  1997  European
    Convention on Nationality and the new measures were considered to be in
    line with the Convention. Article 7 of the Convention permits states to
    withdraw citizenship on the grounds of 'conduct  seriously  prejudicial
    to the vital interests of the State Party' but not if the person  would
    be made stateless. In the event, the United Kingdom did  not  sign  the
    Convention.

21. Further changes were made to the deprivation of citizenship  powers  in
    the aftermath of the London bombings in July 2005 through section 56 of
    the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The  wording  of
    section 40(2) was changed so as to permit the respondent to  deprive  a
    person of citizenship if satisfied that 'deprivation  is  conducive  to
    the public good' rather than on the grounds that the  person  had  done
    something 'seriously prejudicial to the vital interests' of the  United
    Kingdom and its territories.

22. For the purposes of  our  consideration,  the  relevant  provisions  of
    section 40 of the 1981 Act (as amended) are:

         '(2) The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
             deprivation is conducive to the public good.

         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status which  results  from  his  registration  or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

             (a)  fraud,

             (b)  false representation, or

             (c)  concealment of a material fact.

         (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under  subsection
             (2) if he is satisfied that the  order  would  make  a  person
             stateless.

23. Whilst  the  need  to  avoid  statelessness  is  elevated  above  other
    considerations in matters where section 40(2)  applies  such  elevation
    does not arise under section 40(3). This reflects the seriousness  with
    which fraud, false representation or concealment of a material fact are
    viewed, striking as they do at the heart  of  the  system  by  which  a
    foreign national can apply  for  British  citizenship.  The  system  is
    dependent upon applicants acting in good faith, and upon the  truth  of
    details provided by applicants.

24. The respondent's guidance as to the provision made for  deprivation  of
    British citizenship status by order under section 40 of the 1981 Act is
    detailed  at  Chapter  55  of  the  Nationality  Instructions,   titled
    'Deprivation and Nullity of British citizenship'.

Consideration of an appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality  Act
1981

25. In advance of a deprivation  order  being  made,  the  respondent  must
    provide notice in writing as to the decision to  deprive  a  person  of
    British citizenship: section 40(5) of the 1981 Act. The attendant right
    of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  section   40A(1)   is
    established by service of the notice. Under the 1981 Act an  individual
    remains a British citizen until an order is made to deprive  and  until
    such order, they are not subject  to  immigration  control,  cannot  be
    granted leave to enter or remain  and  cannot  be  required  to  submit
    biometrics. Where deprivation  is  pursued  under  section  40(3),  the
    formal deprivation order is  normally  only  made  once  appeal  rights
    against the decision to deprive are exhausted.

26. The Court of Appeal identified several  principles  applicable  to  the
    consideration of an appeal in KV (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2483; [2018] 4 WLR 166, per Leggatt
    LJ at [6]:

         'Pursuant to section 40A(1), a person who is given  such  a  notice
         may appeal against the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
         task of the tribunal on such an appeal has been considered  by  the
         Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  in  a  number  of
         cases including Deliallisi (British  Citizen:  deprivation  appeal;
         Scope) [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) and, more recently, BA (deprivation of
         citizenship: Appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC).  I  would  endorse  the
         following principles which are articulated in those  decisions  and
         which I did not understand to be in dispute on this appeal:

         (1)   Like  an  appeal  under  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, an appeal under  section  40A
             of the 1981 Act is not a review of the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision but a full reconsideration of the decision whether to
             deprive the appellant of British citizenship.

         (2)  It is thus for the tribunal to find the relevant facts on  the
             basis of the evidence adduced to the tribunal, whether or  not
             that evidence was before the Secretary of State when  deciding
             to make a deprivation order.

         (3)   The  tribunal  must  first  establish  whether  the  relevant
             condition precedent specified in section 40(2) or  (3)  exists
             for the exercise of the  discretion  whether  to  deprive  the
             appellant of British citizenship. In  a  section  40(3)  case,
             this requires the tribunal to  establish  whether  citizenship
             was obtained by one or more of the  means  specified  in  that
             subsection.

         (4)  If the condition precedent is established,  the  tribunal  has
             then to ask whether the Secretary  of  State's  discretion  to
             deprive  the  appellant  of  British  citizenship  should   be
             exercised differently. For this  purpose,  the  tribunal  must
             first determine the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of
             deprivation.

         (5)  If the rights of the appellant or any  other  relevant  person
             under article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights are
             engaged, the tribunal will have to  decide  whether  depriving
             the  appellant  of  British  citizenship  would  constitute  a
             disproportionate interference with those rights. But  even  if
             article 8 is not engaged, the  tribunal  must  still  consider
             whether the discretion should be exercised differently.

         (6)  As it is the Secretary  of  State  who  has  been  charged  by
             Parliament with responsibility for making decisions concerning
             deprivation of citizenship, insofar as the Secretary of  State
             has considered the relevant facts, the  Secretary  of  State's
             view and any published policy  regarding  how  the  discretion
             should be exercised should normally be  accorded  considerable
             weight (in which regard see Ali v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799).'

27. Upon considering the effect of Pham v. Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2015] UKSC 19;  [2015]  1  WLR  1591,  Leggatt  LJ  further
    observed at [16]:

         'In making a decision whether to order deprivation  of  citizenship
         in the exercise of a discretionary  power  under  section  40,  the
         decision-maker (whether that be  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
         tribunal on an appeal) has to form a view, not just as  to  whether
         it would be rational to make such an order, but whether it is right
         to do so. This necessarily involves an evaluation of  the  relative
         weight to be accorded to  the  public  interest  in  depriving  the
         person concerned of citizenship and  any  competing  interests  and
         considerations, including the impact of deprivation  on  the  legal
         status of the individual concerned.'

28. Although deprivation of citizenship may  result  in  interference  with
    article 8 rights, the right to a nationality  is  not  itself  a  right
    protected by the European Convention on Human Rights, at [17]

29. As for the use of deception when applying for naturalisation, at [19]:

         'Where, as in the present case, it is  established  not  only  that
         deception was  used  but  that,  without  it,  an  application  for
         naturalisation as a citizen would not have been granted,  it  seems
         to me that it will be an unusual case in which  the  applicant  can
         legitimately complain of the  withdrawal  of  the  rights  that  he
         acquired as  a  result  of  naturalisation.  That  is  because  the
         withdrawal of those rights does  no  more  than  place  the  person
         concerned in the same position as if he had not been fraudulent and
         had acted honestly in making the application ...'

30. The Court of Appeal recognised that consideration will have to be given
    to circumstances where consequent to naturalisation an  individual  has
    lost other rights previously enjoyed which  will  not  or  may  not  be
    restored if he is now deprived of  his  citizenship.  In  such  a  case
    depriving a person of citizenship will not simply  return  him  to  the
    status quo ante but will place him in a worse position than if  he  had
    not been granted citizenship in the first place.  It  was  acknowledged
    that this may occur where a person who was a national of another  state
    lost that nationality as a  consequence  of  having  become  a  British
    citizen and would not be entitled to resume his former  nationality  if
    deprived of his British citizenship. Such  assessment  will  involve  a
    balancing  exercise  and  a  judgment  as  to  whether   in   all   the
    circumstances deprivation is proportionate, at [20]:

         '... In such a case the decision-maker (whether it be the Secretary
         of State or the tribunal  on  an  appeal)  will  need  to  consider
         whether deprivation of citizenship is justified  having  regard  to
         that consequence. Relevant factors in making that determination are
         likely  to  include  both  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  the
         deception by means of which naturalisation was obtained  but  also,
         on the other side of the scales, the likelihood (if any)  that  the
         individual would be able to re-acquire his former  citizenship  and
         the extent to which the inability to  do  so  will  have  practical
         detrimental consequences for the individual or others. Although  it
         does not seem to me necessary that the assessment should have to be
         conducted using the  formal  four  stage  test  of  proportionality
         adopted in cases such as Bank Mellat v HM Treasury  (No  2)  [2013]
         UKSC 39; [2014] AC 700, para 74,  it  will  necessarily  involve  a
         balancing exercise  and  a  judgment  as  to  whether  in  all  the
         circumstances deprivation of citizenship is proportionate.'

31. It is the respondent,  rather  than  the  Tribunal,  who  is  primarily
    responsible for determining and safeguarding  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  rights   flowing   from   British
    citizenship. Consequently, where the requirements in section 40(3)  are
    satisfied, the Tribunal is required to place significant weight on  the
    fact that Parliament has decided, in the public interest, that a person
    who has employed deception to  obtain  British  citizenship  should  be
    deprived of that status.

32. Both the respondent and the Tribunal are  bound  to  apply  the  policy
    guidance in the Nationality Instructions,  or  to  say  that  they  are
    departing from it and to give rational and defensible reasons for doing
    so: Aziz v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ
    1884; [2019] 1 WLR 266, at [35]. Such policy indicates  where  and  how
    the respondent considers that  the  balance  falls  to  be  struck,  as
    between, on the one  hand,  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the
    integrity of immigration control and the rights  flowing  from  British
    citizenship, and,  on  the  other,  the  interests  of  the  individual
    concerned and of others likely to be affected by that person's  ceasing
    to be a  British  citizen:  Deliallisi  (British  citizen:  deprivation
    appeal: scope) [2013] UKUT 00439 (IAC), at [36].

33. Upon the Tribunal  being  satisfied  that  depriving  an  appellant  of
    British citizenship would constitute  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the article 8 rights of that person  or  any  other  person  whose
    position falls to be examined on the principles  identified  in  Beoku-
    Betts v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  39;
    [2009] 1 A.C. 115 it is then compelled by section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998  to  re-exercise  discretion  by  finding  in  favour  of  the
    appellant. However, the fact that the scope of a section 40A appeal  is
    wider than article 8 means that, in a case where article  8(2)  is  not
    even engaged, because the consequences of deprivation are not found  to
    have consequences of such  gravity  as  to  engage  that  article,  the
    Tribunal must still consider whether  discretion  should  be  exercised
    differently: Deliallisi, at [37]

34. In BA (deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018]  UKUT  00085  (IAC);
    [2018] Imm. A.R. 807, the Tribunal held at [44]:

         'The Tribunal will be required to place significant weight  on  the
         fact that the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided,  in  the  public
         interest, that a person who has employed deception etc.  to  obtain
         British citizenship  should  be  deprived  of  that  status.  Where
         statelessness is not in issue, it is likely to be only  in  a  rare
         case that the ECHR or some very compelling feature will require the
         Tribunal to allow the appeal.'

35. The focus of a section  40A  appeal  is  to  ascertain  the  reasonably
    foreseeable consequences of deprivation, which may involve removal. The
    Tribunal confirmed in Deliallisi, at [56], that even if removal is  too
    uncertain to feature directly as  a  consequence,  the  possibility  of
    removal and any period of  uncertainty  following  deprivation  may  be
    required to  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the  effect  that
    deprivation would have, not only on the appellant but also  on  members
    of his family. While it is necessary for the Tribunal to have regard to
    the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation when determining
    whether the making of the deprivation order itself is lawful, it is not
    necessary  for  it  to  go  further  and  conduct   a   proleptic,   or
    anticipatory, analysis of whether the appellant would be likely  to  be
    deported at a later stage: Aziz, at [21]-[32].

36. Sales LJ (as he then was) held in Aziz, at [26], that whilst regard  is
    to be had to the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation, an
    examination of such consequences is only required in so far  as  it  is
    necessary to make an assessment in relation to them in  order  to  rule
    upon whether the making of the deprivation order itself will be  lawful
    and compatible with Convention rights,  in  particular  article  8  and
    section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    ('section 55'). This is a fact specific assessment.

37. Even where the respondent's reasons  for  making  a  deprivation  order
    include that deprivation is necessary to afford an opportunity to  make
    a deportation order later, it is still unlikely to be  appropriate  for
    the Tribunal to conduct proleptic analysis. Sales LJ held in  Aziz,  at
    [29]-[30], a matter in  which  the  respondent  to  sought  to  deprive
    several convicted criminals of their citizenship under section 40(2) of
    the 1981 Act:

         'In other cases, it may be that part of the  Secretary  of  State's
         reasons why the making of an order  to  deprive  an  individual  of
         British citizenship is conducive to the  public  interest  is  that
         this step  is  necessary  to  afford  the  Secretary  of  State  an
         opportunity to make a deportation  or  removal  order  at  a  later
         stage. In such a case, again it seems to me that it is likely to be
         unnecessary and inappropriate for the  FTT  on  an  appeal  against
         deprivation of citizenship to conduct a full  proleptic  assessment
         of whether a deportation order will or will not ultimately be  made
         at some time in the future (and after a separate appeal to the  FTT
         in relation to the decision to make such an  order).  The  evidence
         available and circumstances obtaining at the time of the making  of
         the deprivation order (and the appeal in relation to that) are very
         likely to be different from that which will be available and  those
         which will obtain when the  decision  regarding  the  making  of  a
         deportation order is actually taken (and when there is an appeal in
         relation to that). It will usually be sufficient  to  support  this
         part of the reasoning of the Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to
         making a deprivation order that it can be seen that by making  such
         an order he will have a real prospect of making a deportation order
         at the later stage. The FTT  should  resist  having  tribunal  time
         taken up with unnecessary and inevitably speculative  evidence  and
         argument about whether a deportation order will in fact be made  at
         the end of the day, if all that needs to be shown is that there  is
         a real prospect that a deportation order may eventually be made.

         In relation to such a case, it would in principle be  open  to  the
         individual concerned to try to show that there was no real prospect
         of him being deported at the end of the day, as part of his case to
         challenge the making  of  the  deprivation  order  (this  would  be
         especially important if the Secretary of State does not seek to  or
         cannot justify the making of a  deprivation  order  on  the  simple
         basis referred to in para. [27] above).  If  the  individual  could
         show that, then the Secretary of State's justification  for  making
         the deprivation order might fall  away.  I  can  see  that  if  the
         individual does seek to make out such a case, this could give  rise
         to case management issues for the FTT. Again, where  possible,  the
         FTT should resist being drawn at  the  deprivation  of  citizenship
         stage into a full proleptic assessment  of  whether  a  deportation
         order will be made at the end of the day, where that is unnecessary
         and would involve an inappropriate waste of time and effort for the
         tribunal and the parties. It may be that if an individual maintains
         that there will be no real prospect of his being  deported  at  the
         end of the day, the FTT would in anything other than a  very  clear
         case be able to dismiss that contention at an early  stage  in  the
         proceedings  without  needing  to  proceed  to  a  full,  elaborate
         proleptic assessment of whether a deportation order will be made or
         not. Much will depend upon the way in which the issues  are  framed
         on the appeal and whether the FTT is in a position sensibly to make
         an early assessment of the position and to avoid a  full  proleptic
         hearing on the issue of whether a deportation will in fact occur at
         the end of the day.'

38. Therefore, it will usually be sufficient for  the  Tribunal  simply  to
    support the respondent's reasoning that  deprivation  is  necessary  to
    make a deportation order at a later time  because  by  making  such  an
    order there will be a real prospect of a deportation order  being  made
    later. Even if the Tribunal is  not  satisfied  with  the  respondent's
    reasoning on the ground  that  it  concludes  that  there  is  no  real
    prospect of deportation, the Tribunal should still usually be  able  to
    avoid making a proleptic assessment.

Hearing before this Tribunal

39. Being mindful that there are  presently  a  number  of  deprivation  of
    citizenship appeals before the First-tier Tribunal and that a  decision
    from a Presidential panel would aid consideration of such appeals  this
    matter proceeded before us as a rolled-up  hearing,  permitting  us  to
    consider the error of law appeal and, if we found that  the  Judge  had
    materially erred in law, to proceed to remake the decision.

40. With the agreement of the parties at the commencement of  the  hearing,
    we permitted reliance by both parties upon evidence that was not placed
    before the Judge. Such evidence as was admitted under  rule  15(2A)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  ('2008  Procedure
    Rules') does not form part of our error of law consideration.

41. The respondent  relies  upon  several  witness  statements  from  Fiona
    Johnstone, Policy Manager, BICS Policy and  International  Group,  Home
    Office, and Sophia Grundy, SEO Senior Caseworker, Status  Review  Unit,
    Refused Case Management Directorate, Home Office. By an order  dated  9
    September 2019, the first witness statements of both Ms. Johnstone  and
    Ms. Grundy were admitted under the 2008 Procedure Rules.  By  the  same
    order the appellant was permitted to put questions to the two witnesses
    and their responses were directed  to  be  presented  in  the  form  of
    witness statement. Both witnesses answered the appellant's questions by
    individual statements dated 9 October  2019.  In  response  to  further
    permitted questions from the appellant, a third witness statement  from
    Ms. Grundy, dated 3 January 2020, was filed and served.

42. By a letter dated 29 October 2019  the  appellant  requested  that  Ms.
    Johnstone and Ms. Grundy be directed to attend before the Tribunal  for
    cross-examination. The request was re-affirmed by correspondence  dated
    7 November 2019. The respondent objected to this course of  action.  By
    an order dated 12 November 2019, the Tribunal  confirmed  its  decision
    that neither  witness  was  required  to  attend  the  hearing  as  the
    witnesses had answered the questions presented by the appellant and  no
    adequate reason had been provided as to why oral evidence was required.
    It  was  observed  that  the  issues  raised  by   the   appellant   in
    correspondence could appropriately be addressed by submissions.

43. The appellant  renewed  his  application  for  the  attendance  of  the
    witnesses at the commencement of the hearing, providing general  detail
    as to the terms of the proposed  cross-examination.  The  Tribunal  was
    satisfied there  was  a  significant  interplay  between  Ms.  Grundy's
    evidence as to relevant policies and Ms. Naik QC's  proposed  questions
    to make it appropriate for Ms. Grundy to attend and be examined.

44. As to Ms. Johnstone the Tribunal concluded that the  evidence  conveyed
    by  her  witness  statement  was  substantively  in   the   nature   of
    submissions. This was not a criticism, as the respondent had decided to
    provide evidence as to whether deprivation of citizenship  leads  to  a
    'resumption' of ILR  in  response  to  observations  by  a  differently
    constituted panel  of  the  Tribunal  at  an  earlier  case  management
    hearing. The nature of her evidence was such  that  we  concluded  that
    there was no good reason for her to be called and examined.

45. The appellant and his wife relied upon  additional  witness  statements
    and were permitted to present oral evidence before the Tribunal.

Delay

General delay arising from reliance upon the nullity doctrine

46. Ms. Naik and Ms. Foot succinctly identified the  appellant's  challenge
    on this ground as the  Judge  having  misdirected  herself  and  failed
    properly to consider the ratio of the Supreme Court judgment  in  Hysaj
    when concluding that the respondent's previous nullity decision was 'in
    accordance with the law at the time' and was made 'on the basis of  the
    law as it then stood'. The appellant's position is that it  was  unfair
    and unreasonable for the  respondent  to  exercise  her  discretion  to
    deprive him of his British citizenship in July 2018 as she  had  failed
    to do so for several years from 2007; then having erroneously  declared
    his naturalisation to be a nullity proceeded to defend this  course  of
    action through the courts for a further five years. The Judge  is  said
    to have erred in law in accepting the respondent's position that at the
    relevant time she was bound by Court of Appeal authority to act as  she
    did.

47. We observe that delay and maladministration  are  not  to  be  equated,
    without more, with unlawfulness. In R (FH) v. Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2007] EWHC 1571 (Admin), at [30] Collins J held:

         'It follows from this judgment that claims such as these  based  on
         delay are unlikely, save  in  very  exceptional  circumstances,  to
         succeed and are likely to be regarded as unarguable. It is only  if
         the  delay  is  so  excessive  as  to  be  regarded  as  manifestly
         unreasonable and to fall outside  any  proper  application  of  the
         policy or if the claimant is suffering  some  particular  detriment
         which the Home Office has failed to alleviate that a claim might be
         entertained by the court.'

48. The respondent has on occasion become aware  that  'Kosovan'  nationals
    who were recognised as refugees and granted settled  status,  and  then
    proceeded  to  secure  British  citizenship,  were  actually   Albanian
    nationals who had presented false  information  both  at  the  time  of
    claiming asylum and when applying to naturalise.  Upon  being  provided
    with information as to such falsehood, the  respondent  initially  took
    steps to deprive British citizenship under section 40(3)  of  the  1981
    Act. An early example is Arusha and Demushi (deprivation of citizenship
    - delay) [2012] UKUT 80; [2012] Imm. A.R. 645, where  the  respondent's
    decision to deprive  was  made  on  2  February  2009.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was promulgated on 25  March  2011  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision was dated 13 February 2012, some three years  after
    the initial decision. The Tribunal concluded in that  matter  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been entitled to find that the evidence  relied
    on by the respondent to deprive  a  foreign  national  of  his  British
    citizenship was insufficient to establish that  he  had  acquired  that
    citizenship by fraud.

49. In 2011 the First-tier Tribunal considered  eleven  linked  deprivation
    appeals concerning  Albanian  nationals  who  had  represented  to  the
    respondent that they were Kosovan nationals. The decisions  to  deprive
    were all made under section 40(3) in 2009. One of the appeals proceeded
    to the Upper Tribunal with  a  decision  promulgated  in  August  2013:
    Deliallisi. Ms. Naik refers to these appeals as to the  'Hatton  Cross'
    or 'Deliallisi' cohort.

50. In the meantime, the respondent amended  her  policy  and  subsequently
    informed several other recipients of  British  citizenship  that  their
    grants were a nullity on the ground of  impersonation.  Such  decisions
    were issued to the two claimants in R (Kadria and Another) v. Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2010] EWHC 3405 (Admin) on  15  April
    2010 and 23 April 2010, post-dating the decisions issued in Arusha  and
    the 'Deliallisi cohort'.  The  High  Court  held  that  the  deceptions
    perpetrated by the claimants on and after their arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom from Albania were such that  the  grants  to  them  of  British
    citizenship were a nullity and so the respondent had been  entitled  to
    detain them and direct their removal without invoking the procedure for
    the deprivation of citizenship set out in section 40 of the  1981  Act.
    The judgment of HHJ Allan Gore QC,  sitting  as  a  Deputy  High  Court
    Judge, is dated 18 November 2010 and we observe the  agreement  of  the
    parties before him at [22]:

         'It  is  common  ground  between  the  parties  that  the  relevant
         decisions from which the law is to be derived are, in the order  in
         which they were decided in each case by the Court of  Appeal:  R  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Sultan  Mahmood
         [1981] QB 59; R v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ex
         parte Parvaz Akhtar [1981] QB 46; R v Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department ex parte Nahid Ejaz [1994] QB 496; and Bibi  v  the
         Entry Clearance Officer [2007] EWCA Civ 740.'

51. The High Court accepted that there is a limited category  of  cases  in
    which the respondent was entitled to treat the grant of nationality  as
    a nullity, and which involved no exercise of executive  discretion.  It
    rejected the suggestion that there was a distinction between the effect
    of a false claim to be another real person and a claim  to  be  someone
    who in fact had never existed or did not now exist: at [32]:

         '... I do not understand and  cannot  see  a  justification  for  a
         distinction that asserts that, where what is in issue is the  false
         adoption of attributes and status so as to obtain  entry  into  and
         settlement in the United Kingdom, there is  a  material  difference
         between falsely adopting an identity that either does exist or once
         existed and adopting one that never existed.  If  that  distinction
         had merit, the fraudulent could  obtain  advantage  simply  by  the
         device of ensuring that they pretended to be  a  fictitious  person
         rather than pretending to be a  real  one.  In  my  judgment,  that
         cannot be right when what is at issue is the false claiming of  the
         attributes and the status. I am fortified in that view by the  fact
         that in Akhtar it was neither clear nor found  whether  the  person
         who the appellant claimed to be had ever existed or not,  and  that
         it was clear that the answer to the  question  made  no  difference
         (see the judgment of Templeman LJ at page 50F).  I  do  not  accept
         that Wilson LJ's observation in Bibi at paragraph 15, that  "it  is
         important therefore to distinguish between adoption of a  pseudonym
         from advancement of a false identity" is to contrary effect. It  is
         clear from reading the whole of that paragraph that what he had  in
         mind was distinguishing between simply the adoption of a pseudonym,
         which we are all entitled to  do,  and  the  adoption  of  a  false
         identity in the sense of false attributes. In other words,  if  all
         that were false in a given case was the name,  there  would  be  no
         nullity, but if what was false were material facts  or  attributes,
         that would be or might be a nullity ...'

52. The High Court identified the following propositions as  being  derived
    from the judgments relied upon by the parties, at [33]:

         (1)  where an application is made  for  the  grant  of  citizenship
         using fraud, false representation, or concealment of material fact,
         that may be treated as a nullity.

         (2)  whether, in the circumstances of an individual case, it should
         be treated as a nullity is a question of fact and degree.

         (3)  where person A with attributes  A  represents  himself  to  be
         person B with different attributes B and thereby obtains a grant to
         person B, the grant to A may be a nullity, in which case, the grant
         has and had no effect in law.

         (4)  where, however, the application is by A who has  attributes  A
         and the grant is to A who in fact has attributes B, the  grant  may
         remain effective or may be  a  nullity  depending  on  the  nature,
         quality and extent of the fraud, deception or concealment. This  is
         in fact illustrated by  the  facts  of  Arusha,  presently  pending
         before the relevant Immigration and  Asylum  Tribunals,  where  the
         defendant had in fact  accepted  the  validity  of  the  grant  but
         invoked the statutory deprivation procedure to  secure  removal  of
         citizenship.

         (5)  a grant of citizenship for the purposes of section 10  of  the
         1981 Act is intended to be made to the identity with the attributes
         in respect of which the application is made.

         (6)   identity  with  claimed  attributes  are  therefore  material
         averments.

         (7)  as a result,  when  person  A  with  attributes  A  represents
         himself to be person B with attributes  B  and  thereby  obtains  a
         grant to person B, the grant to A either is a nullity  in  law,  or
         alternatively  is  capable  of  being  treated  as  such   in   the
         circumstances by the Secretary of State.

53. The respondent adopted the  nullity  approach  just  described  to  the
    appellant, writing to him in February 2013 informing him that his grant
    of nationality was a nullity as he was not and never had been a British
    citizen because the grant  had  been  obtained  by  impersonation.  The
    appellant challenged the decision by judicial review and his claim  was
    linked with two others before the High Court: R. (on the application of
    Kaziu and Others) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
    EWHC 832 (Admin); [2015]  1  W.L.R.  945.  The  core  of  the  argument
    advanced on behalf of the claimants was that the admitted lies did  not
    mean that they had impersonated anyone. Impersonation was the test  for
    whether naturalisation was a nullity, rather than, as with other  lies,
    providing grounds for deprivation of nationality,  with  its  statutory
    right of appeal. The respondent relied, in part, upon the  judgment  in
    Kadria and Ouseley J noted at [38]:

         'Permission to appeal was refused at a hearing by Sullivan LJ, on a
         narrower basis than HHJ Gore's decision itself. He pointed  to  the
         "wholly false  identities"  assumed  in  name,  age,  adulthood  or
         minority, nationality "and a vital characteristic, that is to  say,
         as to whether they were refugees." This decision, [2011]  EWCA  Civ
         696, carries no authority. But the point made  by  Sullivan  LJ  at
         paragraph 7 summarises the impersonation  point  well  in  language
         which I adopt, because it reflects  my  own  thinking  as  to  what
         impersonation in this context amounts to:

             "The plain fact of the matter  is  that  citizenship  was  not
             given to two adult  Albanian  citizens,  Villion  and  Laurent
             Cakollari, who were born in 1978 and 1976 respectively; it was
             granted to Kosovan refugees who were called  Villion  Krasniqi
             and Rouland Kadria, who were minors born in 1981."'

54. Ouseley J addressed the judgment in Kadria, at [44]:

         'Although I agree with the result of HHJ Gore's judgment in  Kadria
         and Krasniqi, I consider that his approach was too broad, as to how
         in practice a case of nullification was to be distinguished from  a
         case  of  deprivation.  His  listed  factors  do  not  sufficiently
         distinguish between nullification and deprivation; the question  is
         not one of degree, nor of the nature, quality, extent or  frequency
         or circumstances of the deceit,  in  the  broad  way  he  suggests.
         Although he is right that it is the attributes of the person  which
         matter, those attributes have to be carefully defined;  it  is  not
         just any matter which can be described as an attribute of a  person
         or of his identity which matters in this context, since that  blurs
         or  removes  the  crucial  distinction  between  nullification  and
         deprivation.  For  example,  sexuality  may  be  core  to  personal
         identity in one sense, yet a false story of  sexuality  leading  to
         persecution does not go to identity for naturalisation purposes.'

55. As to the earlier authorities noted at paragraph 50  above,  Ouseley  J
    observed, at [70]-[71]:

         'I am also troubled by  the  fact  that  the  SSHD  can  inform  an
         individual that deprivation proceedings are  unlikely  although  he
         obtained his nationality by nullifying deceit, and then some  years
         later, at a time of her choosing,  and  not  subject  to  any  time
         limits such as those which would apply if she had to seek  judicial
         review, announce to him that he is not a British citizen, that  the
         grant she has made and the  certificate  he  holds  are  nullities,
         leaving him to take judicial review proceedings  to  challenge  the
         asserted ineffectiveness of a seemingly valid  document.  All  that
         had happened the while is made irrelevant to his position.  Without
         the earlier decisions, I would have  agreed  with  Mr  Knafler  and
         quashed the purported nullification.

         Nonetheless, I do not think that, on Mr Knafler's submission, I can
         distinguish the well-established  jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal, at least one case in which was decided after the  1981  Act
         so far as material assumed its present form. I cannot hold that the
         concept of a naturalisation void for impersonation  died  no  later
         than 2003. Those decisions also have an undeniable  force,  applied
         to the circumstances they considered, and I have sympathy with  the
         concept  that  it  is  objectionable  for   someone   who   obtains
         naturalisation as X to take advantage of it as Y,  to  be  able  to
         appeal against that truth being pointed out, and to ask a court  to
         exercise its discretion to give effect to such a fraud.'

56.  Ouseley J concluded as to the appellant in this matter, at [50]-[51]:

         'More difficult are the other two cases, since in Hysaj,  one,  and
         in Kaziu, two, of the crucial characteristics was correct. However,
         it seems to me that the three are interlocking  characteristics.  A
         false name but correct date of birth or nationality cannot identify
         the person who receives the grant as who he says he is. The correct
         name and date of birth cannot identify the application  as  who  he
         says he is if he gives the wrong nationality. Any of those  aspects
         may be irrelevant in the context of other applications, but  to  my
         mind in this  context  each  together  identifies  the  person  who
         applies for and receives the grant. It is  to  be  remembered  that
         these are  aspects  which  do  not  lead  to  nullification  unless
         material and given deceitfully.

         Accordingly,  Hysaj,  born  on  20   December   1977   of   Kosovan
         nationality, is not Hysaj, born on 20  December  1981  of  Albanian
         nationality. The grant was to the former and no grant has been made
         to the latter ...'

57. In reaching this conclusion, Ouseley J noted at [55] a problematic area
    regarding the effects of a finding of nullification upon others,  which
    had been avoided by pragmatic concessions made by the respondent:

         'There is a problematic area over the effect of  the  nullification
         of a person's nationality on those who have  acquired  nationality,
         whether  knowing  of  the  deceit  or  not,  deriving  from   their
         relationship  to  that  person.  The   parties'   agreed   position
         distinguishes the  effect  of  nullification  on  the  children  of
         Bakijasi, by registration and by birth, and the effect on  citizens
         by descent not requiring registration. There  appears  to  be  from
         Akhtar, Ejaz and Tohura Bibi a clear recognition that nullification
         should  not  be   extended   readily   to   nullifying   derivative
         citizenship. But there is no clear and logical dividing  line.  The
         decisions more obviously seek a  pragmatic  limit  to  the  logical
         effects of the nullification of citizenship on dependants.  Such  a
         pragmatic approach befits giving limited scope to nullification and
         a wide right of appeal in respect of deprivation. If  nullification
         survives, as I hold it does, this case by case pragmatism leads  to
         uncertainty in application of the concept  and  is  unsatisfactory.
         Either  nullification  of  one  citizenship  should   nullify   the
         citizenship  of  those  whose  citizenship  had  depended  on   its
         validity, or it  should  go  no  further  than  the  impersonator's
         citizenship. Half-way pragmatism, which may or may not apply  to  a
         given case, simply illustrates the difficulty of the concept.'

58. The claimants appealed and the Court  of  Appeal  (Kitchen,  Floyd  and
    Sales LJJ) held in R. (on  the  application  of  Kaziu  and  Others)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1195; [2016]
    1 W.L.R. 673, at [30], that the High Court had  been  right  to  regard
    itself bound by the decisions  in  Mahmood  and  Akhtar.  On  a  proper
    interpretation of the 1981 Act, an individual was not  entitled  to  be
    naturalised if he engaged in fraud of  such  seriousness  and  of  such
    centrality to the application being made as  to  wholly  undermine  the
    statutory process. Such fraud would keep him outside the  operation  of
    section 40 altogether. There was an  interpretive  presumption  that  a
    statute would not be given a construction which would enable a criminal
    to benefit from his crime. That presumption applied in relation to both
    the British Nationality Act 1948 and the 1981 Act.

59. Appellants in Kaziu and Others, including the appellant in this matter,
    filed notices and grounds of  appeal  with  the  Supreme  Court  on  24
    November 2016 and the respondent filed a  notice  of  objections  on  8
    December 2016. The Supreme Court granted permission  to  appeal  on  27
    February 2017. By notice dated 20 October 2017 the  respondent  applied
    to the Supreme Court  for  an  order  allowing  the  appeals  from  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal to dismiss the appeals  from  the  High
    Court and to set aside the orders made by  the  Court  of  Appeal.  The
    Supreme Court noted the respondent's reasoning and held in its judgment
    of Hysaj, at [16] - [20]:

         'Having reviewed the matter after permission to appeal was  granted
         in this case on 27 February 2017, the Secretary of State  has  come
         to the conclusion that the law took a wrong turning after  Mahmood.
         The Mahmood type of case involves two  real  people,  X  and  Y.  X
         impersonates Y for the purpose of applying for citizenship.  Y  has
         the characteristics required for citizenship. Y  is  considered  by
         the Secretary of State and is granted citizenship. But Y has  never
         applied for it, may not want it, or may  even  be  dead.  Thus,  it
         cannot be said that citizenship has been granted either to Y or  to
         X. Accordingly there was no grant of citizenship. Mahmood,  in  the
         Secretary of State's view, remains good law.

         By contrast, in the later cases, X uses a false identity created by
         him (or someone on his behalf) and in that identity he acquires the
         characteristics  needed  to  obtain  citizenship.  X  applies   for
         citizenship  using  the  false  identity  Y.  But   X   meets   the
         requirements for citizenship albeit having acquired them  by  using
         the false identity Y.  X  is  considered  for  citizenship  by  the
         Secretary of State in identity Y and is granted citizenship in that
         identity. In such a case, in the Secretary  of  State's  view,  the
         grant of citizenship is valid, albeit that the person may later  be
         deprived of it under section  40.  Ejaz  was  rightly  decided  but
         Akhtar and Bibi were wrongly decided.

         Those cases, and the Court of Appeal's decision in this case,  were
         based on the principle that there is a  category  of  fraud  as  to
         identity which is so serious that a purported grant of  citizenship
         is of no effect. But, argues the Secretary  of  State,  the  courts
         have not articulated any clear  or  principled  definition  of  the
         types  of  fraud  which  will  be  so  serious  as  to  have   this
         consequence. In the current cases, for example,  neither  appellant
         pretended to be someone he was not. Mr. Hysaj used  his  real  name
         but put forward a false date of birth,  nationality  and  place  of
         birth in gaining his ILR and gained citizenship on the basis of the
         ILR that he himself had obtained. Mr. Bakijasi used a false name in
         gaining his ILR but otherwise gained citizenship in the  same  way.
         Ouseley J held that the key characteristics of  identity  for  this
         purpose were the name,  date  of  birth,  and  nationality  or  the
         country and place of birth, because this was the information on the
         certificate. But he also held that there had to be fraud - innocent
         mistakes or misunderstandings were not enough (paras 46, 47).  Such
         uncertainty means that the law is difficult to apply in practice.

         It also has a number of illogical and unsatisfactory  consequences.
         Thus, it is not clear when the use of a false  identity  to  obtain
         citizenship by one person will lead to  the  nullification  of  the
         grant of citizenship to those making a derivative claim, whether as
         a spouse or child. It is not easy to  reconcile  Akhtar,  Ejaz  and
         Bibi. Logically, as Ouseley J pointed out in this  case  (para  55)
         either all derivative citizenship should be of  no  effect  if  the
         citizenship from which it is  derived  is  of  no  effect,  or  the
         nullity should be confined to the person who  obtained  citizenship
         using the false identity. As Ouseley J also pointed out  (para  69)
         the logic of the position then adopted by the  Secretary  of  State
         would also nullify the grant of ILR, but the Secretary of State has
         never contended for this.

         This court agrees  with  the  reasoning  now  put  forward  by  the
         Secretary of State. It follows that the decisions of the  Court  of
         Appeal in Akhtar and Bibi must be overruled and  that  this  appeal
         must  be  allowed  by  consent  in  terms  of  the  detailed  order
         proposed.'

60. The Supreme Court confirmed the law as to deprivation and nullity as it
    has always been, acknowledging that the correct identification  of  the
    law by the courts had taken a  wrong  turn  from  the  case  of  Akhtar
    onwards. Ms. Naik correctly observes that the nullity decision taken in
    this matter on 13 February 2013  was  unlawful  from  the  outset.  She
    proceeds to assert that by this fact  alone,  significantly  diminished
    weight should be attached to the public interest in deprivation because
    the respondent cannot rely on the application  of  an  erroneous  legal
    doctrine in order to justify delay.

61. We are satisfied that the adoption of such an  approach  to  limit  the
    application  of  the  public  interest  based   on   delay   alone   is
    unsustainable as it seeks to deny any true engagement  with  the  facts
    that arise. The respondent was clearly permitted  to  rely  upon  legal
    advice. The starting point  in  any  consideration  undertaken  by  the
    respondent  as  to  whether  to  deprive  the  appellant   of   British
    citizenship must be made by reference to the rules and policy in  force
    at the time the decision was taken, and  such  rules  and  policy  will
    abide with  relevant  precedent,  as  understood.  The  respondent  was
    entitled to rely upon the then favourable judgment in Kadria from which
    permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been  subsequently
    refused at an oral hearing, and indeed did so rely before both the High
    Court and the Court of Appeal. Though Akhtar and  subsequent  Court  of
    Appeal judgments that relied  upon  it  cannot,  with  the  benefit  of
    hindsight post- the Supreme Court judgment in Hysaj, be  considered  to
    have finally and definitively settled the law the  respondent  and  her
    legal advisors were entitled to observe the application of the doctrine
    of precedent. The respondent needs  to  have  means  of  assessing  the
    legality of her actions at a particular time, in order to know what her
    legal duty is. Rule of law values indicate that the  respondent  should
    be entitled to take advice and act in light of the circumstances  known
    to her, and the state of the law, as then known: R. (on the application
    of MH) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWHC  2506
    (Admin), per Sales J, at [105]; approved Fardous v. Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 931, at [42]  per  Lord  Thomas
    CJ. When  defending  her  decision  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  the
    respondent  was  reasonably  permitted  to  place  reliance  upon   the
    principle that the Court of Appeal is obliged  to  follow  one  of  its
    previous decisions  unless  specific  exceptions  arise,  such  as  the
    judgment being per incuriam: Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd  [1946]
    AC 163.

62. Ms. Naik is critical of the respondent for having  filed  a  notice  of
    objections some two weeks after  the  appellant  filed  his  notice  of
    appeal with the Supreme Court. We find that the respondent was entitled
    to protect her position and seek to secure  appropriate  legal  advice,
    which ultimately resulted in her making an application under rule 34(2)
    of the Supreme Court Rules  2009  for  the  appellant's  appeal  to  be
    allowed by consent.

63. We are satisfied that whilst the respondent had knowledge of the  fraud
    in 2007 and a decision to deprive under section 40(3) was only taken in
    2018, such delay did  not  arise  from  illegality  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent nor did  it  arise  from  a  dysfunctional  system  yielding
    unpredictable and inconsistent outcomes. In the circumstances,  we  are
    satisfied that the Judge's  consideration  of  delay  at  [74]  of  her
    decision was appropriate and contains no error of law.

Legitimate expectation

64. Since the date the appellant's wife submitted her application for entry
    clearance in the summer of 2007  there  have  been  eight  versions  of
    Chapter 55 of the Nationality Instructions. The appellant  reached  his
    fourteenth year of residence in this country on 7  July  2012.  At  all
    relevant times, the relevant instructions were as follows:

         '55.  7  Caseworker  Decisions   -   Completing   the   Deprivation
             Questionnaire

         55.7.1  Following receipt of any  information  requested  from  the
              deprivation subject the caseworker, in order  to  deprive  of
              citizenship,  must  be  satisfied  that  the   fraud,   false
              representation or concealment of material fact  was  material
              to the acquisition of citizenship (55.7.2) and that the fraud
              was deliberate (55.7.3) ...

         ...

         55.7.2.5 In general the Secretary of  State  will  not  deprive  of
              British citizenship in the following circumstances:

                  ...

                   . If a person has been resident in the United Kingdom for
                     more than 14 years we  will  not  normally  deprive  of
                     citizenship

                  ...

                  However, where it is in the  public  interest  to  deprive
                  despite the  presence  of  these  factors  they  will  not
                  prevent deprivation.

65. The appellant posits that he had  a  legitimate  expectation  that  the
    respondent would consider deprivation  in  line  with  the  'clear  and
    unambiguous' 14-year policy expressed in Chapter 55 and  that  'nothing
    in the policy  suggests  its  disapplication  to  him'  on  the  facts.
    Legitimate expectation protects  certain  expectations  by  identifying
    action which is procedurally or substantively unfair and underpins good
    administration.  Such  expectation,  though   not   amounting   to   an
    enforceable legal right, is founded on a reasonable assumption which is
    capable of being protected in public law. The appellant's case is  that
    the  respondent's  decision  deprived  him  of  a  reasonably   founded
    expectation that his claim would be dealt with in a particular way.

66. There is no specified period within which an immigration decision, or a
    decision to deprive, must be made and a decision to deprive a person of
    their British citizenship, as for any  immigration  decision,  must  be
    made by reference to the rules and policy in force at the  time  it  is
    made, and not by reference to some earlier law and policy: EB  (Kosovo)
    v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41; [2009]  1
    A.C. 1159, at [13]. The respondent  is  responsible  for  deciding  and
    formulating policy as to the practice to be followed in  naturalisation
    and deprivation matters and enjoys discretion to reformulate policy, so
    long as such reformulation is within  the  constraints  which  the  law
    imposes. The appellant did not contend before us  that  the  respondent
    could not amend her policy to remove reference to the 14-year residence
    exception to deprivation.

67. Lord Hoffman  confirmed  in  R  (on  the  application  of  Bancoult)  v
    Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2008] UKHL 61;
    [2009] 1 A.C. 453, at [60], that a claim to  a  legitimate  expectation
    can be based only upon a  promise  which  is  'clear,  unambiguous  and
    devoid of relevant qualification.' We observe the use of the qualifying
    words 'in  general'  and  'normally'  within  Chapter  55.7.2.5  [later
    renumbered Chapter 55.7.5] and the additional  qualification  that  the
    public interest may still require deprivation even  if  the  identified
    circumstances militating against deprivation are  established.  We  are
    satisfied that  the  provisions  in  Chapter  55  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant do not establish a clear  and  unambiguous  promise  that  by
    reaching the fourteenth year of residence a person will not be deprived
    of their citizenship because it is clear that the respondent  qualified
    the identified exceptions where deprivation will not normally occur  so
    as to permit her to weigh the public interest in proceeding to  deprive
    with the individual facts  arising.  The  only  legitimate  expectation
    enjoyed by  the  appellant  is  that  his  case  would  be  treated  in
    accordance with the law and policy in place at the  time  the  relevant
    decision was made. Consequently, the  appellant's  submission  that  he
    enjoyed a legitimate expectation to be  treated  in  a  particular  way
    under an earlier policy must fail.

Historic injustice

68. The appellant submits that the Judge erred by  failing  to  correct  an
    historic injustice arising in this matter from the  respondent's  delay
    in making a decision. Such delay  is  said  to  have  resulted  in  the
    appellant being denied the opportunity to  benefit  from  the  guidance
    previously in place under  Chapter  55.7.2.5  [later  Chapter  55.7.5].
    Reliance is placed upon the judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  EB
    (Kosovo), at [16]:

         'Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the  weight  otherwise
         to be accorded to the requirements of  firm  and  fair  immigration
         control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a  dysfunctional
         system  which  yields  unpredictable,   inconsistent   and   unfair
         outcomes.'

69. Ms. Naik submitted that the loss of an  opportunity  to  be  considered
    under the earlier, more favourable, instructions in circumstances where
    there  were  very  compelling  features  that  meant  the  respondent's
    discretion should have been exercised in his favour, is a  factor  that
    the respondent and the Tribunal are required  to  engage  with  as  the
    impact of historic injustice is a relevant factor  when  assessing  the
    public interest in depriving citizenship.

70. Where there is an interference with family or private  life  sufficient
    to engage article 8(1), recognition that someone has been the victim of
    a 'historic injustice' may well  be  relevant,  in  some  cases  highly
    relevant, when the proportionality of that interference  is  considered
    under article 8(2) but first it must be shown that there is  family  or
    private life for the purposes of article 8, and that  the  interference
    with it (or lack of respect for it) is sufficiently serious  to  engage
    the potential operation of article 8:  JB  (India)  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2009] EWCA Civ  234.  An  example  of  the  identification  of
    historic injustice is the less favourable treatment to Gurkha  veterans
    with other comparable non-British Commonwealth  veterans  as  to  their
    entitlement to settle in this country prior to October 2004: R  (Limbu)
    v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin);
    R. (on the application of Gurung) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8; [2013] 1 W.L.R. 2546.

71. The enhancement of claims  by  reliance  upon  historic  injustice  was
    considered by the Supreme Court in TN  (Afghanistan)  v.  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department2015] UKSC 40; [2015] 1 W.L.R. 3083  where
    it examined Court of Appeal case-law as to the circumstances  in  which
    the 'Ravichandran' principle that asylum appeals should  be  determined
    by reference to the position at  the  time  of  the  appeal  should  be
    displaced. The Supreme Court  held  that  the  approach  adopted  in  R
    (Rashid) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ
    744; [2005] Imm. A.R. 608 was wrong  where  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    considered there had been an historic failure  to  apply  a  favourable
    policy and the unfairness of such  failure  amounted  to  an  abuse  of
    process that permitted a court to correct the injustice by declaring an
    entitlement to leave to remain, even though at the date of decision the
    person no longer satisfied the criteria as a result of the invasion  of
    Iraq by coalition forces and the removal of  Saddam  Hussein's  regime.
    Lord Toulson JSC, giving the unanimous judgment  in  TN  (Afghanistan),
    confirmed that the respondent could not be compelled to grant leave  to
    a person who would not be entitled to leave under current  policy,  and
    held at [72]:

         'Discretionary leave by definition involves a discretion, but it is
         a discretion which belongs to the respondent and not to the  court.
         The respondent must of course  exercise  her  discretion  lawfully,
         with proper regard to any policy which she has established,  but  I
         agree with Sir Stanley Burnton that it is not proper for a court to
         require the respondent to grant unconditional leave to an appellant
         who would not be entitled to such relief under current  policy  (or
         have a current right to remain in the UK on other grounds, such  as
         article 8 ), as a form of relief for an earlier error or breach  of
         obligation.'

72. Though the Supreme Court significantly curtailed the ability of a court
    to correct historic injustice, expressly in asylum claims, it  did  not
    extinguish it. Dyson LJ (as he then was)  confirmed  in  Mousasaoui  v.
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 50 that  the
    establishment of historic injustice requires prior illegality and there
    is a significant distinction between illegality and maladministration.

73. Prior illegality requires more than a  mere  unlawful  decision  having
    been taken at some stage in the past. There must be  sufficient  causal
    connection  between  the  alleged  historic  injustice  caused  by  the
    illegality and the alleged prejudice caused by the decision to  justify
    the intervention of a court or tribunal. A judge must be perceptive  as
    to efforts seeking to elevate an unfavourable  previous  decision  into
    one that establishes such grave injustice  as  to  be  illegal.  In  RS
    (Afghanistan) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
    Civ 1179 Stanley Burnton LJ observed, at [16]:

         '... [T]he appellant seeks to elevate the significance of the error
         of the First-tier Tribunal by calling it "historic". The  error  of
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  no  more  than  a  regrettable  but
         unexceptional incident of litigation: an error of law made  by  the
         Tribunal. The duty of the  Tribunal  is  to  determine  the  appeal
         before it on the facts and circumstances as they are at the date of
         the hearing (assuming there is no significant  change  between  the
         date  of  the  hearing  and  the  determination).   Saving   highly
         exceptional cases, I can see no basis for the Upper Tribunal having
         to consider, on a speculative basis, what might have occurred if  a
         different decision had been made at an earlier stage.'

74. The appellant seeks the intervention of the Tribunal  to  disapply  the
    policy existing at  the  date  of  the  decision  and  to  require  the
    respondent to exercise her discretion in  accordance  with  an  earlier
    policy. He seeks to  disabuse  the  usual  rule  that  immigration  and
    nationality decisions are made according to the law and policy in force
    at the time the decision is taken. We have  explained  above  that  the
    respondent did not unlawfully delay in making  her  decision  and  that
    though in hindsight she erred in relying upon the nullity doctrine  she
    was entitled to rely upon  legal  advice.  She  could  reasonably,  and
    therefore lawfully, rely upon the High Court  judgment  in  Kadria,  as
    well as previous Court of Appeal  precedent  as  generally  understood.
    Reliance upon existing case-law cannot be categorised as illegality  in
    this matter. The respondent was under no obligation to make a  decision
    between 7 July 2012 and 20 August 2014, when the policy was  withdrawn,
    and if there was an obligation to make a deprivation decision within  a
    reasonable period of time, the failure to do so does not  establish  an
    illegal abuse of discretion. Even at their highest, and  being  mindful
    of the significant public interest in deprivation where citizenship has
    been obtained by fraud, the circumstances arising in  this  matter  are
    not such that illegality was so obvious, and the remedy so plain,  that
    there was only one way in which the respondent  could  have  reasonably
    exercised her discretion when considering deprivation.

75. Though the respondent erred in law by initially deciding that the grant
    of citizenship to the appellant was a  nullity,  the  appellant  cannot
    establish that a decision to deprive under section  40(3)  should  have
    been taken under a specific policy within a certain period of time.  He
    is therefore unable to substantiate the alleged prejudice.  Rather,  he
    has benefited from the delay, being  able  to  continue  to  enjoy  the
    benefits of his fraudulently obtained British citizenship from 2007  to
    the present time,  including  his  present  ability  to  work  in  this
    country. We are satisfied that no historic  injustice  arises  in  this
    matter and this ground of appeal must fail.

76. The appellant sought to rely upon decisions said to have been  made  by
    the  respondent  in  matters  that  formed  the  'Deliallisi   cohort'.
    Evidentially, the appellant advanced this argument through a series  of
    questions to Ms. Grundy and Ms. Johnstone. We were informed that eleven
    appeals were listed and heard together  at  Hatton  Cross  in  December
    2011. Ms. Grundy informed us that two of the appeals were  conceded  by
    the respondent by reference to the 14-year policy that was in force  at
    the  time.  Following  the  dismissal  of  the  other   nine   appeals,
    deprivation orders were issued to the remaining nine  appellants,  each
    of whom was subsequently granted leave to remain on  article  8  family
    life grounds. Ms. Grundy understood that no criminal convictions  arose
    in that cohort and she was not aware of any deportation  considerations
    arising. Though the witnesses sought to aid the Tribunal, they were not
    personally involved in the cohort appeals and we accept that there  are
    practical difficulties in seeking to establish a detailed understanding
    of several linked appeals heard  some  eight  years  ago.  The  limited
    information provided as to the cohort, where  no  criminal  convictions
    were considered, does not establish  that  the  respondent  would  have
    exercised her discretion in the appellant's favour  under  the  14-year
    exception. Further, for the reasons detailed above, the respondent  was
    not required to make a  section  40(3)  deprivation  decision  under  a
    specific policy within a  certain  period  of  time  and  so  decisions
    arising in the Deliallisi cohort do not aid the appellant.

Substantive unfairness

77. The appellant asserts that substantive unfairness arises in this matter
    because 'he can point to others in the same position as himself to whom
    the policy was similarly applied'.

78. The failure to be considered under an earlier policy that the appellant
    perceives to have been more favourable to him does  not  amount  to  an
    abuse of power by the respondent.

79. Consistency is a generally desirable objective,  but  not  an  absolute
    rule: R (O'Brien) v. Independent Assessor [2007] 2  AC  312,  per  Lord
    Bingham, at [30]. The Supreme Court held in R (Gallaher Group  Ltd  and
    others) v. The Competition and Markets Authority [2018] UKSC 25; [2019]
    A.C. 96, at [26]-[29] that whilst domestic law does not recognise equal
    treatment as a distinct principle of administrative law it may arise as
    an aspect of rationality. Lord Sumption JSC said, at [50]:

         '... to say that the result of the decision must  be  substantively
         fair, or at least not 'conspicuously' unfair, begs the question  by
         what legal standard the fairness of the decision is to be assessed.
         Absent a legitimate expectation of a different result arising  from
         the decision-maker's statements or conduct,  a  decision  which  is
         rationally based on relevant considerations is most unlikely to  be
         unfair in any legally cognisable sense. ...'

80. The substantive unfairness argument is based upon the  appellant  being
    treated by the respondent as a 'nullity' case, whilst others were being
    dealt with differently and, the appellant asserts, more favourably.  As
    we have already held, the respondent was entitled to  rely  upon  legal
    advice that was based upon an understanding of the law post-Mahmood and
    the favourable judgment of the High  Court  in  Kadria  concerning  the
    application of the nullity  doctrine  to  Albanian  nationals  who  had
    identified themselves as 'Kosovan' when seeking to secure international
    protection  and  again  when  applying  to  naturalise.  In   all   the
    circumstances of this case, having already found that the appellant was
    not subjected to unlawful delay in the consideration of his  matter  or
    that  he  enjoyed  a  legitimate  expectation  for  his  matter  to  be
    considered at a certain time and in a  particular  way,  we  find  that
    there was no unfairness in the appellant's matter not being  considered
    under Chapter 55 between 7 July 2012 and 20 August 2014. The  appellant
    is wholly unable to establish that he was subjected to such  unfairness
    as to amount to irrationality.

Disapplication of the policy - Appellant's criminal conviction

81. By her July 2018 decision, the  respondent  addressed  the  appellant's
    contention that he should benefit from the 14-year residence  exception
    under an earlier policy and observed  that  the  exception  was  not  a
    guarantee that the appellant's circumstances were such that a  decision
    to deprive would not have been made. The letter detailed, inter alia:

         'At the time your client's deception had been discovered  in  2007,
         your client had not been present in the UK for more than 14  years.
         Furthermore, it is noted that your client was sentenced to 5  years
         in prison on 20/05/2011. At that time, given he had  less  than  14
         years residence, applying the principle of discounting  periods  of
         imprisonment from the residence  calculation  for  long  residence,
         your client would not have been considered to have accrued 14 years
         residence until significantly later than  2014  when  the  14  year
         concession in the nationality guidance was withdrawn. As such,  the
         assertion that your client should now benefit from this  concession
         is not accepted.'

82. The appellant complains that the respondent  seeks  retrospectively  to
    interpret the 14-year exception as requiring  continuity  of  residence
    before it can bite because she was required to be  consistent  with  an
    entirely  different  policy  concerned  with  ILR.  Consequent  to  our
    findings above, this issue is academic because the appellant is  unable
    lawfully to rely upon the earlier policy or establish that  his  matter
    should have been considered at a particular point in time. However,  we
    are  mindful  that  guidance  from  a  Presidential   panel   may   aid
    consideration of related appeals, and note the evidence of  Ms.  Grundy
    that the 14-year exception in Chapter 55 was developed in line with the
    long-residence  concession  to  be  found  at  paragraph  276A  of  the
    Immigration Rules. It was introduced to  ensure  consistency  with  the
    respondent's policy on ILR, so that a person who would benefit from the
    long residence exemption if they were not a British citizen, would  not
    ordinarily  be  deprived  of  their  citizenship.  Chapter  55   itself
    specifically  refers  to  the  14-year  exception  in  terms  of  'long
    residence':

         '55.7.2.6 Deprivation on fraud  grounds  regardless  of  length  of
              residence

                  Although the Secretary of State will not normally  deprive
                  someone of their British citizenship where they have  more
                  than 14  years  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  (long
                  residence), circumstances in which the Secretary of  State
                  may  still  proceed  to  deprive  of  British  citizenship
                  include ...'

83. The existence of such link can be also  observed  by  the  respondent's
    Nationality Notice 8/14, dated 17 July 2014, that details, inter alia:

          1. It was previously the  policy  that  a  person  who  had  been
             resident in the United Kingdom for a period of 14 years  would
             not normally be  deprived  of  British  citizenship  on  fraud
             grounds, although guidance set out exceptions  to  this.  This
             policy was originally based  on  the  14-year  long  residence
             rule, which ended in July 2012.

          2. It  has  now  been  agreed  at  Ministerial  level  that  long
             residence in the UK  alone  should  no  longer  be  a  bar  to
             deprivation on fraud grounds.

84. Paragraph 276A(a)(iv) of the Rules expressly confirmed at the  date  of
    the appellant's conviction in 2011, and continues to so  confirm,  that
    the continuous residence requirement of the long residence  rule  shall
    be considered to have been broken if an applicant has been convicted of
    an offence and was sentenced to a period of imprisonment, provided that
    the sentence in question was not a suspended sentence.  Time  spent  in
    prison is therefore considered a technical absence for the  purpose  of
    residence.

85. The respondent expressly referred to current policy in her decision  of
    July 2018, noting confirmation at paragraph 55.7.6 of  Chapter  55  (in
    force from 27 July 2017)  that  'length  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom alone will not normally be a reason not to deprive a person  of
    their citizenship'. Her consideration as to the application of the  14-
    year exception was an alternative to  her  primary  position  that  the
    matter had to be considered in light of the law and  policy  applicable
    at the date of decision.

86. We are satisfied that  as  to  the  14-year  residence  exception,  the
    respondent was permitted  to  conclude  in  the  alternative  that  the
    appellant enjoyed no benefit from it because she lawfully  adopted  the
    linked  continuous  residence  requirement  for  long  residence   when
    undertaking her assessment, and such continuous residence was broken by
    the appellant's custodial sentence.

87. In the circumstances, we are satisfied that the  Judge's  consideration
    at [74] of her decision was appropriate and contains no error of law.

Other  matters  arising  from  the  appellant's  United   Kingdom   criminal
conviction

88. At paragraphs 68 to 70 of the  appellant's  skeleton  argument,  it  is
    asserted that the appellant's United Kingdom criminal conviction cannot
    play a part in whether the respondent decides to deprive under  section
    40(3). With respect, that cannot be right.  Such  a  consideration  may
    legitimately inform her decision whether to invoke  section  40(3).  So
    far as article 8 is concerned, it  is  a  factor  that  is  capable  of
    increasing  the  weight  to  the  public  interest  in   depriving   of
    citizenship a person who, whilst in the United Kingdom as a  result  of
    abusing its citizenship laws, commits a criminal offence.

Failure to determine the appellant's  status  on  deprivation  in  order  to
determine the proportionality of deprivation

89. The appellant relies upon the judgment of Leggatt LJ in KV (Sri Lanka),
    at [19]-[20] and asserts that as, immediately upon deprivation, he will
    be left with no status he will therefore be in a worse position than he
    was immediately prior to naturalisation, when he enjoyed ILR.

90. The  respondent  accepts  that  the  Judge  did  not  engage  with  the
    appellant's request that a finding be made, as a preliminary issue,  as
    to whether he would be left without any leave pending a decision on the
    respondent's part as to whether to deport him. Mr. Palmer  QC  contends
    that such failure is a non-material error of law as ultimately it  made
    no difference to the outcome.

91. Unlike in Deliallisi where the respondent confirmed that in  the  event
    that directions were not given for the removal  of  the  appellant,  he
    would be assigned leave to remain in this country with effect from  the
    date of the commencement  of  the  deprivation  order,  the  respondent
    accepts in this  matter  that  the  appellant  will  not  enjoy  status
    immediately upon being deprived of his British citizenship because  the
    respondent intends to take time to consider whether to deport or  grant
    a limited form of leave. By means of her  decision  of  July  2018  the
    respondent informed the appellant:

         'In order to provide clarity regarding the period between  loss  of
         citizenship via service of a  deprivation  order  and  the  further
         decision to remove, deport or grant leave, the Secretary  of  State
         notes this period will be relatively short:

              . A deprivation order will be made within four weeks of  your
                client's appeal  rights  being  exhausted,  or  receipt  of
                written confirmation from you that  your  client  will  not
                appeal this decision, whichever is the sooner.

              . Within eight weeks from the deprivation order  being  made,
                subject to any representations  your  client  may  make,  a
                further decision will be made either to remove him from the
                United Kingdom, commence deportation action (only  if  your
                client has less than 18 months of a custodial  sentence  to
                serve or has already been released from prison),  or  issue
                leave.'

92. Though he was recognised as a refugee on a false understanding  of  his
    true history by the United Kingdom authorities, the appellant never met
    the requirements of article 1(2) of the 1951 UN Convention Relating  to
    the Status of Refugees ('the 1951 Convention')  and  so  never  enjoyed
    Convention status as it is a surrogate international  status  and  only
    enjoyed if article 1(2) is satisfied.

93. Further, in deprivation matters, where refugee status was granted on  a
    true understanding  of  relevant  facts,  the  subsequent  securing  of
    British citizenship brings  into  operation  the  second  paragraph  of
    article 1A(2) that provides if a person has more than one  nationality,
    the term 'country of his nationality' shall mean each of the  countries
    of which he is a  national.  This  is  consistent  with  the  surrogacy
    principle. If a recognised refugee acquires British  citizenship,  then
    by operation of article 1C(3), his Convention status ceases because  he
    enjoys the protection of the country of his new nationality.  Paragraph
    132 of the UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and  Criteria  for  Determining
    Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating
    to the Status  of  Refugees  details  that  where  refugee  status  has
    terminated through the acquisition of a new nationality, and  such  new
    nationality has been lost, depending on the circumstances of such loss,
    refugee status may be revived. However, revival is  not  automatic  and
    therefore must be applied for. In the appellant's matter  it  is  clear
    that the original claim for international  protection  was  made  on  a
    false basis and he could never meet the requirements of article  1A(2).
    Even if he wished to seek to 'revive' his former status  based  on  his
    original claim it would be an application devoid of merit.

94. The cessation provision of article 1C(3)  of  the  1951  Convention  is
    mirrored  by  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  of  29  April  2004,  the
    Qualification Directive, at article 11(1)(c) and  has  been  transposed
    into domestic law by paragraph 339A(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

95.  The  Tribunal  confirmed  in  Deliallisi,  at  [43]-[53],  that   upon
    deprivation a foreign national does not continue to enjoy ILR which had
    been granted prior to acquiring citizenship. The power to  grant  leave
    to enter or remain under section 3 of the Immigration  Act  1971  ('the
    1971 Act') is limited to those persons subject to immigration  control.
    ILR is a status enjoyed by persons who do not possess a right of  abode
    in this country and so it simply ceases upon  a  recipient  becoming  a
    person to whom section  1(1)  of  the  1971  Act  applies.  Whilst  the
    respondent enjoys discretion to grant ILR consequent to deprivation, we
    are satisfied that there is no process  in  place  by  which  automatic
    revival  of  such  status  can  occur  upon  deprivation   of   British
    citizenship. The leave system is a  permissive  system  of  immigration
    control and revival is a significant and far  reaching  legal  concept,
    particularly as to settled  status,  that  requires  express  statutory
    provision that it be intended. There is no revival of  previously  held
    ILR status upon deprivation.

96. Some weeks  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  applicant's
    solicitors wrote to the  Government  Legal  Department  ('GLD')  on  10
    February 2020 and brought to the respondent's attention  an  anonymised
    consent order, which was attached to the letter. No written submissions
    from Ms. Naik or Ms. Foot accompanied the letter. As  for  the  consent
    order itself, the claim number, the name of the applicant, the firm  of
    solicitors, signatures, the date of the order and  details  present  on
    various Upper Tribunal seals are redacted. The preamble details:

         'Upon the respondent declaring on [redacted] that the applicant has
         reverted back to having indefinite leave to  remain  following  the
         deprivation of [redacted] British citizenship'

97. The GLD responded by way of a letter sent to  the  Tribunal,  dated  12
    February  2020.  Reference  is  made  to  Ms.  Grundy's  third  witness
    statement where she  confirmed  that  she  had  no  recollection  of  a
    concession having been made in judicial review litigation that a person
    deprived of their British citizenship reverted  back  to  enjoying  ILR
    following such deprivation, but qualified this statement  by  observing
    that she could not be certain about this because to be sure as to  what
    has happened in every individual case over the previous six years would
    require each and every litigated case to be checked and this  would  be
    'a huge task'.

98. We note that beyond the limited contents of the letter of  10  February
    2020, no submissions are made on behalf of  the  appellant  as  to  the
    declaration detailed in the consent order positively impacting upon any
    consideration  in  this  matter.  The  respondent  asserts   that   the
    declaration was wrongly given. We confirm that  an  unreasoned  consent
    order of this kind  does  not  displace  the  authority  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's judgment on this point in Deliallisi.

99. Ms. Naik posited that the loss of 'any immigration  status  in  and  of
    itself, combined with the practical consequences for the appellant  and
    his  family,  renders   deprivation   disproportionate   in   all   the
    circumstances.'

100. We are satisfied that the judgment in KV (Sri Lanka) does not  aid  the
    appellant. Leggatt LJ was specifically looking at the  loss  of  rights
    previously enjoyed prior to securing British citizenship, not the  loss
    of status. The Court was considering the position of someone who  would
    become stateless upon deprivation, having automatically ceased to enjoy
    his original  nationality  upon  being  voluntarily  naturalised  as  a
    British citizen through  the  mechanics  of  legislation  in  his  home
    country. This is a discrete legal consequence that occurred  consequent
    to the grant of citizenship. In  this  matter,  upon  deprivation,  the
    appellant will continue to be an Albanian national, his  children  will
    continue to be British citizens  and  his  wife  will  be  an  Albanian
    national enjoying limited leave to remain in this country. As  for  his
    own status as an Albanian national he continues  to  enjoy  the  rights
    that are entailed with such citizenship.   Consequently,  the  loss  of
    immigration status  does  not  in  and  of  itself  render  deprivation
    disproportionate.

101. This ground of appeal is linked to that concerned with 'limbo'  and  we
    proceed to consider that issue to identify whether the Judge's error of
    law was material to the outcome of this appeal.

'Limbo' - the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation

102. In her decision letter the respondent confirms that within eight  weeks
    of the deprivation order being made,  subject  to  any  representations
    received,  a  decision  will  be  made  as  to  whether   to   commence
    deportation, seek to remove or  grant  limited  leave  to  remain.  Mr.
    Palmer informed the Tribunal that the respondent would seek to minimise
    any  period  of  disruption  by  issuing  a  notice  of  liability   to
    deportation immediately after the deprivation order is made and that it
    is anticipated the respondent will be able to make  a  decision  within
    six weeks from representations being received,  assuming  a  protection
    claim is not lodged. We were further informed that if, in light of  the
    representations being received, no deportation decision was taken, then
    it is likely that the appellant would be  granted  a  short  period  of
    leave barring any change of circumstances.

103.  Ms.  Naik  asserted  that  in  assessing  the  reasonably  foreseeable
    consequences  of  deprivation  for  the  purposes  of   assessing   the
    appellant's  article  8  rights,  and  those  of  his  British  citizen
    children, the  Judge  limited  her  consideration  to  whether  or  not
    ultimately the appellant would be deported or granted leave  to  remain
    in this country. Ms. Naik submitted that  the  Judge  was  required  to
    consider  a  certain  consequence  of  deprivation,  namely  that   the
    appellant would be left with no leave to remain and therefore would  be
    unable to work in order to provide financial support  for  his  family.
    Ms. Naik observed that the appellant would be unable to lawfully  drive
    a vehicle, access certain benefits, or rent property in his  own  name.
    The family's rent would be at risk of being  unpaid  resulting  in  the
    family  becoming  homeless,  or  at  least   reliant   upon   temporary
    accommodation and public funds. Ms. Naik submits that  the  appellant's
    historic fraud, and any claimed public interest  in  deprivation  as  a
    result of such fraud, is not such as to outweigh  the  children's  best
    interests and they will be adversely affected by  the  consequences  of
    their father's deprivation. She  further  submits  that  the  appellant
    being placed in a state of 'limbo', or stasis, is such as to amount  to
    a breach of both his and his family's article 8 rights.

104. The respondent acknowledges that for a period  of  time  the  appellant
    will be in this country without any leave and so will be unable to work
    or have recourse to public funds. However, it  is  not  her  policy  to
    grant leave to persons in such a situation simply in order for them  to
    continue living as before pending a decision or a subsequent outcome on
    appeal. The respondent contends that to grant individuals such  as  the
    appellant a limited period of leave until  a  further  decision  as  to
    leave to remain or deportation is reached would  give  this  cohort  of
    individuals beneficial treatment over and above others who  equally  do
    not have a right to remain in  this  country,  but  who  did  not  take
    fraudulent steps to obtain leave, still less citizenship. Further,  the
    respondent observes that it would  be  wholly  contradictory  to  grant
    leave to remain to an individual on article 8 grounds while at the same
    time considering whether to deport him, a decision which could only  be
    made having concluded that the public interest in deportation outweighs
    any interference with the article 8 right to respect  for  private  and
    family life.

105. 'Limbo' is convenient shorthand for the  appellant's  concern  that  he
    faces an uncertain period awaiting a decision. Though  he  has  enjoyed
    lawful presence in this country for many years through his fraud, he is
    being returned to the position he would have been in at  the  time  the
    respondent considered his application for international  protection  if
    he had been truthful as to his personal history. He has no identifiable
    claim for international protection and his wish is to  remain  here  on
    the basis of established private and family life rights.  There  is  no
    requirement that he enjoy temporary leave whilst a decision is made  on
    possible deportation action.

106. We are satisfied in this matter that the short  time-period  identified
    by the respondent within which the appellant will be required  to  make
    representations and for a decision to deport or a  grant  of  leave  to
    then be made cannot require the grant of leave to  remain  pending  the
    respondent's ultimate decision as to deportation.

107. The appellant's articulated concern is that deprivation will  adversely
    impact upon not only his life, but also that of his wife and  children.
    He contends that  the  expected  'upheaval'  in  their  lives  will  be
    accompanied by financial and emotional concerns.  Such  upheaval  is  a
    consequence of the appellant losing rights and  entitlements  from  his
    British citizenship that he should never have enjoyed.

108. The Court of Appeal has confirmed that article 8 does  not  impose  any
    obligation upon the State to provide financial support for family life.
    The ECHR is not aimed at securing social and economic rights, with  the
    rights defined being predominantly civil and political  in  nature:  R.
    (on the application of SC) v Secretary of State for Work  and  Pensions
    [2019] EWCA Civ 615; [2019] 1 W.L.R. 5687, at [28]-[38]. The  State  is
    not required to grant leave to an individual so that they can work  and
    provide their family with material support.

109. The time period between deprivation and the issuing of  a  decision  is
    identified by the respondent as  being  between  six  to  eight  weeks.
    During such time  the  appellant's  wife  is  permitted  to  work.  She
    accepted before us  that  she  could  seek  employment.  She  expressed
    concern as to the impact her limited English language skills  may  have
    on securing employment but confirmed that she  could  secure  unskilled
    employment. She confirmed that her husband could  remain  at  home  and
    look after their children. The appellant  accepted  that  his  wife  is
    named on the joint tenancy and will continue to  be  able  to  lawfully
    rent their home upon his loss of citizenship and status.  In  addition,
    the children can access certain benefits through their citizenship. Two
    safety nets exist  for  the  family.  If  there  is  an  immediate  and
    significant downturn in the family's finances such as  to  impact  upon
    the health and development of the children, they can seek support under
    section 17 of the Children Act 1989. If the family become destitute, or
    there are particularly compelling reasons relating to  the  welfare  of
    the children on account of very low income, the  appellant's  wife  may
    apply for a change to her No Recourse to Public Funds (NRPF) condition.



110. There is a heavy weight to  be  placed  upon  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the integrity of the system by which foreign nationals  are
    naturalised and permitted to enjoy the benefits of British citizenship.
    That  deprivation  will  cause  disruption  in  day-to-day  life  is  a
    consequence of the appellant's own actions and without  more,  such  as
    the  loss  of  rights  previously  enjoyed,  cannot  possibly  tip  the
    proportionality balance in favour of  his  retaining  the  benefits  of
    citizenship that he fraudulently secured. That is the essence  of  what
    the  appellant   seeks   through   securing   limited   leave   pending
    consideration by the respondent as to whether he  should  be  deported.
    Although  the  appellant's  family  members  are  not  culpable,  their
    interests are not such, either  individually  or  cumulatively,  as  to
    outweigh the strong public interest in this case.

111. We find that though the Judge erred in  law  by  not  considering  this
    aspect of the appellant's appeal, such error was not material.

Conflation of the grounds of appeal

112. An appeal against  a  decision  to  deprive  under  section  40(3)  may
    succeed  either  because  a  reasonably  foreseeable   consequence   of
    deprivation  would  be  contrary  to  article  8  or  because  of  some
    exceptional feature which means that the respondent's discretion should
    have been exercised differently having proper regard to the significant
    public interest in deprivation and the grounds for the same.

113. The Tribunal is tasked with forming a view, not just as to  whether  it
    would be rational to make such  a  deprivation  order,  but  to  decide
    whether it is right to do  so.  This  involves  an  evaluation  of  the
    relative weight to be accorded to the significant  public  interest  in
    depriving  the  person  concerned  of  citizenship  and  any  competing
    interests and considerations, including the impact  of  deprivation  on
    the legal status of the individual concerned. The Tribunal confirmed in
    Deliallisi that the scope of a section  40A  appeal  is  wider  than  a
    consideration of article 8 and so in a case where article 8(2)  is  not
    engaged, because the consequences of deprivation are not found to  have
    consequences of such gravity as to engage that  article,  the  Tribunal
    must still consider whether discretion should be exercised differently.



114. The appellant  contends  that  the  Judge  undertook  no  free-standing
    assessment of his  public  law  grounds  of  appeal,  namely  that  the
    respondent's decision was unlawful and unfair independently of  article
    8. Reliance is placed upon the respondent's unlawful reliance upon  the
    nullity doctrine for  several  years  and  the  failure  to  treat  the
    appellant consistently with the cohort of cases that culminated in  the
    Deliallisi appeal.

115. The Judge noted at [66] of  her  decision  that  she  was  required  to
    consider the public law ground of appeal in addition to article  8  and
    consider whether delay could amount to an exceptional circumstance from
    [72]. However, we are in agreement with Ms. Naik that  when  concluding
    her assessment at [77], the Judge conflated the public law ground as an
    element of her article 8 assessment, rather than identifying  it  as  a
    stand-alone consideration. We are, however, satisfied  that  the  Judge
    did not materially err in  law  because,  for  the  reasons  identified
    above, no exceptional feature arises in this matter  establishing  that
    it is not right for a deprivation order to be made.

The application of the wrong test to the article 8 appeal

116. Ms. Naik submitted that the Judge erred at  [77]  of  her  decision  by
    requiring the appellant to demonstrate 'exceptional  circumstances'  in
    order to succeed in  his  article  8  appeal,  whereas  'all  that  was
    required was for him to demonstrate that public  interest  factors  did
    not outweigh the best interests of his children, which  would  be  very
    adversely  affected  as  the  result  of  the  appellant   losing   his
    immigration status for an unspecified period'.

117. Significant weight is to be  placed  upon  the  public  interest  in  a
    person who  has  obtained  British  citizenship  through  fraud,  false
    representation or concealment of a material fact being deprived of that
    status and the Tribunal is to be mindful that it is the respondent  who
    is primarily responsible for determining and  safeguarding  the  public
    interest in maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  rights  flowing  from
    British citizenship.

118. The exercise of discretion is  to  be  approached  on  the  basis  that
    deprivation of citizenship involves interference with a right and  that
    any such interference should be no greater than is necessary to achieve
    the legitimate aim of the interference. In this matter, the issue is as
    to deprivation, and whether the appellant will be deported  or  removed
    is not determined by the deprivation appeal. Upon the conclusion of the
    appeal process, he will remain in this country and continue  to  reside
    with his family. The appellant will await  a  further  decision  as  to
    whether he is to be deported or be permitted to remain in this country,
    and he will enjoy a further right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision to refuse a human rights or  protection  claim.  The
    children's best interests are in staying in a family  unit  with  their
    parents, which they will continue to  do  upon  deprivation.  That  the
    family unit may have  to  move  accommodation  or  enjoy  more  limited
    financial resources is not such as  to  come  close  to  defeating  the
    significant public interest in the  appellant  being  deprived  of  his
    British citizenship. The Tribunal held in BA that  consequent  to  such
    weight, where statelessness is not in issue it is likely to be only  in
    a rare case that the ECHR or some very compelling feature will  require
    an appeal to be  allowed.  The  circumstances  in  such  a  case  would
    normally be exceptional in nature. We find that the Judge did not apply
    the wrong test when considering proportionality and article 8. She  was
    employing  exceptionality  as  a  predictive  device,  rather  than   a
    threshold test.

Anonymity

119. The Judge made an anonymity direction  confirming  that  no  report  of
    proceedings was to directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any
    member of his family. Ms. Naik requested that the direction continue.

120. We are mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 concerned  with  the  issuing
    of an anonymity direction and we observe that the  starting  point  for
    consideration of  such  a  direction  in  this  Chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, as  in  all  courts  and  tribunals,  is  open  justice.  The
    principle of open  justice  is  fundamental  to  the  common  law.  The
    rationale for this is to protect the rights of the parties and also  to
    maintain public confidence in the administration of justice. Revelation
    of the identity of the parties is an important part  of  open  justice:
    Re: Guardian News & Media Ltd [2010] UKSC 1; [2010] 2 AC 697.

121. Paragraph 18 of  the  Guidance  Note  confirms  that  the  identity  of
    children whether they are appellants or the children  of  an  appellant
    (or otherwise concerned with the proceedings),  will  not  normally  be
    disclosed nor will their school, the names  of  their  teacher  or  any
    social worker or health professional  with  whom  they  are  concerned,
    unless there are good reasons in the interests of justice to do so.  We
    observe that we have not named either the  appellant's  wife  or  their
    children and no reference is made to where the family reside, the  ages
    of the children or what school they attend.

122.  Even  in  cases  involving  exploration  of  intimate  details  of  an
    appellant's private and family life, the full force of the open justice
    principle should not  readily  be  denigrated  from:  Zeromska-Smith  v
    United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS  Trust  [2019]  EWHC  552  (QB).  The
    appellant was named in proceedings up to and before the Supreme  Court.
    His personal history, including his fraudulent application for  asylum,
    was expressly referred to within the Supreme  Court  judgment  and  his
    criminal conviction was detailed  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal. Though not named, his eldest child was expressly  addressed  at
    paragraph 4 of the draft order attached to the judgment of the  Supreme
    Court. Information as  to  the  appellant's  Supreme  Court  case,  and
    attendant press and legal commentary, as well  as  his  conviction  are
    publicly accessible. In all of the circumstances we are satisfied  that
    there is no need to make a direction to protect  the  identity  of  the
    appellant, his wife or his children.

123. We therefore set aside the anonymity direction of the Judge.

Notice of decision

124. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law. The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld, and the appeal is dismissed.

125. The anonymity direction dated 26 October 2018 is set aside


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 17 March 2020

