
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00040/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Hearing by Microsoft Teams           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th July 2021                    |On 27th July 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MR PETRIT OMERAJ
                           (AKA: MR AJRAM BAJRAMI)
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

   1. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision of 17th April 2019 to
      deprive the appellant of his British citizenship on the ground that it
      was obtained  by  fraud.   His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cartin for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
      9th January 2021.


   2. To summarise, the appellant arrived in the UK on 14th June  1998,  and
      claimed to be 'Arben Bajrami', born  on  20th  March  1981  in  Decan,
      Kosovo.  He claimed to fear persecution in Kosovo on  the  grounds  of
      his political opinion.  On 8th May 1999,  the  appellant  was  granted
      refugee status and indefinite leave to remain in the UK solely on  the
      basis of his claim to be an ethnic Albanian from Kosovo.  In  November
      2003, the appellant lodged an application for naturalisation using the
      same name and date of birth.  He  became  a  British  citizen  on  8th
      January 2004.


   3. In November 2007, the appellant acted as a sponsor in  an  application
      for entry clearance made by his wife, Eljana  Omeraj.   She  confirmed
      during  an  interview  with  an  entry  clearance  officer  that   the
      appellant's true identity is Petrit Omeraj and that  he  was  born  in
      Shkoder, Albania, on 1st September 1979.  She confirmed the  appellant
      is an Albanian national. Although that application for entry clearance
      was refused, the appellant's partner appealed  that  decision  and  in
      September 2008, the appeal  was  allowed.   The  appellant  had  given
      evidence in support of the appeal. His partner arrived in the  UK  and
      in September 2017, she was granted British citizenship.


   4. On 12th February 2019, the appellant's 'Status  Review  Unit'  ("SRU")
      wrote  to  the  appellant  to  advise  him  that  the  respondent  was
      considering depriving him  of  British  citizenship.   Representations
      were made on behalf of the appellant and  following  consideration  of
      the representations and explanations provided by  the  appellant,  the
      respondent reached her decision of 17th April 2019.


   5. Permission to appeal the decision of Judge Cartin was granted by Upper
      Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan on 15th April 2021 on three grounds.  I  do
      not need to deal with each of the grounds. The  respondent  has  filed
      and served a Rule 24 response  dated  12th  May  2021,  in  which  the
      respondent confirms that the appeal is not  opposed.   The  respondent
      invites the Tribunal to remit  the  appeal  to  the  FtT  for  hearing
      afresh, following the clarification of the law on deprivation set  out
      in the decision of the Supreme Court in Begum v SSHD  [2021]  UKSC  7.
      At the hearing before me I also drew  the  parties  attention  to  the
      recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Laci v SSHD [2021] EWCA  Civ
      769.


   6. Mr Seelhoff submits that the appropriate course is for the decision of
      FtT Judge Cartin to be set aside and for the decision to be remade  in
      the Upper Tribunal.  He invites me to allow the appeal  on  the  basis
      that the appellant admits much of what is said against  him  regarding
      the background, but the position  of  the  respondent  here,  is  more
      egregious than  it  was  in  Laci.   He  submitted  that  in  all  the
      circumstances, the only  reasonable  conclusion  is  that  the  appeal
      should be allowed.


   7. I accept that the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law
      and that the appropriate course is for the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cartin to be set aside.  As to disposal, I agree that
      the appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for
      hearing de novo with no findings preserved.  I have decided that it is
      appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,
      having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
      Statement of 25th September 2012.  Although much is admitted by the
      appellant, in the end, the Tribunal will be required to consider all
      the facts and circumstances regarding the appellant's conduct and the
      delay on the part of the respondent.  A fact specific assessment is
      required.


Notice of Decision


   8. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Cartin is set
      aside.


   9. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.

Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         13th July 2021
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


