


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Manchester Crown Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 18th March 2016                           |On: 11th April 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                           demonique wesseh wilson
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  13
January 2015 to deprive him of his British nationality under section  40  of
the British Nationality Act 1981.

The appellant was born on 14 January 1968 in Liberia. According to  his  own
account, he left Liberia and went to the USA in August 1984 at  the  age  of
16 years. From the papers before me I have managed, as best as possible,  to
ascertain the following chronology of events.


Between August and December 1988 the appellant  committed  several  offences
of armed robbery in the USA, for which he was arrested on 12 December  1988.
Before his case came to trial, around the end of 1989, he escaped  and  left
the USA. He claims, in his statement, to have returned to  Liberia,  but  to
have then travelled to the Netherlands in 1993. He  was  eventually  located
in the Netherlands, following his claim for asylum, and was arrested  on  23
December 1993. He received psychiatric  treatment  whilst  detained  in  the
Netherlands. He was then extradited to the USA, where  he  stood  trial  for
his previous criminal offences. He was convicted of several counts of  armed
robbery on 4 January 1995  and  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  5-20  years
imprisonment. He served several years in prison, at Ingham  County  Jail  in
Michigan, during which time he received psychiatric treatment,  followed  by
two years in a detention centre. He was deported to Liberia in 2001.


In Liberia, in August 2001, the appellant changed his name from the name  by
which he was known in the USA and the Netherlands, Alexander Monla Wulu,  to
his current name, Demonique Wesseh Wilson. He then left Liberia and came  to
the UK, entering the UK on 19 October 2001 in his new identity.  He  claimed
asylum the following day. His claim was refused on  21  December  2001  but,
owing to the country situation in Liberia at the time, he was  granted  four
years of exceptional leave to remain.  On 11 October  2006  he  was  granted
indefinite leave to remain and on 8 February 2007  he  applied  for  British
citizenship. A certificate  of  naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen  was
issued on 13 December 2007.

The appellant claims to have returned to the USA in November 2008  in  order
to bring his two eldest sons, who were living there  with  his  parents,  to
join his family in the UK. He was stopped at the airport on arrival  in  New
York, held in detention in the US for 7 months, and  then  returned  to  the
UK. He claims to have been assisted by the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office
and the  British  Consulate  whilst  detained  and  claims  that  a  British
Consulate assistant  worked  together  with  his  US  attorney  and  the  US
immigration authorities  during  that  period  and  further  that  his  past
conviction and  change  of  name  was  disclosed  in  full  to  the  British
authorities at that time. He claims to have been returned to the UK in  June
2009, on the order of  a  US  Federal  District  Judge,  and  to  have  been
accompanied by two US immigration officers who handed him  over  to  the  UK
authorities at Heathrow Airport  together  with  his  British  passport  and
files containing all of his case details. He  claims  that  the  US  and  UK
immigration officers spoke to each other and  went  through  his  files  and
that the UK authorities retained the files and his passport.  He  claims  to
have been interviewed by a senior secret service police officer who  advised
him that he was not a threat to national security and who then released  him
and handed back his passport. He was cleared through immigration.

The appellant claims to have written  to  the  Home  Office  himself,  in  a
letter dated 29 July 2009 (Annex I in the respondent's  bundle),  confirming
his name and past convictions.


Following an incident in 2012, where the appellant  claims  that  his  house
was burgled and he reported the matter to the police, he  was  arrested  for
making a fraudulent claim. He  claims  that  the  allegation  of  fraud  was
subsequently dropped. However the Greater Manchester Police  (GMP)  referred
his case to the Home Office as a result of information  about  his  previous
convictions in the USA and it was as a result of that that  the  deprivation
of his British citizenship was considered.


On 19 June 2014 UK Visas and Immigration wrote  to  the  appellant  advising
him that deprivation was being considered and inviting a response.


The appellant's solicitors responded in a  letter  dated  9  July  2014,  in
which they submitted that the GMP referral had not been  conducted  in  good
faith. It was submitted that the referral had been motivated  by  the  GMP's
disappointment at having failed in the fraud allegation  and  that  the  GMP
had withheld vital information including  court  hospital  orders  from  the
Netherlands and the USA relating to the sentence for  psychiatric  treatment
which had run concurrently with the prison  sentence  in  the  USA.  It  was
submitted further  that  the  appellant  had  been  advised  by  his  former
solicitors that he was not required  to  disclose  his  previous  conviction
because, as a Hospital Order,  it  was  spent.  Further,  he  had  not  been
required to disclose his  change  of  name  because  it  had  been  effected
through a court of law. Further, it was submitted that the Home  Office  was
fully informed of the appellant's criminal conviction in  the  USA  when  he
was returned to the UK in 2009 and in the appellant's subsequent  letter  of
28 July 2009.

In the decision of 13 January 2015 to deprive the appellant of  his  British
nationality, the respondent referred to enquiries  being  made  of  the  USA
authorities  following  the  referral  of  the  case  by  the  GMP  and   of
information received about his previous identity and  conviction  for  armed
robbery. It was noted that the appellant, in  his  application  for  British
citizenship, had failed to declare that he had  a  previous  conviction  and
that, had he done  so,  his  application  for  citizenship  would  not  have
succeeded. It was considered that  he  had  used  fraud  to  obtain  British
citizenship. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim in regard to  the
GMP having deliberately withheld information and rejected his claim to  have
been wrongly advised by his former  solicitors.  The  respondent  considered
the appellant's claim as to the events in 2009  did  not  detract  from  the
fact that he had failed to reveal his criminal  past  when  he  applied  for
citizenship. Accordingly the respondent gave  notice,  pursuant  to  section
40(5) of the British Nationality Act 1981, of her decision to make an  order
to deprive him of his British citizenship.


The appellant appealed against that decision  under  section  40(1)  of  the
British Nationality Act  1981.  Following  two  adjournments  and  two  case
management hearings at which directions were  made  for  the  respondent  to
obtain  and  serve  any  available   material   documents   concerning   the
appellant's return to the UK in June 2009, the appeal was  eventually  heard
on 1 July 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup.

At the hearing the judge was provided with a letter dated 30 June 2015  from
the Home Office explaining that all attempts  to  obtain  information  about
the appellant's arrival in the UK in 2009 had been unsuccessful. The  letter
explained that  the  USA  authorities  had  been  contacted  again  and  had
confirmed that the appellant was deported from the USA on 4 June  2009,  but
were unable to access their records. Obtaining such records would  entail  a
formal request which would involve a long and protracted process  and  would
not be possible.  There  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant  having  been
interviewed by the UK authorities. The GMP had been contacted  to  establish
if they held any records of the appellant's return but they did not.  Checks
made with the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office had  also  yielded  no
results.


Judge Pickup noted that the appellant's  representative  was  not  satisfied
with the Home Office's response but he proceeded with  the  appeal.  He  did
not accept the appellant's account of the UK authorities having  been  fully
informed of his criminal convictions in 2009, but in any  event  found  that
that was not relevant since it did  not  detract  from  the  fact  that  the
appellant had not disclosed his conviction in his application in  2007.  The
judge noted that the appellant's account of his experiences in  Liberia,  as
provided in his asylum claim, was contradicted by the fact that  he  was  in
prison in the USA at the relevant period of time, and concluded that he  had
fabricated a false history of his life in Liberia and  that,  as  such,  his
credibility was seriously undermined. He rejected the appellant's  claim  to
have been advised by a previous  solicitor  that  he  was  not  required  to
disclose his previous conviction in the USA.  He  rejected  the  appellant's
claim that his sentence in  the  USA  was  a  hospital  order,  or  that  he
believed it to be a hospital order, such  that  the  conviction  would  have
been spent by the time he made his application for British citizenship.  The
judge did not accept the appellant's claim to have  disclosed  his  criminal
convictions, or that his convictions became known to the UK authorities,  on
his return to the  UK  in  2009,  but  in  any  event  considered  that  the
respondent was entitled to consider  deprivation  on  the  basis  that  such
information had not been disclosed two years previously in his  application.
The judge found that the appellant had obtained his British  citizenship  by
fraud and accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal was sought on grounds of the  judge's  conduct  at  the
hearing  and  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  misrepresented  matters
explained to him at the hearing  and  had  erroneously  taken  into  account
matters which affected the appellant's credibility.


Permission was initially refused but was subsequently granted by myself,  on
22 September 2015, on the grounds of arguable procedural unfairness  arising
from the absence of consideration of a letter from the appellant's MP  which
had been sent to the Tribunal prior to the hearing but had not  been  before
the  judge.  The  grounds  in  the  renewed  permission   application   were
accompanied by a statement from the appellant's representative in the First-
tier Tribunal, Ms Talat Jabin of Maya  Solicitors,  setting  out  her  views
about the judge's conduct at the hearing.


In granting permission, I noted that the allegation made against  the  judge
in relation to his conduct was the subject of further correspondence at  the
time. That  correspondence  was  subsequently  concluded  with  the  judge's
response, by way of written comments, to  the  appellant's  representative's
statement. Those written comments were before me at the hearing.

Appeal hearing and submissions

In regard to the first ground of  appeal,  the  allegation  made  about  the
judge's conduct at the hearing, Ms Smith relied upon the case of  Alubankudi
(Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542 and in particular  upon  the  test  set
out at [7] in relation to the appearance of bias. She submitted  that  there
was perceived bias in the judge's conduct, in relation to  his  interruption
of the appellant's evidence and  his  representative's  submissions  and  in
regard to his demeanour, the cumulative effect of which was  to  give  to  a
fair-minded observer the appearance of bias. In response to my  queries,  Ms
Smith confirmed that no formal complaint had been  made  against  the  judge
and, further, that Ms Jabin's comment  at  [21]  of  her  statement  was  an
allegation of racism and discrimination. With regard to the  second  ground,
Ms  Smith  submitted  that  the  judge,  in  disbelieving   the   appellant,
erroneously took account of irrelevant matters. He rejected the  appellant's
claim that his sentence in  the  USA  was  a  hospital  order,  whereas  the
appellant had claimed that he believed it to be a hospital order  and  that,
as such, his conviction was  spent  by  the  time  he  applied  for  British
citizenship. He also erroneously proceeded on the basis that  there  was  no
evidence of the events which took place on the appellant's return to the  UK
in June 2009, whereas it was not a case of no evidence existing, but  of  no
evidence  having  been  obtained.  With  regard  to  the  basis  upon  which
permission was granted, Ms Smith submitted that Judge Pickup  did  not  have
the MP's letter of 26 June 2015 before him, but that  letter  supported  the
appellant's account of events in June 2009.

Ms Johnstone submitted that the respondent did not  accept  that  there  was
any evidence of bias  on  the  part  of  the  judge.  She  relied  upon  the
reference in the rule 24 response to the contemporaneous attendance note  of
the presenting officer before the First-tier Tribunal.  She  submitted  that
there had been no challenge to the judge's finding that  the  appellant  had
lied in his previous claim and that the judge was entitled to find  that  he
had. What happened in 2009 was irrelevant as the only  issue  was  what  the
appellant did in 2007 when he made his application for citizenship,  but  in
any event it was the respondent's case that the Home Office was not told  of
the appellant's criminal convictions in 2009. There was  no  material  error
in the fact that the MP's letter was not considered.


Ms Smith, in response, submitted that the judge's conduct differed  to  that
in Alubankudi as it was a  case  of  persistent  misconduct  throughout  the
hearing. Cumulatively the judge's conduct led to  the  perception  of  bias.
She reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings.

The first ground of appeal raises serious  allegations  against  the  judge,
including allegations of "blatant  bias"  in  favour  of  the  Home  Office,
"open, blatant discrimination", rudeness  and  aggression.  The  allegations
set out in the initial application for permission  made  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal were properly rejected by Judge  Verity  on  the  basis  that  they
consisted of  generalised  statements.  In  response,  the  grounds  in  the
renewed application were refined and were accompanied by  a  statement  from
Ms Jabin, to which I have given careful  consideration.  I  have,  likewise,
given careful consideration to the judge's written response of  10  February
2016.

At [9] to [13] of her statement Ms Jabin addresses  the  way  in  which  the
judge dealt with a preliminary issue. That issue consisted of  an  objection
to the Home Office's response, in  the  letter  of  30  June  2015,  to  the
directions requiring them to produce any available evidence  of  the  events
of June 2009 when the appellant returned to  the  UK  from  the  USA  and  a
request for an adjournment in order that further enquiries be made. At  [10]
she states that the judge decided to proceed  despite  her  submissions  and
goes  on  at  [12]  and  [13]  to  state  that  the  judge  did  not   allow
representation on the matter  and  completely  disregarded  the  appellant's
evidence without even attempting to explore  the  matter,  simply  rejecting
the appellant's account as a lie. The judge responds to this  allegation  at
paragraph 5 of the first  page  of  his  written  comments,  explaining  his
reasons for refusing to adjourn the proceedings and recalling that Ms  Jabin
was not happy with his ruling and expressing his belief that that  may  have
affected her attitude during the rest of the case.

It seems to me, from reading the judge's decision at  [11]  and  [17]  that,
far  from   disregarding   the   evidence   and   refusing   to   hear   any
representations,  the  judge  gave  careful  consideration  to  Ms   Jabin's
concerns but made a decision that further evidence could not  reasonably  be
obtained and that the appeal should therefore proceed. It  may  be  that  he
was not prepared to engage in further discussion of the matter,  and  whilst
Ms Jabin may not have been happy with the ruling, I do not consider that  to
be anything other than a judge carrying out  the  overriding  objectives  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in dealing with the  case
justly and fairly and in a timely manner.


At  [17]  to  [18]  of  her  statement,  Ms  Jabin  states  that  the  judge
interrupted the appellant and intimidated him into  admitting  that  he  had
lied in  his  asylum  claim,  However  the  judge's  handwritten  record  of
proceedings indicates  that  the  presenting  officer  asked  the  appellant
various questions about his asylum claim and the appellant was able to  give
full responses to the questions asked. It is clear from the  record  of  the
appellant's evidence that he  was  seeking  to  distance  himself  from  the
obvious  inconsistency  between  his  account  of  his  experiences  in  the
Liberian army and the fact that he was in prison in  the  USA  at  the  same
time, by blaming his solicitors, whereas there could be  no  doubt  that  he
had lied in his asylum claim. The judge, at [24] of his  decision,  recorded
that  the  appellant  was  unwilling  to  give  straight  answers  and   was
prevaricating and, in his written comments  in response to  the  allegations
of bias, refers to the difficulties he  faced  in  that  regard.  Again,  it
seems to  me  that  the  judge's  conduct  was  no  more  than  robust  case
management which was required in the face of a difficult witness.

Likewise, with regard to the issues raised by Ms Jabin at [20]  to  [24]  of
her statement in relation to what she perceived as intimidation  during  her
submissions, it appears from the  judge's  explanation  at  page  2  of  his
written comments that he had to engage in robust case managing in  order  to
focus her arguments. The judge's handwritten  record  of  proceedings  shows
that he took a careful note of Ms Jabin's submissions, that the  submissions
were lengthy and that he had to enquire about the relevance of parts of  the
evidence to which she was referring. His recollection, as  set  out  in  his
written comments, is that Ms Jabin objected to being deflected from  reading
out  lengthy  pre-prepared   submissions   including   passages   from   the
documentary evidence, and that, when he tried to focus  her  arguments,  she
did not seem willing to engage in discussion. That  is  in  fact  consistent
with the contemporaneous note from the presenting officer, set  out  at  [7]
of the rule 24 response.


As to the comments made by Ms  Jabin  at  [21]  and  [23],  she  appears  to
suggest that the judge was discriminating against  her  because  she  was  a
Pakistani woman wearing a headscarf and that he also  discriminated  against
the appellant. These are very serious allegations which need to be  properly
substantiated but plainly have  not  been.  In  the  face  of  such  serious
allegations it is surprising that no formal complaint has been made  against
the judge. No justification has been  given  by  Ms  Jabin  as  to  why  she
considers the judge to have racially discriminated against her. There is  no
support for her allegation by  the  other  party  present  at  the  hearing,
namely the presenting  officer.  Other  than  to  confirm  that  Ms  Jabin's
comment at [21] was an allegation of racism,  Ms  Smith  did  not  take  the
allegation any further in her submissions,  and  I  consider  that  she  was
right not to have done so.


Ms Smith's submission, in relation to the question of bias, was not so  much
whether there was actual bias, but whether there was a perception  of  bias,
in terms of the relevant test set out in Alubankudi:


      " The question is whether the fair minded observer, having considered
      the facts, would conclude that there was a real possibility that the
      tribunal was bias."


In line with the approach taken in that case, I have considered  the  matter
as a hypothetical observer. The hypothetical observer would, in  this  case,
note that the judge had given the appellant an  opportunity  to  respond  to
the  questions  put  to  him  in  cross-examination,  would  note  that  the
appellant's representative chose not to re-examine him on any of the  points
that had arisen in cross-examination, and that both parties had  been  given
a full opportunity to present their submissions in the  case.  It  is  clear
that Ms Jabin disagreed with the judge's ruling on  the  preliminary  issue,
whereas he was entitled to take the approach that he did.  It  seems  to  me
that what Ms Jabin perceives as bias is simply  her  disagreement  with  the
judge's approach. What she states is intimidation is simply a  judge  having
to employ robust case managing in order to obtain  direct  answers  from  an
evasive  witness  and  in  order   to   focus   the   submissions   of   his
representative. There is no basis for  the  assertion  that  the  judge  had
already decided the case against the appellant, but it  is  clear  that  the
judge was entitled to approach the appellant's evidence with  caution  given
his undoubted, and admitted,  fabrication  of  his  previous  asylum  claim.
Accordingly  I  find  no  merit  in  the  challenge  based   on   bias   and
discrimination.

Neither do I find any merit in the other grounds. It is  asserted  that  the
judge made his adverse findings  against  the  appellant  on  the  erroneous
basis that the appellant was alleging that his sentence in  the  USA  was  a
hospital order, whereas he had  stated  only  that  that  was  what  he  had
believed to be the case. Clearly  that  is  a  material  matter,  since  the
appellant's perception of his conviction and sentence, and thus  whether  or
not  it  was  spent  at  the  time  he  made  his  application  for  British
citizenship, was relevant to the question of  whether  he  had  deliberately
deceived the British authorities in his citizenship application. However  it
is plain that the judge was fully aware  of  the  appellant's  evidence.  At
[24] and [25] the judge rejected the appellant's entire  account  of  having
been advised by his previous solicitor that he did not need to disclose  his
conviction because it was spent. He noted at [24]  that  the  appellant  had
not disclosed his  conviction,  or  his  previous  name,  in  his  SEF  when
required to do so at sections 1.3 and 1.8, even though  that  form  made  no
reference to exclusions for spent convictions. He gave detailed  reasons  at
[26] and [29] for rejecting the claim that the appellant's  sentence  was  a
hospital order. At [31] his findings were clear and unequivocal -  that  the
appellant had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment and  not  a  hospital
order, but also that he did not accept that the appellant believed  that  he
was subject to a hospital order. Accordingly  the  challenge  made  on  that
basis is clearly misconceived. The judge gave full and detailed reasons  for
rejecting the appellant's explanation for  having  failed  to  disclose  his
conviction in his citizenship application form. He  was  entitled  to  reach
the conclusions that he did.

The grounds assert further that the judge based his adverse  findings  about
the events in June 2009 upon an erroneous understanding that  there  was  no
evidence to support the appellant's account of having  been  accompanied  to
the UK by US officials who handed over his  files  to  the  UK  authorities,
whereas the claim was that owing to time constraints such evidence, even  if
available,  could  not  be  obtained.  However,  again,  the  challenge   is
misconceived, as the judge was clearly fully aware  of  the  claim  made  in
regard to the availability of the evidence, which he set out at  length  and
in detail at [11], [17] and [19].  The respondent's letter of 30  June  2015
made a clear distinction between evidence from  the  US  authorities  which,
even if available, could not be obtained because of  time  constraints,  and
evidence from the UK authorities which was simply not available. It was  the
appellant's case that  his  US  case  files  were  handed  over  to  the  UK
authorities, that he had been interviewed by the UK  authorities  in  regard
to his previous US conviction and whether he  posed  a  threat  to  national
security, and that his passport had been handed back  to  him.  It  was  his
case that the UK authorities  were  aware  at  that  point  about  his  past
convictions and that they ought to have acted upon them at that time  rather
than seeking to deprive him of his British nationality several years  later.
However the judge dealt with the appellant's claim in detail  and  addressed
the question of unfairness raised by Ms Jabin at  [19].  He  considered  the
appellant's own letter dated 28 July 2009 at [33] and  gave  cogent  reasons
for according it no weight. Indeed  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  letter
includes details about the appellant's role in the Liberian army which  have
since been found to be a fabrication and clearly the judge was  entitled  to
reject the letter as unreliable.

I turn finally to the basis upon which permission was  granted,  namely  the
letter from the appellant's MP, dated 26 June 2015. In granting  permission,
I was concerned that that letter had been submitted to  the  Tribunal  prior
to the hearing but had not been seen by the judge. Whilst  it  appears  that
that was the case, having had the opportunity  to  consider  the  letter  in
detail in the context of all the other evidence and the judge's findings  on
the evidence, it seems to me that nothing material arises out of  a  failure
to consider it. The letter is not a contemporaneous  account  of  events  in
2009 but is simply a rehearsal of the appellant's account given  to  the  MP
shortly before his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, in the same  terms
as the account given before the judge, and an  expression  of  support  from
the MP on the assumption that the appellant's account  were  true.  It  does
not take the appellant's case any further and I do  not  consider  that  any
procedural unfairness has arisen as a result of the letter not  having  been
considered by the judge.

Accordingly, the judge was entitled to reject  the  appellant's  account  of
events in 2009 and to reject his claim that his previous convictions  became
known to the UK authorities in 2009. In any event, the judge properly  found
that that was not material to the question of the appellant's deception  two
years previously in 2007, when completing his application form, and  he  was
entitled so to conclude. Having rejected  the  appellant's  explanation  for
not having disclosed his conviction at that time, the judge was entitled  to
conclude that the appellant had obtained his British  citizenship  by  fraud
and to dismiss his appeal.

Contrary to the assertions made in the grounds, the judge's  decision  is  a
thorough and detailed one, giving full and careful consideration to all  the
evidence and to the submissions made by both parties. I  find  no  merit  in
the grounds suggesting bias, discrimination or any other misconduct  on  the
part of the  judge.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  conducted  himself
appropriately and carried out his duties in accordance with  the  procedural
rules, having regard to the overriding objective  of  the  rules.  He  dealt
with the appellant's case  in  an  appropriate  manner.  For  all  of  these
reasons I conclude that the grounds of appeal do not disclose any errors  of
law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.













                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
