
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00047/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2020                              |On 29 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Aguie [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Simpson, Counsel instructed by Stewart & Co
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  of  the  respondent
       (herein after "the claimant") against a decision of the Secretary of
       State on 2 May 2019 to deprive her of her British nationality.   The
       claimant was given a certificate of  naturalisation  on  14  January
       2011 having satisfied the Secretary of State that she was an Italian
       national who had lived lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  some
       years.  The decision to deprive her of her citizenship was based  on
       a subsequent  discovery  that  she  was  not,  in  fact  an  Italian
       national.

    2. Appeals to the Upper Tribunal concern alleged errors of law.  It  is
       necessary to  look  very  carefully  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  rightly,  directed  his
       attention precisely to the way the Secretary of State  had  put  her
       case.  At paragraph 2 of his decision  and  reasons  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge directed himself, correctly, in the following terms:

  "The basis of the decision, as set out in Section 40(3)(a) BNA 1981,  was
  that the [claimant] had fraudulently obtained  her  British  nationality.
  The false representation needs to be knowingly made.  An innocent mistake
  does not give rise to a power to order deprivation of nationality."

    3. The fundamental difficulty in the claimant's case is  that  she  did
       support her application for  British  nationality  with  a  document
       identifying her as an Italian citizen but that document later deemed
       unreliable.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge,  correctly,  found  that
       the document was a genuine document in the sense that it was  issued
       from the identified registry in Italy but was also satisfied that it
       gave false information and that the claimant  was  not  in  fact  an
       Italian national.   As  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  the
       Secretary of  State  does  not  appear  to  have  made  any  further
       enquiries about the origin of that  document,  how  it  came  to  be
       prepared, who prepared it and on what information.

    4. The short point is that there  was  nothing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that persuaded the judge that the claimant was  tainted  by
       the unsatisfactory nature of that document.  It had been provided to
       her, she had said consistently, by her parents.

    5.  There  are  elements  in  this  case  which  would  trouble  anyone
       experienced in nationality and immigration law.   For  example,  the
       claimant has never had  an  Italian  passport  and  when  she  first
       entered the United Kingdom she did so  with  entry  clearance  which
       would have been inappropriate if she were then an  Italian  national
       because it would not have been needed.  Then appellant also  had  an
       Italian national identity card  identifying  her  as  a  citizen  of
       Cameroon.

    6. However, I do not know when the claimant was said to  have  acquired
       Italian nationality.  It is the claimant's case that she was born in
       1986 and went to Italy when she was aged 4.  Italy  is  the  country
       where she grew up.  There is nothing intrinsically incongruous about
       claiming to be an  Italian  national.   Indeed,  as  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge noted, it is the feature of the case that if she  was
       not an Italian national she may well have been able to have obtained
       Italian nationality by reason of the length of residence  in  Italy.
       The point is that when the deficiencies in the case  are  considered
       they have to be set against the  fact  that  it  is  not  inherently
       unbelievable that she had gained Italian nationality.   It  is  also
       right to say that the document on which  the  Secretary  of  State's
       case depends was sufficiently plausible to satisfy the Secretary  of
       State that she was a citizen of Italy and to grant  her  nationality
       as a result.

    7. It was  clearly  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  view  that  the
       Secretary of State has not investigated this case adequately and had
       jumped to the conclusion that the claimant must  herself  have  been
       dishonest but had produced little or no  evidence  to  persuade  him
       that the conclusion was well founded.

    8. I will go through the grounds.

    9. The essence of ground 1 is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge "fails
       to take into account A's parents' involvement and therefore fails to
       explain how A could have been unaware prior to  the  application  to
       the Italian Registrar, that she was not Italian."

   10. This makes little or no sense.  The judge was perfectly aware of the
       claimant's parents' involvement.  It is possible (I emphasise I make
       no finding on this point) that there was some  dishonesty  involving
       members of the claimant's family without in any way  involving  her.
       It is possible (again I make no findings on  this  point)  that  the
       claimant was herself knowingly deceptive but the fact  that  someone
       else had provided her with an authentic looking certificate  of  her
       nationality does not prove that the claimant was dishonest  and  the
       First-tier Tribunal was perfectly entitled to reach  the  conclusion
       that it did not.  Indeed in my judgment I find it hard  to  see  how
       any other conclusion could have been reached.

   11. The second ground  criticises  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for
       describing the claimant as "essentially a child at the direction  of
       her parents".  The point is made  that  the  claimant  was  born  in
       January 1986 and was therefore 18 at the date of her EC applications
       and 24 at the date of her  application  for  nationality.   However,
       this misses the point.  The claimant  was  18  years  old  when  she
       applied for entry clearance.  It is her case that her father  is  in
       fact a lawyer and that she relied on his advice.  As indicated above
       if  it  were  the  case  that  the  claimant  were  well  versed  in
       nationality law and immigration law applying for an entry  clearance
       when she could have entered as of right seems strange  but  it  does
       not follow that it should have seemed strange  to  an  18  year  old
       young person.  There is nothing perverse or  otherwise  unlawful  in
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the claimant  relied  on
       her parents when she first entered the United Kingdom.

   12. There is no significance in her age when she produced the unreliable
       document.  If she had known that it was an unreliable  document  she
       would be at fault but there was no evidence before the Tribunal that
       she knew.

   13. Ground 3 criticises the judge for having some regard to  an  earlier
       unsuccessful decision by the Secretary of State to  deprive  her  of
       citizenship that was withdrawn.  I do not understand  the  Secretary
       of State's  complaint  here.   The  decision  was  indeed  withdrawn
       because it was made wrongly.  The judge observed that there  was  no
       real change since the earlier decision was withdrawn.   It  is  said
       that the judge erred by saying  that  this  somehow  undermined  the
       Secretary of State's case.  It does not and the judge did not  think
       it did.  The Secretary of State's case is problematic because  there
       is no evidence to support it.

   14. The fourth ground complains that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
       in that he:

  "Failed entirely to have any regard to the underlying  fraud  as  set  at
  RFRL 11 in that A "applied for naturalisation as a British citizen  on  6
  September 2010 (Annex E) and in that application form AN, you stated that
  your nationality was Italian (form AN, Section 1.9)"."

   15. The grounds then criticise the First-tier Tribunal Judge for finding
       that the claimant had relied on an apparently genuine  document  but
       she did. The judge did not ignore the "underlying fraud" but  rather
       found that if there was an underlying fraud  the  claimant  had  not
       been shown to have been involved.

   16. The criticism in ground 4 that the judge was wrong to say  that  the
       "appellant  has  had  no  part  in  producing   the   document"   is
       misconceived.  It is the claimant's case that she asked  her  father
       to obtain the document but that is not any kind  of  admission  that
       the claimant asked her father to do anything improper.   The  simple
       truth is we do not know how that document came to be written.

   17. This is an unsatisfactory case but the difficulty is  not  with  any
       alleged deficiency by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  difficulty  is
       that  having  discovered  that  the  document  was  unreliable   the
       Secretary of State leapt, without consideration, to  the  conclusion
       not only that somebody had been dishonest (which has not  been  made
       out) but that the claimant had been dishonest.  It was quite obvious
       to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  that   claim   was   not
       sustainable.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in  law.   I
       will go further.  The First-tier Tribunal  made  the  only  decision
       permissible  on  the  evidence  disclosed.  If  there  is   anything
       unsatisfactory about the decision the Secretary of  State  needs  to
       look at her procedures rather than criticise an  experienced  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge for exposing their deficiencies.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 April 2020                  |



