
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00003/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2018                         |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                           Appellant
                                    -and-
                         AKINTUNDE ABIODUN OLATUNDE

                                                              Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:         Mr. M. Sowerby of counsel, instructed by
Quintessence Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national  of  Nigeria.  On  30  July  2008  he  was
    granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the  husband  of  a  British
    national. On 28 July 2009 the Respondent applied for naturalisation  as
    a British citizen. He was issued with a certificate  of  naturalisation
    on 5 October 2009.

2.   He has three children who are British citizens and a  partner  who  has
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom, as the mother  of  three
    British citizen children.

3.   On 13 June 2014 the  Respondent  was  convicted  on  twenty  counts  of
    applying for and/or obtaining  British  passports  or  British  driving
    licences in false identities and being in possession of  a  variety  of
    documents in these false identities. Furthermore, on 24  October  2014,
    he was sentenced to  a  total  of  42  months  imprisonment  for  these
    offences, which took place between 10  November  1999  and  29  January
    2014.





4.   On 14 May 2015 the Respondent was referred to the  Status  Review  Unit
    by the Criminal Casework Team and on 29  December  2017  the  Appellant
    decided to deprive the Respondent  of  his  British  citizenship  under
    section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981.

5.   The Appellant appealed against this decision on  17  January  2018  and
    his appeal was heard and allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herbert
    in a decision promulgated on 22 August  2018.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision and on 2 October 2018 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davidge granted him permission to appeal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the Respondent  both
    made oral submissions and I have taken these into account,  where  they
    were relevant, in my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 states that:

         "The Secretary of  State  may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-


             (a)  fraud,
             (b)  false representation, or
             (c)  concealment of material fact".


8.   In paragraph 37 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert
    stated that the first issue in the appeal was  whether  the  Respondent
    had used fraud to obtain his naturalisation as a British citizen.  More
    properly,  the  actions  taken  by  the  Respondent   amounted   to   a
    "concealment of material facts", including the fact that he had used  a
    number of other identities  and  had  obtained  passports  and  driving
    licences to which he was not entitled.

9.   In paragraph 41 and 42  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert than considered  whether  the  Respondent  deliberately  placed
    himself in breach of section  40(3)  or  whether  it  was  an  innocent
    mistake. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the reasons given by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge for finding that the Respondent had  made
    an innocent mistake were cogent and  compelling.   He  also  relied  on
    paragraph 58 of the decision, where the First-tier Tribunal Judge found
    that "taking a holistic view of the [Respondent's] claim,  it  is  more
    probable than not that [his omission] was not a deliberate act".

10.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take into account  the
    fact that question 1.8 of the application form,  which  the  Respondent
    completed when he applied to naturalise, stated that  "if  you  are  or
    ever have been known by any name or names apart  from  those  mentioned
    above, please give details here". The Respondent left  the  answer  box
    blank. No explanation was put forward for this omission.  At  best,  in
    paragraph 42 c) the First-Tier Tribunal Judge asserted that there was a
    general understanding that detailed forms such  as  this  can  lead  to
    mistakes by all applicants, whether or not they are educated or adapted
    to life in the United Kingdom.

11.  He also failed to take into account that there were no  other  mistakes
    on the form apart from the manner in which the Respondent  subsequently
    answered the question about "good character" and both of the  omissions
    assisted the Respondent to  conceal  factors  which  might  hinder  his
    ability to naturalise. In addition, in my view, the meaning of question
    1.8 was clear and not open to misinterpretation.

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert concentrated on the  failure  by  the
    Respondent to give an  affirmative  answer  to  question  3.12  on  the
    application form, which stated that "have  you  engaged  in  any  other
    activities which might indicate that you may not be considered a person
    of good character?". In paragraph 42 of his decision, he noted that the
    question was somewhat unclear and could encompass a range of  activity.
    However, he failed to take into account the fact  that  the  Respondent
    subsequently pleaded guilty to twenty counts  of  applying  for  and/or
    obtaining passports and driving licences in false identities and  being
    in possession of documents in false identities, which indicates that he
    understood that this amounted to criminal behaviour.

13.  Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge also  failed  to  take  into
    account that, in his sentencing remarks, His  Honour  Judge  Devaux  DL
    noted that the Respondent used the same method when he applied for  the
    various false passports. He gave the details of an individual  who  did
    exist but supplied his own photograph.   In  addition,  he  provided  a
    variety of addresses throughout the country to  which  these  passports
    were to be sent. The offences for which he was convicted also stretched
    from 10 November 1999 to 29  January  2014  which  indicated  that  the
    Respondent consistently relied upon  documents  to  which  he  was  not
    entitled and did so throughout his time in the United Kingdom.

14.  This evidence should also have been considered when,  in  paragraph  57
    of his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied on the fact  that
    the Respondent had applied for naturalisation in his true identity  and
    that in 2009 he had not yet had any convictions.

15.  As a consequence, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  failed  to  take
    into account a number of  factors  which  indicated  on  a  balance  of
    probability that the answers which the Respondent gave to questions 1.8
    and 3.12 did not amount to an innocent mistake.

16.  In the alternative, First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered  whether  the
    decision to deprive the Respondent of his British citizenship  amounted
    to a breach of his right to continue to enjoy  a  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights. The second ground of appeal asserted  that  this  also
    amounted to an error of law, as the decision under appeal  was  one  of
    revocation not deportation. However, as the power provided  by  section
    40 of the British Nationality Act 1981  is  a  discretionary  one,  the
    Appellant did have to consider whether he should exercise  this  power.
    In this context the  circumstances  of  the  Respondent's  partner  and
    children did amount to relevant considerations. In Deliallisi  (British
    citizen: deprivation appeal: Scope) [2013] UKUT  00439(IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that:


         "(1) An appeal under section 40A of  the  British  Nationality  Act
         1981 against a decision to deprive a person of British  citizenship
         requires the Tribunal to consider whether the Secretary of  State's
         discretionary decision to deprive should be exercised  differently.
         This will involve (but not be limited to) ECHR Article 8 issues, as
         well   as   the   question   whether   deprivation   would   be   a
         disproportionate interference with a person's EU rights.


         (2)   Although,  unlike  section  84(1)(g)  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, section 40A of the 1981  Act  does
         not involve any statutory hypothesis that  the  appellant  will  be
         removed from the United Kingdom in consequence of  the  deprivation
         decision, the Tribunal is  required  to  determine  the  reasonably
         foreseeable consequences of deprivation, which  may,  depending  on
         the facts, include removal".


17.  Given the  length  of  the  Respondent's  sentence  it  was  reasonably
    foreseeable that, if he was deprived of  his  British  citizenship,  he
    would be liable to automatic deportation pursuant to section 32 of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

18.  Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert did not err in law  merely
    because he considered Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and reminded himself in paragraph 56 of his  decision,  that  he
    needed to answer the questions  set  out  in  R  (ex  parte  Razgar)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27

19.  But when considering whether the revocation would be  proportionate  he
    referred to section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 in paragraph 62 of his decision. This was inappropriate as the
    context in which he was considering Article 8 was one in which  it  was
    reasonably foreseeable that a decision would  be  made  to  deport  the
    Respondent from the United Kingdom.

20.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did refer to  a  number  of  cases  which
    addressed  the  impact  of  a  child  child's  best  interests   on   a
    proportionality decision, including  the  recent  case  of  MT  and  ET
    (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  00088
    (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal found that:


         "A very young child, who has not started school  or  who  has  only
         recently done so, will have difficulty  in  establishing  that  her
         Article 8 private and family life has  a  material  element,  which
         lies outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
         that may be. This position, however, changes over  time,  with  the
         result  that  an  assessment  of  best  interests  must   adopt   a
         correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in  the
         wider world, of which school will usually be an important part".


21.  All three of the Respondent's children had been born here  and  two  of
    them had been in the United Kingdom for over ten years  and  the  other
    has been here for over seven years.  Therefore,  their  private  lives,
    including their attendance at school, was a relevant factor.   However,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  undertake  any  assessment  of  the
    individual factors in the Respondent's children's lives or  even  refer
    to the, albeit limited, evidence about their lives which can  be  found
    in the witness statements by  the  Respondent  and  their  mother.   In
    addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge elected not to  hear  any  oral
    evidence  from  the  witnesses  and,  therefore,  their  evidence   was
    untested.

22.  In addition, he did not remind himself  that  ultimately  the  question
    would be whether, if a decision was made to deport the  Respondent,  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to accompany him to  Nigeria  or
    remain here with their mother.

23.  In the recent case of KO & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2018]  UKSC  53   the   Supreme   Court   confirmed   that
    authoritative guidance as to the meaning  of  "unduly  harsh"  in  this
    context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J President  and  UT
    Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a  decision
    given on 15 April 2015. They referred to  the  "evaluative  assessment"
    required of the tribunal:


         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.
         'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It  is
         the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.  Furthermore,   the
         addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard
         still higher."


24.  In the decision under appeal, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  no
    further in paragraph 56 than taking judicial notice  that  children  in
    one parent  households  tend  to  have  a  lower  rate  of  educational
    attainment and a far higher rate of delinquency.

25.  As a consequence, First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert did make errors  of
    law in his decision and his decision should be set aside.


 DECISION

(1)  The appeal is allowed.
(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert or First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Dated: 20 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch







