
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00050/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 26 April 2021                           |On 27 May 2021                  |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                     ADMIR (aka AMIR) SHEEHU (aka LITA)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms H Foot, counsel, instructed by Oliver & Hasani
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing was not held as
all issues could  be  fully  and  comprehensively  determined  in  a  remote
hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Bibi ("the judge") promulgated on 30 January 2020 in which
         she dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
         respondent  dated  7  May  2019  to  deprive  him  of  his  British
         citizenship pursuant to section 40(3) of  the  British  Nationality
         Act 1981 ("the 1981 Act").

      2. The appellant is Admir Sheehu, a national of Albania whose date  of
         birth is 24 February 1985. He entered  the  UK  on  19  April  2001
         claiming to be Amir Lita, a national of Serbia (from  the  Preshevo
         region, bordering Kosovo) with a date of birth of 24 February 1988.
         When he entered the UK the appellant was 16 years old, although  he
         claimed to be 14 years old. An asylum claim made by  the  appellant
         in his false identity was refused  but,  by  a  decision  dated  20
         August 2001, the appellant was granted four years Exceptional Leave
         to Remain ("ELR") until 20 August 2005. The appellant  was  granted
         ELR "because of the particular circumstances" of his case, although
         there was no expansion in the decision as to what those "particular
         circumstances" were.

      3. The appellant turned 18 on 24 February 2003. Sometime in  2005  the
         appellant made an  in-time  application  for  Indefinite  Leave  to
         Remain ("ILR"). When he made this application he was an adult.  The
         ILR application was made in the appellant's false identity. After a
         delay in considering this application the appellant was granted ILR
         on 3 June 2007 in his false identity.

      4. On 19 March 2009 the appellant  applied  for  naturalisation  as  a
         British citizen. He did so using his false name, his false age  and
         his false nationality. The  application  was  refused  because  the
         appellant had a criminal conviction that was not spent. On 14 April
         2014 the appellant made a further application for naturalisation as
         a British citizen. He  again  did  so  using  his  false  identity.
         Section 3  of  the  naturalisation  application  form  ("Form  AN")
         required the appellant to provide information  and  to  tick  boxes
         marked "yes" or "no" relevant to the  Good  Character  Requirement.
         Section 3.18 asked:

             "Have you ever engaged in any other activities which might
             indicate that you may not be considered a person of good
             character?"

      5. The appellant ticked the box next to section 3.18 marked "no".

      6.  On  28  May  2015  the  appellant  was  issued  a  Certificate  of
         naturalisation  as  a   British   citizen.   The   Certificate   of
         naturalisation was issued in the appellant's  false  name  and  his
         false date of birth and stated that his place and country of  birth
         was "Presheve, Kosovo".

      7. In July 2015 the respondent became aware of  the  appellant's  true
         name, date of birth and  nationality.  On  26  September  2018  the
         respondent wrote to  the  appellant  informing  him  that  she  was
         considering depriving him  of  his  British  citizen  status  under
         s.40(3) of the 1981 Act.  Following  representations  made  to  the
         respondent by the appellant's legal representatives,  in  which  it
         was accepted that the appellant had  used  a  false  identity,  the
         respondent made her  decision  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his
         British  citizenship.  Pursuant  to  s.40A  of  the  1981  Act  the
         appellant appealed the decision to make an order to deprive him  of
         his British citizenship to the First-tier Tribunal  (Immigration  &
         Asylum Chamber).

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. The judge considered, inter alia, a bundle of documents provided by
         the appellant running to  425  pages  and  which  included  witness
         statements from the appellant and his partner (Ms Enida Prenci,  an
         Albanian national with leave to remain in the UK), and  a  skeleton
         argument provided by Ms Foot. The judge heard  oral  evidence  from
         the  appellant  and  his   partner   and   submissions   from   the
         representatives.


      9. In  her  decision  the  judge  first  summarised  the  respondent's
         decision letter. It was the respondent's view  that  the  appellant
         obtained his ELR, his ILR and his British  citizenship  by  way  of
         fraud or false representation and that,  had  the  respondent  been
         aware of the true facts, the appellant would not have been able  to
         build up the residency status  which  led  to  him  being  able  to
         naturalise as a British citizen. Although the  respondent  did  not
         hold the appellant accountable for his  deception  when  he  was  a
         minor, when he completed his  ILR  application  and  then  when  he
         completed his naturalisation application he was an  adult.  It  was
         the respondent's view that, had the  appellant  revealed  his  true
         identity as an Albanian, he would not have been granted ILR. It was
         also the respondent's view that the appellant's  use  of  fraud  to
         obtain ELR, ILR and then in  his  naturalisation  application  fell
         within the terms of section 3.18 of the Good Character  Requirement
         section of Form AN  (although  wrongly  identified  as  3.19).  The
         respondent rejected as incredible the  appellant's  claim  to  have
         witnessed civil unrest in Albania and she did not consider there to
         be a plausible, innocent explanation for the misleading information
         given by him which  led  to  the  decision  to  grant  him  British
         citizenship.  The  respondent  considered,  on   the   balance   of
         probabilities standard,  that  the  appellant  provided  the  false
         information with the intention  of  obtaining  a  grant  of  status
         and/or citizenship in circumstances where his application(s)  would
         have been  unsuccessful  if  he  told  the  truth.  The  respondent
         concluded  that  the   fraud/misrepresentation/concealment   of   a
         material fact was deliberate and material  to  the  acquisition  of
         British citizenship.


     10. The judge then summarised the reasons given by the  respondent  for
         exercising her discretion to deprive the appellant of  his  British
         citizenship. Reference was made to the fact that, at  the  date  of
         the respondent's decision, the  appellant  was  residing  with  his
         Albanian citizen partner and his British  citizen  child  (born  in
         December 2017 (a second British citizen child was born in  December
         2019, and the appellant has a son born from another relationship in
         2013, both factors considered by the judge), the respondent's  view
         that the deprivation of citizenship would  not  in  itself  have  a
         significant  effect  on  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
         children, the consequences of the loss  to  the  appellant  of  the
         right of abode, and that there would not be a significant impact on
         his partner's status and entitlement to reside in the UK.

     11.  The  judge  then  accurately  set  out  the  relevant  legislative
         provisions (sections 40 and 40A of the 1981 Act) and  the  relevant
         extracts from the  Home  Office  guidance  in  chapter  55  of  the
         Nationality  Instructions  entitled  'Deprivation  and  Nullity  of
         British citizenship'. The judge additionally indicated that she had
         considered  a  number  of  authorities  and   decisions   including
         Deliallisi (British Citizen: deprivation appeal; Scope) [2013] UKUT
         439 (IAC) ("Deliallisi"), BA (deprivation of citizenship:  Appeals)
         [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC) ("BA"), Arusha  and  Demushi  (deprivation  of
         citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC), Pirzada (Deprivation  of
         citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC)  ("Pirzada")
         and Sleiman (deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 00367
         (IAC) ("Sleiman"). The judge properly  directed  herself  that  the
         burden of proof in a deprivation appeal lay on the  respondent  and
         that the standard of proof was the balance of probabilities.

     12. Under the heading 'Findings' the judge set out the  material  facts
         leading  to  the  deprivation  decision  noting   the   appellant's
         remorsefulness and that his  partner  had  been  granted  leave  to
         remain for 30 months as the mother of a British citizen  child  and
         that she was subject to a 'no recourse to public funds'  condition.
         At [34] et seq the judge summarised the arguments  advanced  by  Ms
         Foot  (who  continues  to  represent  the   appellant)   that   the
         appellant's deception was not material to the grant of ILR  and  to
         his naturalisation as a British citizen because even  if  his  true
         identity was known the respondent  would  still  have  granted  him
         leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor (based on an  Operational
         Guidance Note  ("OGN")  in  2003  indicating  that  there  were  no
         adequate reception facilities for unaccompanied minors in  Albania)
         and then ILR based on a previous policy relating to individuals who
         had accumulated 4 years ELR, and the submission that it was  unfair
         and unlawful for the  respondent  to  exercise  her  discretion  to
         deprive the appellant of his citizenship given that he was a  minor
         when he first claimed asylum (at [35]). Ms Foot also submitted that
         the deprivation  was  contrary  to  the  appellant's  rights  under
         Article 8 ECHR and those of his  partner  and  children  given  the
         impact on them of the  appellant  being  left  without  any  status
         pending any grant of leave to remain.

     13. At [41] the  judge  found  Ms  Foot's  submission  that  a  similar
         position  to  that  set  out  in  the  2003  OGN  in   respect   of
         unaccompanied minors was likely to have been in place in 2001,  and
         that the appellant would therefore have been granted some  form  of
         leave, to be "speculative". At [43] the judge  recorded  Ms  Foot's
         submission that, had the appellant been granted leave to remain  as
         an unaccompanied minor, he would have then  been  granted  ILR  and
         would have been eligible for naturalisation on  the  basis  of  his
         long residence and he would have met the statutory requirements for
         naturalisation. Any fraud was therefore immaterial to the grant  of
         citizenship.

     14. At [45] the judge rejected Ms Foot's submission that the  facts  of
         the instant case had similar features to the facts in Sleiman as Mr
         Sleiman was granted ILR under the Legacy policy and due to delay in
         the SSHD making a decision, which broke the chain of causation.  At
         [46] the judge noted the Presenting Officer's submission that,  had
         the appellant disclosed his true identity, he would not  have  been
         granted ILR.

     15. At [48] the judge found that the appellant's  false  representation
         when  he  was  a  minor  did  not  "lead  to"  the  acquisition  of
         citizenship and again referred to the submission made on behalf  of
         the appellant that he was a vulnerable minor on arrival in the UK.

     16. At [49] the judge noted that the appellant was  an  adult  when  he
         applied for ILR and that he  made  false  representations  in  this
         application. Then  at  [50]  to  [55]  the  judge  noted  that  the
         appellant had answered  'no'  in  respect  of  the  good  character
         requirement section of his  naturalisation  application  form  (the
         judge referred to section 3.12, which was the relevant  section  of
         the good character requirement section in the  2009  naturalisation
         application, but it is clear that she had in mind section  3.18  of
         the 2014 naturalisation application which is in  exactly  the  same
         terms; nothing turns on this minor inaccuracy). The judge concluded
         that the  appellant  knowingly  used  his  false  identity  in  his
         naturalisation application which led to the grant  of  his  British
         citizenship and that sections 40(3)(a), (b) and  (c)  all  applied.
         The appellant's failure to disclose his true identity in respect of
         the good character requirement section of the Form AN was dishonest
         and motivated the grant of naturalisation. The judge concluded,  at
         [56], that the concealment was material. At [58]  the  judge  found
         that, had the true facts been  known  to  the  decision-maker,  the
         respondent would not have been motivated to grant  the  certificate
         of naturalisation. Then at [59], with  reference  to  Sleiman,  the
         judge found that there was a direct material link between the false
         representation of a material fact and the decision to grant British
         citizenship. At [60] the judge was satisfied that  the  appellant's
         deception in respect of his ILR application led  to  the  grant  of
         citizenship, and then at [61] the judge stated that "even  if  that
         were not the case,  the  Respondent  had  clearly  identified  that
         concealment was deployed in obtaining the grant and the  provisions
         relating to direct materiality apply equally to  concealment."  The
         judge acknowledged  that  revocation  of  British  citizenship  was
         discretionary but was satisfied that the  discretion  was  properly
         considered by the respondent.


     17. At [62] to [64]  the  judge  considered  the  submission  that  the
         deprivation decision would engage Article 8  EHCR  irrespective  of
         any further decision from the respondent that may grant  him  leave
         to remain or direct his removal, but found there was no requirement
         for her to consider Article 8 as his  removal  was  not  reasonably
         foreseeable given the strength  of  his  private  and  family  life
         links.

     18. At [66] and [67], in the section  headed  'Conclusion',  the  judge
         found  that  the  respondent  had   followed   her   guidance   and
         instructions and that  it  was  not  appropriate  to  exercise  the
         relevant discretion any differently.

     19. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     20. The appellant initially relied on three grounds of appeal. The  1st
         ground contended that the judge misdirected herself by  failing  to
         consider Article 8 ECHR. In an email sent to the Upper Tribunal  on
         7 April 2021 the appellant's legal representatives  indicated  that
         they were no longer relying on  the  1st  ground  of  appeal.  This
         position was confirmed by Ms Foot at the 'error of law' hearing. Ms
         Foot relied on the 2nd and 3rd grounds of appeal,  supplemented  by
         the relevant sections of her skeleton argument dated 24 August 2020
         and her oral submissions.  Mr  Whitwell  adopted  the  respondent's
         written submissions dated 19 August 2020 written by Mr D Clarke and
         his  own  skeleton  argument  dated  26  April  2021  which   dealt
         extensively with the relevance and application of the Supreme Court
         decision in R (oao Begum) v SSHD [2021] UKSC 7 ("Begum").


     21. The 2nd ground, as amplified by Ms Foot in  her  skeleton  argument
         and  her  oral  submissions,  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in
         concluding  that  the  appellant's  case  was  not  analogous  with
         Sleiman. As the appellant obtained his ILR as a  direct  result  of
         accumulating 4 years ELR as an unaccompanied minor (which he was on
         his arrival in the UK even on his true date of birth) he would have
         been granted ILR in any event had he put forward his  true  details
         on arrival. The appellant's eligibility for ILR having  established
         4 years ELR broke the chain of causation. The judge's  analysis  of
         the issue of causation was said  to  be  unclear  and  the  reasons
         advanced by the judge for distinguishing Sleiman were unsustainable
         given that in Sleiman the application for ILR was  a  distinct  act
         and the grant of ILR did not depend on the deception as to age. The
         appellant maintains that, had he disclosed his true details, he was
         likely to have been granted ELR as there were no adequate reception
         facilities in Albania at the time since,  as  a  matter  of  public
         record, Albania was in a state of civil unrest in  the  late  1990s
         and the turn of the century, and he would  have  subsequently  been
         granted ILR, and that it was unreasonable for the judge to conclude
         that it was mere "speculation" that the appellant would  have  been
         granted some form  of  leave  on  arrival.  The  skeleton  argument
         contends that it was not wholly clear that the  grant  of  ELR  was
         based on the appellant's minority as it was  granted  for  4  years
         exactly and the decision did not articulate  the  specific  reasons
         why it was granted. It was not therefore obvious, as  suggested  by
         the respondent, that the appellant would only have been  granted  2
         years leave to remain rather than 4 years had he disclosed his true
         identity. In her oral submissions Ms Foot accepted that  there  was
         no detailed information before the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  the
         duration of leave that could be  granted  to  unaccompanied  minors
         under the ELR policy extant at  the  material  time.  The  skeleton
         argument further contends that the judge provided no  justification
         for her conclusion that,  had  the  appellant  disclosed  his  true
         identity, either on claiming asylum or in his ILR  application,  he
         would not have obtained ILR. There  was  said  to  be  no  evidence
         before the judge as to whether the respondent's policy or  practice
         at the time was such that an application for ILR in 2005 would  not
         have been granted had the  applicant  disclosed  a  previous  fraud
         during his minority. The grounds further  contend  that  the  judge
         failed to take account of the respondent's  policy  on  deprivation
         which indicated that where a person obtained ILR on the basis of  a
         concessionary policy, a previous deception may  be  irrelevant.  In
         response to Mr Whitwell's  submission  that  the  grounds  did  not
         challenge  the  judge's  decision  relating  to   the   appellant's
         dishonesty in his naturalisation  application  vis-�-vis  the  good
         character requirements, Ms Foot accepted  that  the  issue  of  the
         appellant's character at the time of his naturalisation application
         was a separate issue, but she submitted that  ground  2  should  be
         read in respect of the materiality of any  dishonesty  overall  and
         that there was no evidence as to the appellant's state of mind when
         the naturalisation application was completed.

     22. The 3rd ground, as amplified by Ms Foot in  her  skeleton  argument
         and oral submissions, contends that the judge  failed  to  consider
         whether discretion should have been  exercised  differently  taking
         particular account of the fact that the appellant was a minor  when
         he entered the UK and when his deceit was set in motion, the length
         of his residence since he  initially  gave  false  particulars  (18
         years) and the length of time since he last  relied  on  his  false
         particulars (5 years). The skeleton argument additionally mentions,
         as relevant circumstances, that the appellant was departing  unrest
         and  violence  in  Albania,  that  he  felt  compelled  to  act  in
         accordance with an interpreter's instructions, and that he  had  no
         knowledge or understanding of the immigration process.  No  reasons
         were  said  to  have  been  given  for  the  conclusion  that   the
         respondent's discretion was properly exercised. This was  an  error
         of  law  as  the  question  of  fairness  and  proportionality   of
         deprivation was a central issue in a deprivation appeal.

     23. In granting permission to appeal judge of the First-tier Tribunal M
         Robertson found the 1st ground reasonably arguable. Judge Robertson
         considered there was less arguable merit in the 2nd  ground.  Judge
         Robertson stated:

             "In Sleiman, the Respondent accepted, on the basis of her  own
             records, that the age point was irrelevant  to  the  grant  of
             ILR.  This  was  not  accepted  by  the  Respondent   in   the
             Appellant's case; the ILR was granted  on  the  basis  of  the
             false  details  put  forward  by  the  Appellant  in  his  ILR
             application. It was open to the Judge to distinguish the  case
             as she did at para 45. It was also open to the Judge  to  find
             that had the Appellant revealed his true identity in  his  ILR
             application, he would not have  obtained  ILR  (decision  para
             48). It was also open to the Judge to find, in the absence  of
             evidence as to  the  policies  in  place  in  2001,  that  the
             submission that the Appellant would have been granted 4  years
             ELR even if he has revealed his true identity was  speculative
             (decision para 41). On the basis of those findings of fact, it
             was open to the Judge to make the finding she in fact made  at
             para 48 of the decision, and paras 19 and 20 of the  ground  1
             [sic] are not reasonably arguable. However, as permission  has
             been granted on grounds 2 and 3, it is not withheld on  ground
             2."

     24. At the 'error of law'  hearing  Ms  Foot  indicated  that  she  was
         content to respond orally to the respondent's  written  submissions
         concerning Begum.  She  noted  that  Begum  concerned  the  Special
         Immigration Appeal Commission  ("SIAC")  and  the  Supreme  Court's
         decision was strictly obiter dicta. Her primary position  was  that
         the public interest factors at play  in  the  instant  appeal  were
         materially different from those  under  scrutiny  in  Begum,  which
         concerned issues of national security. The Upper Tribunal (and  the
         First-tier Tribunal) was well positioned to exercise the discretion
         within s.40(3) of the 1981 Act, unlike that in s.40(2).  Ms  Foot's
         alternative argument was that, even taking account of  Lord  Reed's
         judgement at [66] and [67]  of  Begum,  the  Tribunal  could  still
         consider whether the respondent made an 'error of law' in  reaching
         her decision, and the determination as  to  whether  the  precedent
         fact had been established was still within the Tribunal's remit.

Discussion

     25. The judge's decision was promulgated over a year before the Supreme
         Court handed down its judgement, on 26  February  2021,  in  Begum.
         Begum concerned an appeal to SIAC under s.40A(2) of  the  1981  Act
         against  a  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department ("SSHD") to deprive Ms  Begum  of  her  British  citizen
         status pursuant to s.40(2) of the same Act on the  basis  that  the
         SSHD was satisfied that deprivation was  conducive  to  the  public
         good on national security grounds. The Supreme Court concluded that
         the role of SIAC in  an  appeal  against  a  decision  taken  under
         s.40(2) of the 1981 Act was not to determine for itself whether the
         statutory condition for the exercise of  discretion  was  satisfied
         (that deprivation is conducive to the public good),  or  to  assess
         for itself  how  that  discretion  should  be  exercised,  but  was
         confined to  reviewing  the  SSHD's  decision  that  the  statutory
         condition was satisfied and the SSHD's exercise  of  discretion  on
         more conventional public law grounds (although there  was  no  such
         confinement in respect of issues arising under the Human Rights Act
         1998).


     26. At [66] to [71] Lord Reed, given the decision of the Court, stated:

             "66.             In relation to the nature  of  the  decision
             under appeal, section 40(2) provides:


             '(2)     The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
             of a citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied
             that deprivation is conducive to the public good.'


             The opening words ('The Secretary of State may ...')  indicate
             that decisions under section 40(2) are made by  the  Secretary
             of State in the exercise of his discretion. The discretion  is
             one which Parliament has confided to the Secretary  of  State.
             In the absence of any  provision  to  the  contrary,  it  must
             therefore be exercised by the Secretary of State and by no one
             else. There is no indication in either the  1981  Act  or  the
             1997 Act, in its present form, that  Parliament  intended  the
             discretion to be exercised by or at  the  direction  of  SIAC.
             SIAC can, however, review the Secretary of State's exercise of
             his discretion and set it aside in cases where  an  appeal  is
             allowed, as explained below.


             67.             The  statutory  condition  which   must   be
             satisfied before the discretion can be exercised is that  'the
             Secretary of State is satisfied that deprivation is  conducive
             to the public good'.  The  condition  is  not  that  'SIAC  is
             satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the  public  good'.
             The existence of a right of appeal against  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision enables his conclusion that he was  satisfied
             to be challenged. It does not, however, convert the  statutory
             requirement that the Secretary of State must be satisfied into
             a requirement that SIAC must be satisfied. That is  a  further
             reason why SIAC cannot exercise the discretion conferred  upon
             the Secretary of State.


             68.             As explained at paras  46-50,  54  and  66-67
             above, appellate courts and tribunals cannot generally  decide
             how a statutory discretion conferred upon the primary decision-
             maker ought to have been exercised, or exercise the discretion
             themselves,  in  the  absence  of  any   statutory   provision
             authorising them to do so (such as  existed,  in  relation  to
             appeals under section 2 of the 1997 Act, under section 4(1) of
             the 1997 Act as originally enacted, and under  sections  84-86
             of the 2002 Act prior to their amendment in 2014: see paras 34
             and 36 above). They are in general restricted  to  considering
             whether the decision-maker has acted in  a  way  in  which  no
             reasonable decision-maker could have acted, or whether he  has
             taken into account some irrelevant matter or  has  disregarded
             something to which he should have given weight, or  has  erred
             on  a  point  of  law:  an   issue   which   encompasses   the
             consideration of factual questions, as appears, in the context
             of statutory appeals, from Edwards  (Inspector  of  Taxes)  v
             Bairstow [1956] AC 14. They must also determine for themselves
             the compatibility of the decision with the obligations of  the
             decision-maker under  the  Human  Rights  Act,  where  such  a
             question arises.


             69.             For the reasons I have explained, that appears
             to me to be an apt description of  the  role  of  SIAC  in  an
             appeal against a decision taken under section 40(2).  That  is
             not to say that SIAC's jurisdiction is supervisory rather than
             appellate. Its jurisdiction is appellate, and references to  a
             supervisory jurisdiction in this context are capable of  being
             a source of confusion. Nevertheless, the characterisation of a
             jurisdiction as appellate does not determine the principles of
             law which  the  appellate  body  is  to  apply.  As  has  been
             explained, they depend upon the nature of the  decision  under
             appeal  and  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.   Different
             principles may even apply to the same decision, where it has a
             number of aspects giving rise to different considerations,  or
             where different statutory provisions are applicable.  So,  for
             example, in appeals under section 2B of the 1997  Act  against
             decisions made under  section  40(2)  of  the  1981  Act,  the
             principles to be applied by SIAC in reviewing the Secretary of
             State's exercise of his discretion are  largely  the  same  as
             those applicable in administrative law, as I  have  explained.
             But if a question arises as to whether the Secretary of  State
             has acted incompatibly with the appellant's Convention rights,
             contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights  Act,  SIAC  has  to
             determine that matter objectively on  the  basis  of  its  own
             assessment.


             70.             In considering whether the Secretary of State
             has acted in a way in which no reasonable Secretary  of  State
             could have acted, or has taken into  account  some  irrelevant
             matter, or has disregarded something to which he  should  have
             given weight, SIAC must have  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
             discretionary power in question, and the Secretary of  State's
             statutory responsibility for deciding whether the  deprivation
             of citizenship is conducive to the public good.  The  exercise
             of the power conferred by section 40(2)  must  depend  heavily
             upon  a  consideration  of  relevant  aspects  of  the  public
             interest,  which  may  include  considerations   of   national
             security and public safety,  as  in  the  present  case.  Some
             aspects of the Secretary of  State's  assessment  may  not  be
             justiciable, as Lord Hoffmann explained in Rehman. Others will
             depend, in many if not most cases, on an  evaluative  judgment
             of matters, such as the level and nature of the risk posed  by
             the appellant, the effectiveness of  the  means  available  to
             address  it,  and  the  acceptability  or  otherwise  of   the
             consequent  danger,  which  are   incapable   of   objectively
             verifiable  assessment,   as   Lord   Hoffmann   pointed   out
             in Rehman and Lord Bingham of Cornhill reiterated in A, para
             29. SIAC has to bear in mind, in relation to matters  of  this
             kind, that the  Secretary  of  State's  assessment  should  be
             accorded   appropriate   respect,   for   reasons   both    of
             institutional  capacity  (notwithstanding  the  experience  of
             members  of  SIAC)  and  democratic  accountability,  as  Lord
             Hoffmann explained in Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A,
             para 29.


             71.             Nevertheless, SIAC has a number of  important
             functions to perform on an appeal  against  a  decision  under
             section 40(2). First, it can assess whether the  Secretary  of
             State has acted in a way in which no reasonable  Secretary  of
             State could  have  acted,  or  has  taken  into  account  some
             irrelevant matter, or has disregarded something  to  which  he
             should  have  given  weight,  or  has  been  guilty  of   some
             procedural impropriety. In doing so, SIAC has to bear in  mind
             the serious nature of a deprivation of  citizenship,  and  the
             severity of the  consequences  which  can  flow  from  such  a
             decision. Secondly, it can consider whether the  Secretary  of
             State has erred in law, including whether he has made findings
             of fact which are unsupported by any  evidence  or  are  based
             upon a view of the evidence  which  could  not  reasonably  be
             held. Thirdly, it can determine whether the Secretary of State
             has complied with  section  40(4),  which  provides  that  the
             Secretary of State may not make an order under  section  40(2)
             'if he is  satisfied  that  the  order  would  make  a  person
             stateless'. Fourthly, it can consider whether the Secretary of
             State has acted  in  breach  of  any  other  legal  principles
             applicable to his decision, such as the obligation arising  in
             appropriate cases under section 6 of the Human Rights Act.  In
             carrying out those functions, SIAC may well have  to  consider
             relevant evidence. It has to bear in mind that some  decisions
             may involve considerations which are not justiciable, and that
             due weight has to be given to the  findings,  evaluations  and
             policies of the Secretary of State, as Lord Hoffmann explained
             in Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated  in A.  In  reviewing
             compliance with the Human Rights Act, it has to make  its  own
             independent assessment."

     27. Having regard to the above extracts and the decision in Begum as  a
         whole I cannot accept Ms Foot's submissions and  I  find  that  the
         principles identified by  the  Supreme  Court  as  to  the  correct
         approach to an appeal against a s.40(2) appeal before SIAC  equally
         applies in an appeal against a s.40(3) appeal before the First-tier
         Tribunal (IAC). Lord Reed observed, at  [40],  that  the  statutory
         provisions dealing with appeals against deprivation decisions, both
         in respect of SIAC and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (IAC),  did  not
         provide any details as to the grounds upon which an appeal  may  be
         brought or the  principles  by  which  such  an  appeal  should  be
         undertaken. The positions of SIAC and the First-tier Tribunal (IAC)
         therefore mirror each other in this respect.

     28. From [41] to [46] Lord Reed then heavily criticised the decision in
         Deliallisi, which, as with the instant appeal, concerned an  appeal
         to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) against a decision taken  pursuant
         to s.40(3) of the 1981 Act. His Lordship stated:

             "41.             In relation to the scope of the jurisdiction
             created by section 2B, counsel for Ms Begum  and  for  Liberty
             referred to some decisions of the Upper Tribunal in which  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal  in  an  appeal  under
             section 40A of the 1981 Act was considered.  The  earliest  of
             them  is Deliallisi  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) (unreported) given 30 August
             2013, which was  concerned  with  deprivation  of  citizenship
             under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act.  That  provision  applies
             where   the   citizenship   results   from   registration   or
             naturalisation and 'the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that
             the registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of  -
             (a) fraud, (b) false representation, or (c) concealment  of  a
             material fact'.


             42.             In  that  case,  the   First-tier   Tribunal
             concluded that it had no power to exercise  the  Secretary  of
             State's discretion differently, since such a power could  only
             be  conferred  by  express  statutory  provision.  Subject  to
             compliance with the Human Rights Act, the scope of  an  appeal
             under section 40A of the 1981 Act, in the view of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, was to examine the facts on which the Secretary
             of State made the decision, examine the evidence and determine
             whether the basis upon which the decision was  made  was  made
             out.


             43.             The Upper Tribunal, chaired by Upper Tribunal
             Judge Lane, adopted the opposite approach, holding  (para  31)
             that '[i]f the legislature confers a right of appeal against a
             decision, then, in the absence of express wording limiting the
             nature of that appeal, it should be treated as  requiring  the
             appellate body to exercise afresh any judgement or  discretion
             employed in reaching the decision against which the appeal  is
             brought'. The judge found support for  that  position  in  the
             earlier judgment of the Upper Tribunal in Arusha and  Demushi
             (Deprivation of Citizenship) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC); [2012] Imm
             AR 645, another case concerned  with  a  decision  made  under
             section 40(3). However, the judge mistakenly  understood  the
             judgment in that case to have  'approved'  (para  28)  remarks
             made by the First-tier Tribunal, which the Upper Tribunal  had
             in reality merely  recorded  (see  paras  11  and  14  of  its
             judgment). The judge also found support in remarks made  by  a
             minister in the course of a debate during the passage  of  the
             2002 Act through Parliament, which he mistakenly treated (para
             34) as revealing Parliament's  intention,  applying Pepper  v
             Hart [1993] AC 593 in a manner which was disapproved in Wilson
             v First County Trust Ltd (No 2) [2004] 1 AC 816, paras 58-60.
             The judge also cited textbook authority that a fresh  exercise
             of  judgment  was  excluded  if  the   decision   involved   a
             consideration  of  matters  which  were  non-justiciable,  and
             stated that that could not possibly  be  said  of  a  decision
             under section 40: a questionable proposition so  far  as  some
             decisions under section 40(2) are concerned, but one which can
             be  accepted  in  relation  to  section  40(3).  However,  the
             apparent reasoning, that (1) an appellate body's ability to re-
             take a discretionary decision  is  excluded  if  the  subject-
             matter is non-justiciable, and (2) the subject-matter of  this
             decision is not non-justiciable, therefore (3)  this  decision
             can be re-taken by  the  appellate  body,  is  fallacious.  It
             depends on the unstated premise that  an  appellate  body  can
             always re-take a discretionary decision  unless  the  subject-
             matter is  non-justiciable:  a  premise  which,  as  explained
             below, is incorrect. The judge also referred in Deliallisi to
             a number of potentially helpful authorities concerned with the
             scope of appellate jurisdiction, but did not discuss them.  It
             will be necessary to return to some of those authorities.


             44.             A different approach was adopted by the Upper
             Tribunal,  chaired  by  Mr  C  M  G   Ockelton,   in Pirzada
             (Deprivation of Citizenship: General Principles) [2017]  UKUT
             196 (IAC); [2017] Imm AR 1257. He stated  at  para  9  of  his
             judgment that section 84 of the 2002  Act  did  not  apply  to
             appeals under section 40A of the 1981 Act, but added that  the
             grounds of appeal, in appeals under section 40A  of  the  1981
             Act, must be directed to  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision was empowered by section 40, and that '[t]here is  no
             suggestion that a Tribunal has the power to  consider  whether
             it is satisfied of any of the matters set out in  sub-sections
             (2) or (3); nor is there any suggestion that the Tribunal  can
             itself exercise the Secretary of State's discretion.'


             45.             In BA   (Deprivation   of   Citizenship:
             Appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC); [2018] Imm AR 807 the  Upper
             Tribunal, chaired by Lane  J,  repeated  what  had  been  said
             in Deliallisi and  stated  that  the  passage  just  cited
             from Pirzada was accordingly not to be followed. In support of
             his view of the proper ambit of an appeal under  section  40A,
             Lane J cited the decision of this court in Ali v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016]  1  WLR
             4799. However, that decision was not concerned with an  appeal
             under section 40A, but with an immigration appeal  subject  to
             the pre-2014 version of section 84 of the 2002  Act  (para  36
             above), and was therefore not in point.


             46.             Before considering the authorities  concerned
             directly with appeals to SIAC, it is  worth  considering  some
             other  authorities  concerned  with  the  scope  of  appellate
             jurisdiction, most of which were cited in Deliallisi.  It  is
             apparent from them that the principles to  be  applied  by  an
             appellate body, and the powers available  to  it,  are  by  no
             means uniform. At one  extreme,  some  authorities,  concerned
             with licensing appeals to courts of summary jurisdiction, have
             held  that  such  appeals  should  proceed   as   re-hearings,
             reflecting the terms  of  the  relevant  legislation  and  the
             procedures  followed  by  such  courts.   Other   authorities,
             concerned  with  appeals  to  the  Court  of  Appeal   against
             discretionary decisions by lower courts, have  held  that  the
             scope of the appellate jurisdiction  was  much  more  limited.
             Modern  authorities  concerned   with   the   scope   of   the
             jurisdiction   of   tribunals    hearing    appeals    against
             discretionary decisions by administrative decision-makers have
             adopted varying  approaches,  reflecting  the  nature  of  the
             decision  appealed  against   and   the   relevant   statutory
             provisions. Two examples were mentioned in Deliallisi."

     29. Lord Reed then considered, at [47] and [48], John Dee Ltd v Comrs
         of Customs and Excise [1995] STC 941 and Customs and Excise Comrs v
         J H Corbitt (Numismatists) Ltd [1981] AC 22 which concerned
         approaches to appeals against discretionary decisions in other
         jurisdictions, before returning to the context of decisions under
         section 40(2) of the 1981 Act and setting out the Court's
         conclusions at [66] to [71]. It is irresistibly clear from the
         Supreme Court's judgement that it disapproved of the approach taken
         in Dellialisi and consequently in BA.

     30. Whilst I accept that the assessment needed in a decision taken
         under s.40(2) of the 1981 Act is more likely to be within the
         preserve of the Secretary of State, I note that there is
         significant and material similarity between the two sections: "the
         Secretary of State may by order... if the Secretary of State is
         satisfied that...", both turning on the matters being established
         to the satisfaction of the respondent as primary decision maker,
         and that the language utilised by Lord Reed, particularly at [68],
         suggests the approach is of general application.


     31. For these reasons, and having regard to the Supreme Court's
         rejection of the approach adopted in Dellialisi, I am satisfied
         that the principles established by the Supreme Court in respect of
         s.40(2) of the 1981 Act are the same in respect of an appeal under
         s.40(3).

     32. Applying the principles of law declared in  Begum  it  is  apparent
         that the judge erred in law,  through  no  fault  of  her  own,  by
         determining for herself whether the condition precedent in  s.40(3)
         was met instead of determining whether the respondent was  entitled
         to conclude that it had been met. This error will  not  however  be
         material if the judge was entitled to reach the findings  she  did,
         thereby determining the question as to whether the  respondent  had
         acted in a way no reasonable decision maker  could  have  acted  in
         favour of the respondent. If, upon  an  erroneous  but  'correctly'
         conducted full-merits review, a judge reaches the same decision  as
         the respondent, by definition there was no material  error  on  the
         part of the judge in finding that the condition precedent was  met.
         I therefore consider whether the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
         whether the appellant's deception/false  representations  motivated
         the grant of citizenship.

     33. The judge  found  that,  had  the  respondent  been  aware  of  the
         appellant's true identity when his ILR application was  determined,
         the respondent would not have granted him  ILR.  In  reaching  this
         conclusion the judge found, inter alia, that Ms  Foot's  submission
         that the appellant, who was an unaccompanied minor when he made his
         asylum application, was likely to have been granted  some  form  of
         leave was "speculative."  The  appellant  relied  on  an  Operation
         Guidance Note from 2003 which indicated that there were no adequate
         reception facilities in Albania at that  time.  The  relevant  time
         however was 2001 (when the appellant's asylum claim was refused and
         when he was granted ELR) and there was no evidence before the judge
         as to whether the Secretary of State considered there were adequate
         reception facilities in Albania at that time. Ms Foot  argues  that
         it was a matter of public record that Albania was  in  a  state  of
         civil unrest in the late 1990s and the turn of the century but this
         highly generalised assertion does not necessarily have  any  direct
         correlation to the existence or adequacy  of  reception  facilities
         for unaccompanied minors. The judge was entitled to  conclude  that
         the basis of Ms Foots submission was speculative.


     34. However, even if the judge  was  not  so  entitled  and  Ms  Foot's
         submission that the appellant would have been granted some form  of
         leave to remain in 2001 as  an  unaccompanied  minor  from  Albania
         holds true, there was nothing before the judge to indicate that the
         appellant would still have been granted ELR of 4 years duration  if
         his disclosed  his  true  identity.  Although  Ms  Foot's  skeleton
         argument (but not the grounds) contends that it was unclear whether
         the appellant was granted ELR for 4  years  on  the  basis  of  his
         minority, no issue was previously raised in respect of  this  point
         by the appellant before the judge, and it is difficult to see  what
         basis  other  than  the  appellant's  claimed  age  (and  therefore
         minority) would have motivated a grant of ELR of 4 years  duration.
         In any event, the respondent clearly indicated in her RFRL that the
         appellant was granted ELR because of his minority  (see  para  11).
         Although the respondent's policy  relating  to  grants  of  ELR  to
         unaccompanied minors was not before the judge, it is  difficult  to
         see why the appellant, had he disclosed his  true  date  of  birth,
         would have been granted ELR of 4 years duration rather than 2 years
         duration which would more or less coincide with his 18th  birthday.
         If the appellant had given  his  true  details  there  was  nothing
         before  the  judge  to  support  his  assertion   that   he   would
         nevertheless have been granted  ELR  for  4  years.  He  would  not
         consequently have been entitled to ILR on the basis of what is said
         to have been the respondent's policy at the time.


     35. Neither party placed before the judge any relevant policy issued by
         the respondent relating to applications for ILR by  those  who  had
         previously  been  granted  4  years  ELR.  I  note  that  the   ILR
         application form completed by the appellant in 2005  asked  whether
         there was "any significant new  information"  which  the  applicant
         wished to be considered in  connection  with  the  ILR  application
         which was not considered when the applicant was last  granted  ELR,
         to which the appellant ticked "no". No reliance was however  placed
         on this by the respondent and it was not considered by the judge at
         the hearing or considered at the  'error  of  law'  hearing  and  I
         therefore exclude it entirely from my  consideration.  Although  Ms
         Foot is correct in saying there was no evidence that  the  previous
         provision of false information relating to a person's identity  was
         a factor relevant to the grant of ILR, there was no  evidence  that
         it was not a relevant factor. In  these  circumstances,  and  given
         that the appellant's deception related to his entire identity  (his
         name, his age and his  nationality),  the  judge  was  entitled  to
         conclude that he would not have been granted ILR.

     36. The judge distinguished Sleiman on the basis that the grant of  ILR
         in that case was a consequence of the  Legacy  policy  and  due  to
         significant delay in resolving Mr Sleiman's asylum application.  As
         pointed out by Judge Robertson, the Secretary of State  in  Sleiman
         specifically accepted, based on her own records, that Mr  Sleiman's
         age was irrelevant to the grant of ILR. There was no such  evidence
         of any such acceptance in the evidence before  the  judge.  In  the
         instant case the judge was rationally entitled to conclude that the
         appellant's deception/false representation in his ILR  application,
         made when he was an adult, did not break the 'chain of causation'.

     37. However, even if I am wrong  in  my  above  assessment,  the  judge
         alternatively relied on an entirely separate and independent  basis
         for concluding that the appellant obtained his British  citizenship
         by means of deception/false representation. This was based  on  the
         false  representations  made  by  the  appellant  in  his  Form  AN
         naturalisation  application  in  respect  of  the  good   character
         requirement.  Sleiman  did  not   consider   the   good   character
         requirements respect  of  a  naturalisation  application,  and  the
         respondent specifically relied on the appellant's response  to  the
         good  character  requirement  questions  in  her  decision   letter
         (paragraphs 14 & 17). At [50] to [53], [55] to [57], and  [61]  the
         judge concluded that the appellant's negative reply when  asked  in
         the Form AN whether he had ever engaged  in  any  other  activities
         which might indicate that he may not be considered a person of good
         character was a clear false misrepresentation. The  judge  rejected
         the appellant's explanation that he misunderstood the question  and
         found that there was no evidence that the appellant was  vulnerable
         at the time of his naturalisation application and that no complaint
         had been made in respect of the legal assistance the appellant  had
         when he completed the form. Ms Foot submitted  that  there  was  no
         evidence of the appellant's state of mind  when  he  completed  the
         Form AN, but it was open to the  appellant  to  have  adduced  such
         evidence at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  there  was  no
         suggestion and  no  cogent  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
         appellant was in any way impaired when he  completed  the  form  or
         that he lacked capacity. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had
         taken the decision to lie in respect of his  answers  to  the  good
         character question. This was a conclusion rationally  open  to  the
         judge on the evidence before her and for the reasons she  gave.  On
         this  basis  alone  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that   the
         appellant's deception/false representation was directly material to
         the grant of citizenship. The 2nd  ground  of  appeal  consequently
         discloses no material error of law.


     38. In respect of the 3rd ground, applying the principles flowing  from
         Begum, the judge adopted the correct approach  in  not  considering
         the exercise of discretion for herself but whether it was  properly
         exercised by the respondent. The judge's conclusions at [61],  [66]
         and [67] are brief, but they must be considered in the  context  of
         the decision  as  a  whole.  The  reasons  supporting  the  judge's
         conclusions are readily discernible from the body of her  decision.
         The judge summarised the  respondent's  decision  in  some  detail,
         including the reasons advanced by the  respondent  as  to  why  she
         exercised  her  discretion  to  deprive  the   appellant   of   his
         citizenship. The judge referred to factors relevant to  the  lawful
         exercise of the respondent's discretion including  the  appellant's
         relationship with his partner and children, the best  interests  of
         the children and the impact of  the  deprivation  decision  on  the
         appellant's family members. The judge specifically referred to  the
         exercise of discretion given that the appellant had  been  a  minor
         when he first claimed asylum and when the deception commenced  (see
         [35] and [48]). The judge noted the respondent's rejection  of  the
         appellant's account of having witnessed civil unrest in Albania and
         his claimed fear of being returned to such conditions. It  has  not
         been suggested that  the  respondent  was  not  entitled  to  these
         findings. Both the respondent and the judge were  unarguably  aware
         of the appellant's length of residence  in  the  UK,  and  that  he
         entered as a minor, and that he could not be held  accountable  for
         his deception when a minor  (e.g.  paragraphs  9,  11,  16  of  the
         deprivation decision, [33], [48] of the judge's  decision).  In  so
         doing the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  respondent  had
         properly applied her guidance relating  to  deprivation  decisions.
         The 3rd ground is not made out.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum                              13 May 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

