
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00004/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2016                    |On 21 October 2016                   |
|Prepared 28 August 2016              |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  Ms g I n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Berry, Counsel, instructed by S L A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Given the ages of the children an anonymity direction is made.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  Appellant,  born  on  6  September  1975,  appeals  against   the
    Respondent's  decision,  dated  26  January  2016,  whereby   permanent
    residence was revoked, on 3 October 2013, on the basis that the claimed
    marriage was a sham marriage.   The  application  based  on  that  sham
    marriage had led to the issue of the certificate of naturalisation as a
    British citizen.

2.   The matter in the  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  H
    Clark, who on 18 May  2016  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 and rejected it on human rights grounds.

3.   Permission to appeal was sought  and  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grant-Hutchison on 13 June 2016.  The application was renewed and
    on 12 July 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission on  all
    grounds but particularly with reference to the fact that Section 40A(3)
    of the British Nationality Act was not subject to  the  application  of
    Sections 117A to D of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    (as amended).

4.   Before us it was plain from the judge's decision,  paragraph  47,  that
    there  was  an  error  of  law  because,  in  considering  whether  the
    Appellant's  deprivation  of  citizenship  was  justified,  the   judge
    concluded that she must

         "take account of the provisions of Section 117A  and  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by  Section
         19 of the Immigration Act 2014 when considering the public interest
         with reference to Article 8 ECHR and the Appellant's private life".


5.   It is clear that Section 117 was not a consideration in the  assessment
    of proportionality regarding deprivation and that  error  fundamentally
    undermined her assessment.  For this reason if no  other  it  is  clear
    that the Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

6.   There is no doubt that the Appellant was knowingly participating  in  a
    fraud and there is nothing of her immigration background to her  credit
    in relation to her actions.

7.   The starting point to an assessment  is  not  the  general  and  wholly
    sustainable  objective  of  preventing  entry  based  or  achieved   by
    dishonesty or fraud.  Rather the question is to what  extent  do  false
    representations  or  fraud  become  a  material  consideration  in  the
    exercise of discretion whether to deprive the Appellant of citizenship.

8.   We were taken to the  guidance  given  to  immigration  caseworkers  in
    chapter 55 of the Nationality Instructions.  These provisions expressly
    relate to the deprivation and nullity of British citizenship.  In  this
    regard we note that the Respondent's  decision  was  not  based  around
    deportation nor has any decision been taken to remove the Appellant.

9.   The guidance given encourages a balanced  and  reasonable  approach  in
    taking into account the seriousness of fraud or  misrepresentation  but
    of note is that the provisions do not found themselves  upon  bases  of
    protection for the public interest so that the deprivation  of  British
    citizenship is justified.  Whilst there is no requirement  to  exercise
    the decision to deprive pursuant to the aim of  general  deterrence  of
    fraudulent conduct we think that must still be a relevant consideration
    even if it is not the primary consideration to justify  deprivation  of
    nationality.  Plainly the general deterrence of fraud could be  one  of
    the express bases for deprivation.

10.  Accordingly we were satisfied that in the decision (paragraph  45)  the
    judge misplaced what she described  as  "...  the  very  strong  public
    interest in deterring entrants to the  United  Kingdom  from  obtaining
    immigration status by deception".  The judge continued:

         "For there to be no adverse consequence at all to  the  Appellant's
         obtaining her citizenship by deception in circumstances  where  the
         impact of deprival on  her  four  children  is  minimal,  would  be
         neither an individual or general deterrent, nor mark the  Secretary
         of State's disapproval of such behaviour.  As such, I am  satisfied
         that the Respondent's decision to  deprive  the  Appellant  of  her
         British citizenship, but not remove her from  the  United  Kingdom,
         constitutes a lawful and reasonable exercise of  discretion,  which
         complies with the Respondent's obligations under Section 55 of  the
         2009 [BCIA] Act".


    We did not find the latter remarks worthy of criticism.


11.  Ultimately we accept that there was an error of law  by  the  judge  in
    dealing with this matter.  The Original Tribunal decision cannot stand.
     The parties indicated that this matter could be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal without the need for further evidence or submissions.

12.  We considered the evidence that had been presented and  the  provisions
    of  the  casework  instruction,   particularly   paragraph   55.    The
    Appellant's involvement in fraud was  unequivocally  established.   The
    Appellant is the mother of four children  who  are  British  nationals.
    The Appellant is not being removed and she is in all  likelihood  going
    to obtain 30 months' limited leave to remain because of the  children's
    ages.  Accordingly there is nothing disproportionate in this matter  in
    terms of the Respondent's decision.  The only element of difference  to
    the  Appellant  is  that  she  faces  application  fees;  this  is  not
    disproportionate.   We  therefore  agree  that   the   deprivation   of
    citizenship will not have a significant effect on the best interests of
    the children nor will it impact on their status in the  United  Kingdom
    nor will it give rise to the removal of the Appellant.

13.   In  these  circumstances,  the  decision  to  remove  citizenship   is
    justified and properly takes  account  of  the  ages  of  the  children
    insofar as they are material.  Ultimately it is the fraudulent  conduct
    of  the  Appellant  which  was  the  basis  of  the  decision  and  the
    seriousness of the view taken of it was a matter for the  Secretary  of
    State.  The following decision is substituted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

14.  We find there is a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Clark, dated 18 May   2016. We set the decision aside.  We  remake  the
    decision. We dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Signed                                  Date16 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 16 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


