
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00025/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KILUMU [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Alban, instructed by Fountain Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, whom we shall call "the claimant", is a British citizen
    who appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  notice  by  the
    Secretary of State dated 1 September 2017 that a decision had been made
    to deprive him of his citizenship.  He appealed against  that  decision
    and Judge Coaster allowed the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. The claimant came to the United Kingdom in 2002.  Following the refusal
    of asylum, he and his family were granted leave  to  remain  under  the
    Legacy Scheme.  In July 2013 he submitted an  application  for  British
    citizenship based on his length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This was granted on 9 April 2014.  At some later stage the Secretary of
    State became aware that an application for the removal of a time  limit
    from a passport ("the  NTL  application")  had  been  made  by  another
    person, using the claimant's documents,  in  2006.   The  Secretary  of
    State took the view that the claimant's complicity in that process  was
    something  that  ought  to  have  been  declared  in   the   claimant's
    application for nationality;  and  that  "by  failing  to  declare  the
    fraudulent NTL application you knowingly deceived the  Home  Office  by
    concealing a material fact."

 3. Judge Coaster considered the evidence relating to the  NTL  application
    in great detail.  She took  into  account  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    claimant,  which  she  accepted,  and  the  documents  produced.    She
    concluded that "the appellant has satisfied the standard of proof  that
    he did not make the application for the false NTL application  and  did
    not know that it was made until he was informed of the rejection of the
    NTL application".  The  inevitable  conclusion  was  that  he  did  not
    deceive the Home Office by failing to mention it.  The judge went on to
    make reference to  certain  paragraphs  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    published guidance on the Deprivation of Citizenship: the paragraphs to
    which she refers  relate  to  deprivation  on  the  grounds  of  public
    interest.  Having considered those factors and the conclusion  she  had
    reached that the claimant had no  part  in  the  use  of  his  name  in
    documents in the NTL application, she allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal draw attention first to  the
    fact that the judge quoted the wrong part of guidance, because  in  the
    claimant's case the proposal to deprive him of  citizenship  was  based
    not on the public interest but on his deception.  The grounds go on  to
    say that the crucial question on the application form  for  citizenship
    was that numbered 3.11:

         "Have you engaged in any other activities which might  be  relevant
         to the question of whether you are a person of good character?"

 5. That, in the Secretary of State's view, and as Mr Howells submitted  to
    us, was the one which the claimant had answered falsely, because he had
    said that there were no other such activities, whereas he  should  have
    referred to the NTL application.

 6. We did not need to call upon Ms Alban.  The decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal is perfectly clearly to the effect  that  there  was  no  such
    "activity" that the  claimant  had  engaged  in:  there  was  therefore
    nothing that the claimant should have mentioned.  It follows  that  his
    answer  to  question  3.11  was  in  no  sense  deceptive.   There   is
    accordingly no merit in the Secretary of State's grounds.   We  dismiss
    the appeal to this Tribunal.  The decision of Judge Coaster  stands  as
    the determination of the claimant's appeal.

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 5 December 2018.
