
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00055/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2020                     |On 28 July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               KAMAL JAF FAIEQ

                               (aka HAMA AMIN)

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 November  1979.
      His appeal against the decision  of  16  May  2019  depriving  him  of
      British citizenship was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-
      Kemp MBE on 28 August 2019.


   2. The Secretary of State appealed on the three grounds:


        i) the judge failed to take into account how the  absence  of  oral
           evidence from the Appellant affected the weight attached to  the
           written evidence;


       ii)  the  judge  accepted  the  submissions   of   the   Appellant's
           representative in the absence of evidence from the Appellant  on
           the availability of documents prior to 2014; and


      iii) the judge accepted the  Appellant's  explanation  for  giving  a
           false name  in  the  absence  of  evidence  independent  of  the
           Appellant  and  failed  to  give  adequate   reasons   for   her
           conclusions. Alternatively, taking the Appellant's  evidence  at
           its highest, the judge misdirected herself in law on  the  issue
           of dishonesty.


   3. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on the grounds  it
      was arguable the judge erred in law by treating  submissions  advanced
      on the Appellant's behalf as the Appellant's evidence. It was arguable
      the judge erred in  treating  the  argument  at  [16]  that  "had  the
      appellant had identification documentation available to him  prior  to
      his request for a birth  certificate  then  he  would  not  have  been
      required to source a  copy  of  his  birth  certificate  in  order  to
      register his wedding in 2014" as evidence. It was  arguable  this  was
      material to the outcome.


   4. The hearing of the appeal was vacated due to the outbreak of Covid 19.
      Directions were sent to the parties on 11 May 2020 indicating that the
      error of law hearing would be conducted without a hearing, subject  to
      any view expressed by the parties, and the  inviting  the  parties  to
      make written submissions.


   5. The Respondent responded on 1 June 2020 and replied to the Appellant's
      submissions dated 8 June 2020 on 10 June 2020. Given the  restrictions
      of operating in a pandemic, I extend time to comply with directions.


   6. It is the Respondent's position that an oral hearing is  required  and
      it can be conducted remotely. The Respondent did not  have  access  to
      the  Appellant's  bundle  and  skeleton   argument.   Deprivation   of
      citizenship is a matter  of  significant  public  importance  and  the
      Respondent wished to fully present her submissions at an oral  hearing
      and deal with any concerns the Upper Tribunal may have. The  Appellant
      did not express a view on this matter. I have considered the views  of
      the parties, but I am satisfied,  after  considering  the  submissions
      from the Respondent and the Appellant set out below,  that  there  are
      clear errors of law in the decision such that it cannot stand and must
      be remade by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Appellant  will  not  be
      prejudiced by a further hearing.





The Respondent's submissions


   7. The Respondent relies  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  submits  the
      Appellant's credibility was a key issue in the appeal. The Respondent,
      in her decision, rejected the Appellant's evidence on all matters. The
      Appellant did not give evidence at the hearing and his  account  could
      not be tested in cross-examination. There was no medical  evidence  to
      show that the Appellant was unfit to give evidence. The Appellant  had
      failed to attend his asylum interview and, in spite of  his  claim  to
      fear persecution in Iraq, he returned there for five years  from  2013
      to 2018.


   8. The Respondent submits the judge erred in law in failing  to  draw  an
      adverse inference from  the  Appellant's  failure  to  give  evidence.
      Further or alternatively, the judge did  not  state  what  weight  she
      attached to the Appellant's evidence and at best it  should  be  given
      limited weight.


   9. The Respondent submits the judge failed to  look  at  the  Appellant's
      dishonesty as a whole. He had given false information on three matters
      material to  his  identity.  The  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
      Respondent's position set out in her  decision  that  the  Appellant's
      evidence about his place of birth was contradictory.


  10.  The  Appellant's  representative  gave  evidence  in  her  submission
      recorded at [16] of the decision which could not be tested  in  cross-
      examination. It was not open to the judge to  accept  the  Appellant's
      assertion that the interpreter told him what to  say  without  testing
      the evidence in cross-examination. The Appellant was not  put  forward
      to be cross-examined because he had no answer  which  would  withstand
      scrutiny as to why he  gave  false  details  to  the  Respondent.  The
      judge's failure to recognise this factor and draw an adverse inference
      accordingly was clearly an error of law material to the outcome of the
      appeal.





The Appellant's submissions


  11. The Appellant submits the judge failed to  refer  to  a  medical  note
      produced at the hearing  confirming  the  Appellant's  depression  and
      anxiety which lead to the hearing proceeding  by  way  of  submissions
      only. Unfortunately, the Appellant's representative did not  obtain  a
      copy of the medical note and the original was handed to the judge.


  12. The Appellant submits the judge did properly address her mind  to  the
      lack of oral evidence. The Respondent did not rely on the lack of oral
      evidence in submissions at the hearing and therefore she should not be
      able to raise the matter on appeal. The Appellant  submits  the  judge
      did  not  specifically  refer  to  the  Appellant's   signed   witness
      statement, but she was specifically directed to  it  in  the  skeleton
      argument and in submissions. The Appellant's  representative  did  not
      give evidence but made submissions in  accordance  with  the  skeleton
      argument and the Appellant's witness statement.





  13. The  Appellant  provided  a  detailed  written  account  supported  by
      documentary evidence. The Respondent  was  given  the  opportunity  to
      respond to the Appellant's submissions and  there  was  no  procedural
      unfairness in the conduct of the proceedings. The judge gave  adequate
      reasons for her conclusions and the Respondent's grounds were merely a
      disagreement with her findings.





Conclusions and reasons


  14. The Appellant accepted he gave a false name, false date of  birth  and
      false place of birth in his application for asylum made  in  2002  and
      his naturalisation application in 2008. The Appellant did  not  attend
      his substantive asylum interview and his application was refused.  The
      Appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in February 2007  and
      was issued with a certificate of naturalisation on 21 August 2008. The
      Appellant returned to Iraq in 2013 and lived there until 2015.


  15. The medical note on the court file,  dated  12  July  2020,  from  the
      Appellant's GP confirmed the Appellant was suffering from diabetes and
      back pain which was being treated with medication. The note stated the
      Appellant  also  suffered  from  depression  and  anxiety.  There  was
      insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant  was  unfit  to  give
      evidence. The judge made no reference to the medical note.


  16. The Appellant did not give evidence at the hearing before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal and therefore he did not adopt his witness statement  as
      evidence in chief. The  explanations  offered  therein  could  not  be
      tested in cross-examination. The judge failed to state the weight  she
      attached to the Appellant's evidence in his witness  statement,  given
      the lack of oral evidence, and to give reasons for that conclusion.


  17. The decision letter made a clear allegation of dishonesty specifically
      rejecting the Appellant's explanations. The issue before the judge was
      dishonesty and the Appellant's  credibility  was  crucial.  The  judge
      erred in law in failing to explain why she  accepted  the  Appellant's
      explanations, given in his witness statement,  when  his  account  was
      specifically rejected  by  the  Respondent  and  his  credibility  was
      clearly an issue in the appeal.


  18. It was apparent from the record of proceedings that the Respondent did
      rely  on  the  lack  of  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  in  her
      submissions. The Home Office Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
      Appellant had the means to obtain documents prior to 2014 and  he  had
      not been put forward to give evidence so that he could  be  questioned
      about this. The Respondent was not given the opportunity to respond to
      the Appellant's submissions.


  19. The Appellant's explanation for giving  a  false  name  was  that  the
      interpreter at the screening interview had told him his name  was  too
      long and had removed his grandfather's name (Hama Amin) and added  his
      tribal name (Jaf). There was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the
      Appellant's explanation that, because the interpreter  was  a  Kurdish
      Sorani speaker of Iranian origin, it was common cultural  practice  to
      insert the tribal name. On the Appellant's own evidence, he knew  that
      the name given in  his  screening  interview  and  maintained  in  his
      application for naturalisation was false and he  made  no  attempt  to
      correct it.


  20. There was background evidence before the judge to show that  the  Jaff
      (not Jaf) tribe were from Sulamaniyah. The Appellant claimed  that  he
      was born in Kirkuk. His explanation for giving a false place of  birth
      was that he had lived in Kirkuk as a boy and was not aware  he  wasn't
      born there until he applied for a birth certificate in 2014. The judge
      erred in  law  in  accepting  the  explanation  given  by  Appellant's
      representative at [16] in the absence of evidence from  the  Appellant
      and in the light of the background evidence.


  21. The Appellant admits that he deliberately gave a false date  of  birth
      in order to prevent his removal to Iraq. The judge  erred  in  law  in
      finding that it was not material. The Appellant was able to obtain his
      birth  certificate  with  his  correct  date  of  birth.   The   birth
      certificate showed his place of birth as  Sulamaniyah.  The  Appellant
      could not be removed from the UK because it was accepted he was from a
      Government Controlled Area of Iraq and could not relocate to a Kurdish
      Autonomous Zone. He was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
      basis he was from Kirkuk. The Appellant would not  have  been  granted
      indefinite leave under this policy if he had informed the Home  Office
      he was from Sulamaniyah.


  22. The judge erred in law in failing to  consider  the  totality  of  the
      evidence in assessing whether the Appellant had been dishonest. On his
      own evidence, the  Appellant  knowingly  gave  false  information  and
      failed to correct the  misleading  information  given  in  his  asylum
      interview and in his application forms.


  23. I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and I set  aside  the
      decision of 22 August 2019. The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for re-hearing. None of the judge's findings are preserved.





Notice of decision


Appeal allowed


No anonymity direction made.



      J Frances

Signed      Date: 7 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

