
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/00162/2017
                                                               EA/00163/2017
                                                               EA/00164/2017
                                                               EA/00166/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2019                   |On 31 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                    1) UK
                                    2) RK
                                    3) AS
                                    4) HK
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


      1. The first appellant is  the  wife  of  the  sponsor,  a  Portuguese
         citizen said to be exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  The second,
         third and fourth appellants are the children of the first appellant
         and the sponsor born in 2006,  2009  and  2012  respectively.   The
         appellants are citizens of Pakistan.

      2. The appellants have appealed against a decision sent on 6  December
         2017 in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  dismissed  their
         appeals against the respondent's decisions dated 7  September  2016
         to refuse to issue them with EEA family permits.   Those  decisions
         make it clear that the respondent accepted that the  sponsor  is  a
         Portuguese citizen exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  It  follows
         that the only issue in dispute before the FTT was  whether  or  not
         the appellants are related as claimed to the sponsor.

      3. The FTT  considered  all  the  evidence  available,  including  the
         sponsor's oral evidence, and was  entitled  to  conclude,  for  the
         reasons provided that there was a paucity of credible  evidence  to
         support the claimed family relationships.

      4. The first appellant appealed against the FTT's decision  on  behalf
         of all  four  appellants.   She  submitted  that  there  was  ample
         evidence to support the claimed family relationships and  indicated
         a willingness to undertake DNA testing.

      5. In a decision  dated  10  May  2018  FTT  Judge  EB  Grant  granted
         permission to appeal.  She observed that arguably in the  interests
         of fairness the  FTT  was  required  to  adjourn  the  appeal  with
         directions to the sponsor to adduce and  submit  DNA  evidence  and
         evidence of continuing contact.

      6. The hearing of this matter was previously  adjourned  on  7  August
         2018 and 23 November 2018, at the request of  the  appellants.   On
         the last occasion it was adjourned  to  enable  the  appellants  to
         obtain legal representation.  In a decision dated 7 January 2018  a
         Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal ('UT') refused a  further  adjournment
         on the basis that due to an unspecified "family emergency" they had
         been unable to consult with  their  Counsel  and  anticipated  they
         would need a further six months.

      7. The application for an adjournment was not renewed before me.   The
         sponsor did not appear at the hearing before me and the  appellants
         were unrepresented.  I decided that  given  the  recent  procedural
         history, it was appropriate to continue  with  the  hearing  -  the
         recent history demonstrates that an  adjournment  was  unlikely  to
         achieve anything other than further delay.

      8. The grounds of appeal, as drafted by the  appellants,  do  no  more
         than list disagreements with the decision of the FTT.  The FTT  has
         not erred in law in finding that the appellants failed to discharge
         the burden of establishing  that  they  are  the  sponsor's  family
         members, given the paucity of the evidence available and the length
         of time the  sponsor  claims  to  have  been  residing  outside  of
         Pakistan.

      9. I must consider whether the FTT acted fairly  in  not  granting  an
         adjournment of the hearing of its own  volition.   In  my  judgment
         fairness did not require an adjournment when the following  factors
         are considered in the round.

          i) The sponsor has resided in the UK for a  lengthy  period.   He
             has been employed  in  the  UK.   He  was  in  a  position  to
             understand the issues concerning the respondent and to provide
             the  evidence  capable  of  rebutting  those  concerns.    The
             marriage is said to be a longstanding one dating back to 2004.
              The sponsor claims that he regularly visited his family,  yet
             he was  unable  to  provide  evidence  as  straightforward  as
             photographs.

         ii) The sponsor and the appellants were refused family permits  as
             long ago as September 2016 and have not been able  to  explain
             why they were unable to adduce any further evidence in advance
             of the FTT hearing, sooner.

        iii) DNA evidence has the potential to  clearly  determine  whether
             the parents of the children are the first  appellant  and  the
             sponsor.  If obtained, straightforward fresh applications  for
             an EEA permit could be made.

         iv) The sponsor and the appellants did not ask for an  adjournment
             of the FTT hearing and  there  was  no  clear  reason  at  the
             hearing to  consider  that  an  adjournment  would  accomplish
             anything other than the generation of delay.

     10. When all the relevant circumstances are considered, there has  been
         no unfairness in the FTT proceeding with the hearing.

Decision

     11. The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of an  error  of
         law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer    Date:
Judge of the Upper Tribunal  15 January 2019

