
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00632/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2017                            |On 02 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                          onyebuchi emmanuel okwara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel instructed by Carlton Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes who, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated
    on 1 February  2017,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to reject his application for a permanent
    residence card.

2.   I agreed with the grounds that the judge erred in  her  application  of
    the Devaseelan principles, treating an earlier First-tier  decision  as
    binding, and made errors in her assessment of the  credibility  of  the
    witnesses.

3.   The approach that the judge  should  have  adopted  was  to  treat  the
    earlier decision as her starting point and to consider  any  fresh  the
    evidence that was not before  the  earlier  judge.   Consequently,  the
    judge was required to consider the fresh evidence for  herself  in  her
    assessment of the issues that were before her.  The judge  adopted  the
    wrong approach by asserting that it had not been suggested  that  there
    was some very good reason why the appellant failed  to  call  the  four
    witnesses at the First appeal hearing or why he failed to adduce at the
    first appeal any other relevant evidence which was now before her, such
    as the original photographs  of  the  wedding  and  Ms  Manuela's  HMRC
    records. The judge's failure to consider this fresh evidence led her to
    commit a material error of law.

4.   The judge's decision cannot accordingly stand.

5.   The decision has to be re-made.  The appellant's  appeal  is  therefore
    remitted to Taylor House for re-hearing by a judge  other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to Taylor House for re-hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date:  2 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun





