
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/00515/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated        |                                 |                                 |
|On 29th October 2018                     |On 7th November 2018                    |                                 |                                 |




                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                            MS LEILA HAMADOU YEYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N C Kenneth instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Niger born on 28th July 1986 and she was
    granted permission to appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas, promulgated on  15th  June  2018,  dismissing  the  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  dated  29th  December
    2016.  The Secretary of  State  refused  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ('the   EEA
    Regulations') under Regulations 7 and 6 with reference to regulation  2
    of the EEA Regulations.

 2. The judge recorded  that  the  refusal  decision  took  place  on  29th
    November 2018 (although it would appear that the decision was  in  fact
    made in December) and identified the contents of the  decision  letter.
    The full decision no longer appears to be  on  file.   Nonetheless  the
    application was clearly made as a spouse and the  issues  were  whether
    the marriage was one  of  convenience  and  alleged  deception  in  the
    application form by the appellant.

 3. The judge stated at paragraph 26

    'The burden of proof is upon the Appellant and the standard of proof is
    of the balance of probabilities'.

    Application for Permission to Appeal


 4. The application for permission asserted

    (i) the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  challenged  the
    record of the visit to the  sponsor  and  the  record  thereof  but  no
    attempt was made by the judge to direct himself in accordance with Miah
    (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).

    (ii) the judge failed to follow Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.  It was
    for the Secretary of State to prove, at the outset, that  the  marriage
    was one of convenience.

    (iii) there was a mistake  of  fact.   The  witness  statement  of  the
    sponsor did not assert that the  sponsor  was  mistaken  but  that  the
    Secretary of State was mistaken.

    (iv) the judge failed to give adequate reasons for his findings at [38]
    and [30].

    (v) the judge had not considered the Immigration  Officer's  report  of
    22nd October 2016 within the context  of  all  of  the  evidence.   The
    sponsor  had  on  three  other  occasions  supported  the   appellant's
    applications.

    The Hearing

 5. At the hearing, Mr Deller conceded that there was an error  of  law  in
    the decision which was fundamental.  That  related  to  the  burden  of
    proof.

    Conclusions

 6. The legal direction on the burden of proof was a fundamental error  and
    thus the judge failed to approach the evidence correctly.  The approach
    set out at [26] of  the  decision  and  which  appears  to  be  applied
    throughout the decision contradicts that held by the Supreme  Court  in
    Sadovska at paragraph 28:

    'That must mean, as held in Papajorgji, that the tribunal has  to  form
    its own view of the facts from the evidence presented.  The  respondent
    is seeking to take away established rights. One of the most basic rules
    of litigation is that he who asserts must prove.  It  was  not  for  Ms
    Sadovska to establish that the relationship was a genuine  and  lasting
    one. It was for the respondent  to  establish  that  it  was  indeed  a
    marriage of convenience'.

 7. Nor did the judge engage with the challenge  to  the  contents  of  the
    interview report of  IO  Gill  and,  in  view  of  the  nature  of  the
    challenge, failed to address his/her mind to the question of Miah.

 8. In view of my decision on grounds (i) and (ii) I see no need to address
    the further grounds of challenge.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.







Signed           Helen Rimington                               Date     29th
    October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





