
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00952/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2018                           |On 28 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                             mr tahmid ur rahman
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Ian Howard promulgated on  21  February  2017.   Put  briefly,  the
         appeal was dismissed on the basis that the Upper Tribunal  in  Sala
         (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 had declared  that  there
         was no statutory right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
         Respondent not to grant a residence card.


      2. As the grounds make plain, the decision in  Sala  has  subsequently
         been overturned and it was on that basis that  Judge  Plimmer  gave
         permission to appeal and indicated as follows:

         "1.  In the light of  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
             wrong in law to conclude that it did not have jurisdiction  to
             hear the appeal.


         2.   The Upper Tribunal is minded to find  an  error  of  law,  set
             aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the
             case to the First-tier Tribunal.


         3.   Any party opposed  to  this  course  shall  inform  the  Upper
             Tribunal in writing with reasons, not later than 7  days  from
             the date this decision is sent.  Following  that  period,  the
             Upper Tribunal will issue its decision."

      3. On 29 December 2017, the Secretary of State filed a Rule 24  letter
         and although it is out of  time  I  take  its  content  fully  into
         account.  The Tribunal was invited to stay the appeal on the  basis
         that there are proceedings pending in the higher courts whereby the
         decision in  Sala  may  well  be  revisited,  not  least  there  is
         reference to the fact that Khan may be going to the  Supreme  Court
         and that the point is under consideration in SN (Algeria), heard by
         the Supreme Court in November 2017 with judgment is awaited.


      4. The difficulty with that submission is that  the  Court  of  Appeal
         decision in Khan is binding on the Upper Tribunal unless and  until
         overturned or declared per incuriam. It is not the practice of this
         Tribunal routinely to stay cases pending  further  developments  in
         the law. Thus ordinarily the  order  suggested  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Plimmer would have been made without further argument.


      5. The complication in the current appeal is the non-appearance of the
         appellant and the absence of any  legal  representative.   That  is
         explained by a letter on the  court  file  received  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal on 22 January 2018 and on its face copied to the Secretary
         of State but apparently not yet received. The letter from  Hafiz  &
         Haque Solicitors states that attempts have been made to contact the
         client but have failed to reach him  and  therefore  they  have  no
         instructions to represent him.


      6. In the circumstances I was satisfied that  it  was  appropriate  to
         proceed  with  the  appeal,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the
         appellant and the fact he was unrepresented. I  intend  making  the
         order as heralded by Judge Plimmer setting aside  the  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that there was a  clear  error
         of law and remitting it  to  be  heard  afresh  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.


      7. I direct that  this  determination  be  served  on  Hafiz  &  Haque
         Solicitors at the address which is currently on file,  albeit  from
         their letter of 22 January 2018 they are no  longer  on  record  as
         acting.  I also require that this  determination  is  sent  to  the
         appellant at his last known home address which is as follows:

                       [ - ]
                  [ - ]
                       [London]

Notice of Decision

 1) Having found an error of law, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside
 2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be
    heard afresh.
 3) A copy of this decision is to be sent to  the  solicitors  hitherto  on
    record as acting for the appellant with a further copy to the appellant
    personally at the address stated at paragraph 7 herein.
 4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mark Hill                      Date         23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


