
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/00676/2018
     EA/00677/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|On 8 July 2019                   |
|On 18 June 2019                           |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DM
                                     GV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office
                                   Presenting Officer
For the Respondents (original appellants):   No appearance and, on this
                                   occasion, no representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These appeals came  before  me  substantively  on  5  March  2019  when
    immediately following the hearing I gave an oral decision as  to  error
    of law and also directions.  I shall of necessity repeat some  of  what
    was contained within that decision below.

 2. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  against  a  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul,  promulgated  on  28  December  2018
    following a hearing at Taylor House some fifteen days previously, on 13
    December 2018.  For ease of reference I shall refer to Ms  DM  and  her
    son, Master GV, collectively  as  "the  claimants"  and  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, who was  the  original  respondent,  as  "the  Entry
    Clearance Officer".

 3. I have made an anonymity direction because the  second  claimant  is  a
    minor.

 4. The claimants are mother and son who were born  respectively  in  April
    1974 and October 2007.  They had applied for EEA family permits to join
    the sponsor, who is the first claimant's  husband,  Mr  V,  the  couple
    having been married on 6 September 2016.  It was and remains claimed on
    behalf of the claimants that the second claimant is Mr V's son who  had
    been born some nine years earlier.   Mr  V  is  a  Portuguese  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK and the application was  for  family
    permits to enable them to join him pursuant to their rights  under  the
    EEA Regulations.

 5. The  application  was  refused,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  having
    considered the 2006 EEA Regulations, which were  then  applicable,  but
    having in mind in particular that  there  was  no  supporting  evidence
    confirming the account given on behalf of the first claimant of matters
    which predated the marriage.  Also, the marriage certificate itself had
    been dated some ten months after the claimed marriage and there was  no
    supporting evidence corroborating the wedding.   Although  it  was  the
    claimants' case that the  first  claimant  and  Mr  V  had  been  in  a
    relationship since about 2005, there was no evidence  as  to  how  that
    relationship had been continuing since  that  date.   Although  it  was
    asserted that Mr V had been overseas since 2011 no  evidence  had  been
    provided to show how contact or financial support was maintained during
    his absence, the birth certificate of the second claimant, said to have
    been born in 2007 with the first claimant and Mr V as his parents,  was
    not issued until July 2017 (that is after the marriage relied upon) and
    was obviously not contemporaneous.  In light of the weaknesses  in  the
    evidence and the complete absence  of  supporting  evidence  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer   somewhat   unsurprisingly   concluded   that   the
    relationship was not a genuine one but the marriage  was  in  effect  a
    sham marriage.

 6. The claimants appealed against this decision and as  has  already  been
    noted above, this appeal was heard before Judge Paul sitting at  Taylor
    House on 13 December 2018 who allowed the appeal.

 7. In my error of law decision I noted that  the  decision  was  extremely
    brief and I accepted the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that the decision was not sustainable.  I  considered
    the reasoning inadequate to support the finding that the marriage was a
    genuine one and I gave my reasons for so finding.  It is not,  for  the
    reasons which appear below, necessary to set out these reasons again.

 8. As I noted in my error of law decision the real issue in this case  was
    whether or not, as the sponsor on behalf of the claimants claimed,  the
    child was the child of both parents.   The  sponsor  claimed  that  the
    second claimant was his biological child  which  was  disputed  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, who did not accept that he had  been  involved
    in a genuine relationship with the first claimant since  2005  or  that
    the second claimant who was born in 2007 was his son.  I  noted  in  my
    error of law decision that no DNA  evidence  had  been  produced  which
    should be capable of establishing that the second  claimant  is  indeed
    the son of the sponsor as the sponsor said he was.  During this hearing
    the sponsor informed the Tribunal that he would be happy to obtain this
    evidence prior to the resumed  hearing  before  me  and  I  accordingly
    agreed a date for the resumed  hearing  with  the  parties  which  gave
    sufficient time for  this  evidence  to  be  obtained.   Ms  Cunha  who
    represented the respondent at this  hearing  as  well  as  the  hearing
    before me today  did  not  seek  to  persuade  the  Tribunal  that  the
    objection could be maintained were the DNA evidence to be positive.

 9. The hearing then came before this Tribunal again on 13 May 2019  having
    been listed in the Royal Courts of Justice but the sponsor attended  on
    that occasion and informed the Tribunal that although he  had  provided
    the samples the results had not yet come  through.   Accordingly,  with
    the agreement of the respondent, this hearing was again adjourned for a
    date to be fixed.

10. Subsequently, the sponsor has been given the results of  the  DNA  test
    which are positive and show with a  huge  degree  of  likelihood,  very
    close to 100%, that the second claimant is indeed his biological son as
    claimed.  Accordingly, this appeal has now again been listed  in  front
    of this Tribunal.  The sponsor did not attend this hearing but wrote to
    the Tribunal relying on the DNA evidence.

11. Ms Cunha appeared on behalf of the respondent and informed the Tribunal
    that having seen the DNA evidence, it was accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the decision refusing the  application  was  no  longer
    sustainable as there was clear evidence that the sponsor was related to
    the child as claimed.  Accordingly the respondent invited the  Tribunal
    to again allow the claimants' appeal and I make the following decision:



Decision

12. I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul,  allowing
    the appeal, as containing a material error of  law,  but  substitute  a
    decision again allowing the appeal, on the basis of the evidence  which
    has subsequently been provided.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 June 2019
