
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00679/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 16th January 2017                |On: 17 January 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          Chaudhry Jamishaid Iqbal
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date of birth 5th August 1955.
    I have not been asked to make a direction  for  anonymity  and  on  the
    facts I see no reason to do so.

 2. The matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the  ECO
    in Islamabad was correct to have refused to grant  Mr  Iqbal  a  family
    permit under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
    Mr Iqbal asserted that he is the dependent  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  EEA
    national in question is Dutch national Mr Muhammad Luqman  Aish.    The
    ECO had refused the application on the grounds that  he  could  not  be
    satisfied that the two men were related as claimed.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal reviewed the evidence and  made  the  following
    findings:

         "I am not satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the
         Appellant has provided satisfactory evidence that he is related to
         the EEA national sponsor"

         [paragraph 10]

         "I do not find that the documents presented by  the  Appellant  are
         reliable"

         [at 11]

         "there is insufficient evidence that he was with the  EEA  national
         sponsor during this time or that he was dependent upon him"

         [at 12]

         "There is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that  the  Appellant
         is dependent upon the EEA sponsor"

         [at 13]

         "Accordingly I  conclude  that,  the  Appellant  has  not  provided
         sufficient  satisfactory  evidence  to  meet  the  requirements  of
         Regulations 6 & 7 of the EEA Regulations and is not entitled to  be
         issued with a family permit"

         [at 14]

 4. The determination concludes with the words "the appeal is allowed under
    the EEA regulations".

 5. The ECO now contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  plainly  did  not
    intend to allow the appeal.  I agree. The entire body of the  reasoning
    indicates that the Tribunal did not find the  burden  of  proof  to  be
    discharged.  The  conclusion  of   the   determination   is   therefore
    inconsistent  with  the  decision  overall.   In  the  circumstances  I
    consider it appropriate to remit the matter to Judge Hands so that  she
    has an opportunity to clarify, and if appropriate amend  her  decision.






    Decisions

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.

 7. The matter is remitted to First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands.

 8. There is no order for anonymity.   I was not  asked  to  make  such  an
    order and on the facts I see no reason to make one.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   16th
                                January 2017
