
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/00580/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                 |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 4 October 2017                     |         On 18 October 2017          |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                             QADEER AHMED KIYANI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel instructed by Kabir Ahmed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Designated Judge Woodcraft sitting at Hatton Cross on  3  April  2017)
    dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State to refuse to issue
    him with a residence card as confirmation that he had an obtained right
    of residence or a permanent right of residence as the former spouse  of
    an EEA national.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the appellant requires  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 10 August 2017 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

     1) Despite the fact that the application for the First-tier Tribunal to
        adjourn the hearing and issue an "AMOS" direction (AMOS and  Another
        -v- SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 552), was made extremely late  in  the  day
        (during closing submissions), it is arguable that the FTJ failed  to
        adequately consider the reasons why no such application was made  at
        an earlier time.  Although the FTJ  directed  himself  according  to
        Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC),   any
        evidence obtained from HMRC may well have been determinative one way
        or another of the single issue in contention, and the likelihood  of
        the estranged and divorced partner having worked in the UK  for  the
        necessary period prior the divorce (which would not necessarily have
        to be two years)  is  arguably  not  wholly  speculative  given  the
        appellant's belief that his ex-wife had been working at  Sainsbury's
        and Primark, and that she worked for an agency.

     2) Permission is granted on this ground only.   There  is  no  arguable
        merit in ground 1, given that the FtTJ  did  not  hold  any  of  the
        evidence in the respondent's bundle against the appellant.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of birth is 20  May
    1978.  Following his divorce from his ex-spouse, a Portuguese national,
    in 2013, he was issued with a residence card on 23 May 2013 as  it  was
    accepted that he had demonstrated  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 10(5).

 4. On 2 August 2015, the appellant applied for a permanent residence  card
    under Regulation 15(1)(f).  The application was refused  on  5  January
    2016.  The reasoning of the respondent was that in order to qualify for
    permanent residence, the appellant  had  to  demonstrate  that  he  had
    resided in accordance with the  Regulations  for  a  continuous  5-year
    period,  which  would  mean  that  his  former  EEA   national   spouse
    continually exercised free movement rights up to the point of  divorce,
    and that he had been employed, self-employed or  self-sufficient  since
    the divorce.  Collectively this evidence has to cover a  continuous  5-
    year period to meet the requirements of 15(1)(f).

 5. He had supplied his decree absolute, which was dated 28  January  2013.
    This meant that he had  to  demonstrate  that  his  former  spouse  was
    exercising Treaty rights continuously up to 28 January  2013.   He  had
    shown that he had been continuously employed for three years since  the
    date of the divorce.  So, to qualify for permanent  residence,  he  was
    required to provide evidence that  his  former  spouse  was  exercising
    Treaty rights for two continuous years up until the point  of  divorce.
    He had failed to provide such evidence.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Mr Layne of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant at the  hearing
    on 3 April 2017.  There was no appearance on behalf of the  respondent.
    In his subsequent decision  at  paragraph  [2],  the  Judge  noted  the
    relevant chronology.  The appellant applied for a residence card on  22
    September 2009, and this was issued to him  on  10  October  2009.   In
    2011, the appellant and sponsor separated, and the appellant  presented
    a divorce petition at the Slough County Court. On 10 December 2012, the
    decree nisi was pronounced, and the  decree  absolute  followed  on  28
    January 2013.

 7. The Judge noted at paragraph [7] that the documentary evidence provided
    by the appellant relating to the exercise of Treaty rights by  his  ex-
    spouse comprised her P60  for  the  year  ending  2009;  and  her  bank
    statements for the period March 2010 to September 2010.   He  had  also
    provided a CV that she had written which he relied on as confirming the
    various employments she had held until January 2011.

 8. In his witness statement, the appellant said that he had exhausted  all
    options to attempt to obtain further documents from  the  sponsor.   He
    had tried to contact her on the telephone and he had sent a message  to
    her.  She had refused to provide him with  the  documents  required  to
    demonstrate that  she  was  exercising  Treaty  rights  for  two  years
    preceding the divorce.  He complained that the  respondent  could  have
    sought clarification from HMRC on whether the sponsor was employed  for
    the two years preceding the date of the decree absolute.

 9. In his oral evidence, he was asked if he knew  where  the  sponsor  had
    been working during the two years leading up to  the  decree  absolute.
    He said he thought that she was working  at  Sainsbury's  and  Primark.
    When they had moved from Newcastle,  she  had  applied  for  a  job  in
    London.  She had always been working.  She got work through an  agency.
    He could not remember the name of the agency.

10. In his closing submissions, Mr Layne submitted that the  appellant  had
    exhausted all avenues, and there was only one avenue left that he could
    go down - and that was to apply  for  directions  that  the  respondent
    should make enquiries of HMRC.  He cited paragraph 5  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014.  The Judge asked Counsel whether in effect he was
    asking at this late  stage  of  the  proceedings  for  an  adjournment,
    because that was not how the case had been presented at  the  beginning
    of the hearing.  Counsel indicated that he would leave  the  matter  in
    the Tribunal's hands.  The Judge  indicated  that  he  would  give  his
    written reasons for his decision in the usual way.

11. The Judge's findings are set out at paragraphs [19]-[26].  At paragraph
    [24], he found that the appellant and  his  representatives  had  known
    from the refusal notice for over a year what the problem  in  the  case
    was, and they had had over 5 months to prepare for  the  appeal.   Very
    late in the day, a somewhat 'lukewarm' application for  an  adjournment
    had been made. It appeared to him to be wholly  speculative  with  very
    uncertain prospects of a successful outcome  in  terms  of  information
    about the sponsor being obtainable from HMRC.  If it  was  likely  that
    information might be forthcoming from  HMRC,  he  considered  that  the
    appellant via his legal representatives would have asked  for  an  AMOS
    direction somewhat earlier than in closing submissions.

12. At paragraph [36], he  said  that  the  suggestion  that  the  marriage
    between the appellant and the sponsor might have been bogus arose  from
    the evidence put forward by the appellant himself in his  bundle.   But
    he bore in mind  that  the  respondent  issued  the  appellant  with  a
    residence card and thus must have been satisfied  at  an  earlier  date
    that the marriage was genuine.  In the absence of a Presenting Officer,
    he could not take that issue any further.  What he was concerned  about
    was whether there was any possibility that an adjournment might produce
    evidence of assistance to the Tribunal in deciding this appeal.  It was
    clear to him that there was no such prospect: and  the  appellant  knew
    that: and that was why he and his representatives had not applied at an
    earlier stage for an AMOS direction.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

13. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Layne developed the case pleaded in ground  2,  which  was  the
    sole ground on which permission to appeal had been granted by the Upper
    Tribunal.  In reply, Mr Tufan adhered to the Rule 24 response  opposing
    the appeal settled by a colleague in the Specialist Appeals Team.

Discussion

14. Permission to appeal was granted on ground 2 on the basis that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge had failed adequately to consider  the  reasons
    why the appellant had not made an AMOS application in  advance  of  the
    hearing of his appeal,  rather  than  Counsel  making  what  the  Judge
    characterised as a lukewarm application for an AMOS  direction  in  his
    closing submissions.

15. However, I consider that the Judge  has  made  it  very  clear  why  he
    considers that the application was not made earlier. The Judge makes  a
    clear finding that the appellant knew that  there  was  no  possibility
    that an AMOS direction might produce evidence of assistance to  him  in
    his appeal.  This is a stark finding,  which  effectively  imputes  bad
    faith to the appellant.

16. Having carefully reviewed the  Judge's  findings  leading  up  to  this
    conclusion, I consider that the conclusion was one which  was  open  to
    him.

17. At paragraph [19], he found that the appellant's witness statement  was
    remarkably lacking in detail about the relationship between him and the
    sponsor: when it began, when and why it ended, etc.

18. At paragraph [21], he found that the  appellant's  representatives  had
    given 5 months' notice of the hearing, and they appeared to be aware of
    the possibility of applying to the Tribunal for an AMOS order directing
    the respondent to apply to HMRC for any details there might be  of  the
    sponsor's  employment.  He  continued:  "What  there  is  not   is   an
    explanation why no application was made to  the  Tribunal  for  such  a
    direction until the conclusion of the hearing."

19. The Judge summarised the content of the text messages on Whatsapp  that
    had been exchanged between the appellant and the sponsor after a period
    of 5 years.  At paragraph [22], the Judge  observed  as  follows:  "The
    appellant himself did not ask the sponsor in terms what  he  wanted  or
    needed in support of his  application.   He  referred  vaguely  to  her
    helping him with  papers  which  she,  without  more  information,  was
    understandably reluctant to assist."

20. In the circumstances, it was open to the Judge to  find  the  appellant
    not credible in his  assertion  that,  in  the  two-year  period  after
    January 2011 (the  last  date  on  which  there  was  evidence  of  her
    exercising Treaty rights) she was working at  Sainsbury's  and  Primark
    and/or that she had got work through an agency, whose name he could not
    recall.  It was open to the  Judge  to  find  that,  if  the  appellant
    genuinely believed that the sponsor had been working for  the  two-year
    period leading up to the point of divorce, he would have applied for an
    AMOS direction much earlier.

21. Mr Layne submitted to me that it was  reasonable  to  delay  making  an
    application for an AMOS direction until the conclusion of  the  hearing
    for two reasons: firstly, because paragraph 5 of  the  Procedure  Rules
    permits an application to be made during the  course  of  the  hearing;
    and, secondly, because the appellant had to  put  before  the  Tribunal
    evidence of his efforts to obtain the  evidence  himself,  which  is  a
    condition precedent of an  application  for  an  AMOS  direction  being
    successful.

22. However, as  the  Judge  indicated,  the  appellant  did  not  credibly
    demonstrate that  he  had  genuinely  tried  to  obtain  the  necessary
    documents from the ex-spouse. His request was so  vague  that  the  ex-
    spouse was understandably reluctant to assist.

23. Although this was not raised in oral argument before me,  there  is  an
    obvious additional weakness in the appellant's  case  which  reinforces
    the Judge's stark conclusion that  the  appellant  knew  that  an  AMOS
    direction would not be of assistance.

24. The appellant must have  had  documentary  evidence  of  his  ex-spouse
    exercising Treaty rights at the  point  of  divorce,  as  without  such
    evidence he would not  have  been  recognised  as  satisfying  all  the
    relevant requirements of Regulation 10(5).  However, in order to obtain
    such evidence, he would have needed to have been in  contact  with  the
    sponsor at the point of divorce or shortly  thereafter.   Yet,  as  the
    Judge noted from the text exchange, the sponsor expressed  surprise  as
    to why the appellant was contacting her after a period of 5 years.

25. Nonetheless, if the appellant had been in contact with the  sponsor  at
    the point of divorce, and she had  cooperated  with  him  by  providing
    documentary evidence of the exercise of Treaty rights at the  point  of
    divorce, it is reasonable to question why  her  cooperation  would  not
    have extended to cover the two-year period from January 2011 to January
    2013: and that if she was continuously exercising Treaty rights in this
    period, she would have provided the documents to show this; and if  she
    was not continuously exercising Treaty rights  over  this  period,  she
    would have told him.

26. However, for the avoidance of doubt, the conclusion  of  the  Judge  is
    sustainable for  the  reasons  he  gave,  which  did  not  include  the
    additional consideration set out above.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 8 October 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

