
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00505/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 16 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
              DR H H STOREY, DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                        mr Amad Wanes Imhmiad Tababa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  Libyan  national  who  in  2012  entered  into  a
    relationship with a Spanish citizen whom he has now  married.   At  the
    time they met the appellant had leave to remain as a student.

 2. It is not in doubt that they had cohabited from 5 July  2012  and  were
    married in April 2017.  Prior to the marriage the appellant had applied
    for and obtained on 8 March 2015 a residence card on the basis that  he
    is in a durable relationship with an EEA national.

 3. In 2017 he applied for a document confirming that he  has  a  right  of
    residence.  That was refused on 14 November 2017 on the basis that  the
    time spent here prior to the issue of the card on 8  March  2015  could
    not be taken into account as it was not residence  in  accordance  with
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 4.  The  judge  however  concluded  that  properly  interpreted  paragraph
    15(1)(b) was applied, such that the appellant could have  succeeded  on
    the  basis  that  there  were  only  two  possible  interpretations  at
    paragraph 15(1)(b)

      1) that the Rules require only that the appellant  must  be  a  family
         member at the point when the decision is made; or

    (2)  the  Rules  require  that  he  must  have  been  a  family  member
         throughout the five year period.

 5. The judge concluded if (2) was correct then he could not succeed but if
    (1) was correct that the appellant must succeed because he was a family
    member at the date of the hearing and the  judge  preferred  the  first
    reading.

 6. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that  the  decision  was
    contrary to the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Macastena  v
    Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ 1558 and permission was  granted  on
    that basis.

 7. When the matter came before us this morning there was no appearance  by
    or on behalf of the respondent.  No explanation has been given for that
    and in the circumstances we are satisfied that it is fair  and  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed to determine the appeal in his absence.

 8. As a preliminary matter Mr Jarvis  raised  whether  there  had,  as  it
    appears to have been the case, a concession by the Secretary  of  State
    or rather his Presenting Officer at the appeal before Judge O'Hagan  on
    12 June 2018 as recorded in his decision at [6] and [7].

 9. We do not conclude that it was a  concession  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to a residence card. Properly considered it was  a  concession
    that the appellant had been in a position whereby he could have been an
    extended family member, had he made  the  proper  application,  as  the
    facts established that he was in a durable relationship. That  explains
    the final sentence at [7]  where  the  respondent's  representative  is
    recorded as saying that the appellant could reapply at a later date.

10. Further, and in any event, there could not be a concession as  to  law;
    that cannot be binding and whether the appellant was an extended family
    member is a question of law.

11. We turn to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Aibangbee [2019] EWCA
    Civil 339 at 36 to 38.  We considered that the factual situation  there
    is on all fours with the situation here.  In  Aibangbee  the  Court  of
    Appeal approved Macastena, holding:

         "In my  judgment  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Macastena
         confirms and  applies  the  scheme  of  the  2006  Regulations  and
         Directive which I have  set  out  above,  drawing  the  distinction
         between the right of residence of a family member and  the  absence
         of any right of residence for an extended  family  member  until  a
         residence card is issued by the Secretary of State.  Only from that
         point in time do the Regulations confer upon  the  extended  family
         member a right of  residence  because  from  that  point  they  are
         treated as a family member and  may  if  appropriate  rely  on  the
         rights of residence recognised  in  Regulations  13(2)  and  14(2).
         Then and only then does the individual begin to acquire a period of
         lawful residence under the 2006 Regulations which can count towards
         establishing a  permanent  right  of  residence  on  the  basis  of
         residing in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for  a  continuous
         period of five years under Regulation 15(1)(b)."

12. Whilst we accept that the case refers to the 2006 Regulations and  this
    is a case under the 2016 Regulations, there is no  material  difference
    between the two and in any event the decisions of the Court  of  Appeal
    are underpinned by the Directive 2004/38 which has not changed  in  the
    intervening time.

13. Accordingly for these reasons we find that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of  law  and  we  set  it
    aside.

14. We  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations as on a proper  construction  of  the  law,  the  appellant
    cannot succeed as he has not resided in the United  Kingdom  under  the
    EEA Regulations prior to his marriage in July 2017. He was not a family
    member prior to that as no residence card confirming his status  as  an
    extended family member had been issued.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 2. We  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.




No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 1 May 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
