


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00448/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2018                    |On 16 March 2018                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Adnan Kabir                                       |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.
For the Respondent:    MS Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. By a "Decision and Directions" promulgated on 12 February 2018,  I  set
    aside  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Kelley
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  of
    22 December 2015 to refuse his application  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (hereafter  the
    "EEA Regulations") as an extended  family  member  of  Mr  Semaak  Butt
    (hereafter the "sponsor"), a  Dutch  national  said  to  be  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. As stated in my "Decision and Directions" dated 12 February  2018,  the
    decision  of  Judge  Kelley  was  set  aside  because  the  judge   had
    erroneously (through no fault of his own  and  in  reliance  upon  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)) dismissed  the  appeal
    on the ground that the First-tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to
    decide  the  appeal  of  an  extended  family  member  under  the   EEA
    Regulations.

 3. In my "Decision and Directions" dated  12  February  2018,  I  gave  my
    reasons for re-making  this  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  for
    adjourning the hearing on 9 February 2018 so  that  the  appellant  was
    served with the documents that were submitted by Ms Ahmad on 9 February
    2018. In essence,  the  reason  was  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    appellant to have an opportunity to comment on the  said  documents.  I
    therefore gave directions for the appellant to lodge any submissions he
    wished to make in response to the said documents no later than 4 pm  on
    the sixth working day after the "Decision and Directions" was  sent  to
    the parties.

 4. The deadline for the appellant to lodge his submissions expired  on  20
    February 2018.

 5. I received the papers for this case on 12 March 2018. The appellant has
    not lodged any submissions or any evidence in response to date.

 6. As the appellant had requested, by the letter from his  representatives
    dated 31 January 2018, that his appeal be  decided  on  the  papers,  I
    proceed to re-make the decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal  on  such
    material and evidence as is before me.

Assessment

 7. As stated in the "Decision and  Directions"  dated  12  February  2018,
    there are two issues in this appeal, as follows:

    (i)    (issue 1) whether the appellant has established his relationship
         with his sponsor; and

    (ii)   (issue 2) whether he has established that he was  residing  with
         and/or dependent upon the sponsor  either  immediately  before  his
         arrival in the United Kingdom or since his arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

 8. In relation to issue 1,  the  only  document  that  the  appellant  has
    submitted to establish his claimed relationship with his sponsor is the
    "Family  Registration  Certificate"  ("FRC")  issued  by  the  National
    Database and Registration Authority dated 26 May 2015. However:

    (i)    The respondent's document verification report  ("DVR")  dated  9
         December 2015 states that the FRC is of  genuine  paper  stock  but
         that the document had been incorrectly personalised  and  does  not
         appear as expected. As a consequence, the certificate could not  be
         relied upon as evidence of the holder's nationality or identity  or
         the family relationship as claimed on the certificate.

    (ii)   The appellant has not taken the opportunity  that  he  has  been
         given (by way of the directions dated 12 February 2018) to  comment
         on the DVR.

    (iii)  The appellant's witness statement and the sponsor's statement do
         not address the DVR. The appellant has not taken the opportunity to
         submit further witness statements in response to the  DVR.  No  one
         attended the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be  cross-
         examined. As a  consequence,  I  do  not  have  any  evidence  that
         addresses the DVR.

    (iv)   There is no DNA evidence to establish the  relationship  between
         the appellant and the sponsor. The grounds contend that it is  open
         to the respondent to request a DNA test which ignores the fact that
         the burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish his  claimed
         relationship.

    (v)    There are no identity documents to establish precisely  how  the
         appellant and the sponsor are related. The appellant has  submitted
         his own birth certificate. However, save for a family  tree,  there
         is no documentary  evidence  such  as  birth  certificates  of  all
         relevant persons in the bloodline as would establish precisely  how
         the appellant and the sponsor are related. The family tree  amounts
         to no more than  a  pictorial  representation  of  an  individual's
         assertion of the claimed relationship.

    For the reasons given above and on the whole of the  evidence,  I  find
    that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to
    establish, to the standard of the balance of probabilities, that he and
    his sponsor are related as claimed.

 9. Concerning the issue of whether the appellant has  been  residing  with
    the sponsor since his arrival in the United Kingdom, I have noted  that
    his (the appellant's) application for a residence card shows  that  the
    address he gave for himself at page 11 of the application (page  26  of
    the bundle) is the same as the address his sponsor gave for himself  at
    page 13 of the application (page 28 of the  bundle),  i.e.  [...  Road,
    Thornton Heath]. However, the document from HM  Revenue  &  Customs  at
    page 5 of the bundle and the tax return on page 12 of the bundle give a
    different address for the sponsor, i.e. [... Street, Burnley].

10. There is no evidence of financial dependency  at  all,  whether  as  to
    financial dependency immediately prior to the  appellant's  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom or since his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.  For
    example,  there  is  no  evidence  of  bank  statements  showing  money
    transfers from the sponsor to the appellant whilst he  (the  appellant)
    lived abroad immediately prior to his  arrival  in  the  UK.  The  only
    evidence is that the appellant and the sponsor have asserted  in  their
    witness  statements  that  the  sponsor  maintained  the  appellant  in
    Pakistan.  Such  bare  assertions,  unsupported  by   any   documentary
    evidence, are insufficient to discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

11. Likewise, there is no evidence of the appellant being a member  of  the
    sponsor's household,  whether  immediately  prior  to  the  appellant's
    arrival in the United Kingdom  or  since  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom apart  from  mere  assertions  which  are  unsupported  by  any
    documentary evidence. Again, such bare assertions, unsupported  by  any
    documentary evidence, are insufficient to discharge the burden of proof
    on the balance of probabilities.

12. Given the evidence described at paras  9-11  above,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has not discharged the burden of proof upon him to establish,
    on the balance of probabilities, that, since his arrival in the  United
    Kingdom, he has been residing with the  sponsor  or  that,  immediately
    prior to his arrival in the United Kingdom or since his arrival in  the
    United Kingdom, he was dependent on the sponsor or was a member of  the
    sponsor's household.

13. The reasoning and findings at paras  10-12  are  determinative  of  the
    appellant's appeal irrespective of whether  it  is  necessary  for  the
    appellant to establish that he is the sponsor's relative (paras  5  and
    17 of SM (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK  Visa  Section  [2018]
    UKSC 9 refer).

14. The appeal is therefore dismissed.


      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly  involved  the
    making of a material error of law such that the decision to dismiss the
    appeal for want of jurisdiction is set aside.


    The Upper Tribunal re-made the decision on the appellant's appeal.


      The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  22
    December 2015 is dismissed.


[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 15 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
