
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00390/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                emiljan doda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson instructed by Cohesion Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant who is a citizen of Albania, born 1989, has been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fisher.
    For reasons given in his decision promulgated  on  9  August  2019,  he
    dismissed the appeal by the appellant against the Secretary of  State's
    decision dated 11 January 2019 refusing to issue a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence under European  Community  law  as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. In essence the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application  because
    although adequate evidence had been provided to show that  his  sponsor
    (Ms Ionas, a national  of  Romania)  was  currently  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom, no further consideration was given to the
    documentation relating to the marriage as it was  considered  this  was
    one of convenience for the sole purpose  of  obtaining  an  immigration
    advantage.

 3. Judge Fisher heard evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  wife  and  two
    witnesses and summarised the issue before him at [24] as follows:

         "24. The sole issue in this appeal was whether the marriage between
             the Appellant and Ms Ionas was a marriage of convenience.   Mr
             Stainthorpe accepted that there was some form of  relationship
             in that they were living together, under the same roof, and he
             acknowledged that they may have spent time together in  Italy.
             There was no issue that  the  sponsor  was  exercising  Treaty
             rights in the UK.  I have taken in to account that there  were
             some areas  of  consistency  in  the  evidence  given  by  the
             Appellant and Ms Ionas before me.  There was also a number  of
             photographs of them together in different places."

 4. After directing himself in relation to the  authorities  in  Papajorgji
    (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC)
    and Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14, the judge gave reasons why  he  was
    satisfied that the Secretary of State had  proved  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that this was a marriage of convenience.

 5. Those reasons are set out at [27] to [36] of the decision as follows:

         "27. The Appellant and his wife were interviewed in connection with
             his application in Liverpool on 12 December 2018.  There  were
             said to be a number of discrepancies between the answers which
             they gave about their movements on 10 December 2018, only  two
             days prior to  the  interview.   In  addition,  although  they
             agreed that they had received some financial  assistance  from
             the Appellant's sister and her husband, they were said to have
             been inconsistent on the use to which that  sum  (E5,000)  had
             been put.  Reference was also made to an interview in February
             2018, at the time of one of the  previous  applications,  when
             there were said to be discrepancies in  their  description  of
             their wedding.

         28.  At question 26, of the December 2012 interview, Ms  Ionas  was
             asked:

             "So, when you first came here to live in June  of  July  2017,
             who did you live with?"

             Her answer is recorded as:

             "The first time I came here, I went to live in [inaudible]  in
             Newcastle with a friend and my husband."

         29.  She confirmed that information in the next  question  and,  at
             question 33, explained that, after a while,  her  husband  had
             decided to go away to Italy as he could not find work  in  the
             UK, hindered by his lack  of  documents,  and  that  she  then
             decided to go away, although she gave an account of travelling
             between Italy and the UK.

         30.  The sponsor sought to explain this before me on the basis that
             she was confused and frightened during this interview.  In her
             statement, she alleged that the officer  had  been  aggressive
             and threatening.  However, at question 201, she was  asked  to
             sign the record if she had understood all of the questions and
             was happy with the manner in which she had  been  interviewed.
             She did so, and raised no  issues  at  the  time.   I  do  not
             believe that she was confused during  the  interview,  as  the
             Appellant suggested, because her  answers  make  it  perfectly
             clear that he was in the UK in 2017.

         31.  On the topic of entry to the UK in 2018,  there  were  further
             discrepancies.  The Appellant never mentioned  that  his  wife
             was also in the car in which he arrived, as she said.   I  can
             see no reason why she should have lied  about  that.   He  was
             unable to tell Mr Stainthorpe where he was reconciled with her
             in Newcastle.  He may not have known the  city  well,  but  he
             ought to have been able to provide  some  description  of  the
             place where they met if he were  telling  the  truth.   It  is
             clear to me that the reason for his  inability  to  say  where
             they met was because she was with him in the  car,  hence  the
             lack of any need to reconcile.  His suggestion that his  entry
             with a friend happened by chance and  that  it  was  unplanned
             was, frankly, fanciful.  These factors have an adverse  effect
             on the credibility and reliability of the  Appellant  and  his
             wife.

         32.  I have considered the possibility that  the  Appellant  simply
             did not wish to admit to his presence in the UK in 2017, or to
             implicate his wife in the process by which he arrived in 2018,
             and that their marriage is not one of convenience, but I  have
             discounted that for the following reasons.

         33.  The Appellant said that his wife was unemployed in Italy  when
             they decided to come to the UK, although he said that she  was
             occasionally acting as a waitress.  However, she said that she
             was working  in  the  fields  at  that  time.   In  a  genuine
             relationship, I would have expected  consistency  on  which  a
             fundamental issue  as  the  employment  circumstances  of  the
             parties.

         34.  The evidence of the Appellant and his spouse was that they had
             purchased a vehicle together.  I have considered whether  this
             may be evidence of a genuine marital relationship,  but  there
             was no satisfactory evidence before me  to  show  joint  funds
             being used for it.  In addition, it is perfectly possible  for
             two  individuals  to  make  a  joint  purchase  without  their
             relationship  being  anything  other  than   a   marriage   of
             convenience.  The Appellant told Mr Stainthorpe that they  had
             not purchased anything else of significance together, but  his
             wife said that they had chosen a television together.   Again,
             if the relationship were subsisting, I am  satisfied  that  he
             would have recalled events such as that.

         35.  Another highly significant feature of the evidence related  to
             the sponsor's recent visit to Italy.  The Appellant said  that
             she had only visited her mother.  She spoke of a family issue.
              In a genuine relationship, couples  share  such  matters  and
             discuss them.  Ms Ionas said that she had spent time with  her
             mother,  her  brother  and  the  Appellant's  sister  and  her
             husband.  I can only conclude that there cannot have been  any
             discussion as to how the sponsor had spent a substantial  time
             outside the UK from the answer given by the Appellant.  I find
             it incredible that he did not apparently know  that  his  wife
             had visited his sister, if that were  true.   I  am  satisfied
             that these are not cultural issues, as  Mr  Lawson  suggested,
             but rather that they were evidence of a lack of  communication
             between the parties as their husband and wife relationship  is
             not genuine.

         36.  I have considered the evidence of the  witnesses,  both  those
             who gave oral evidence and those whose account was provided in
             written form.  I found Mrs Lane and Mrs Disani somewhat vague.
              It was clear to me that Mrs Disani did not know a great  deal
             about the parties, given her  answers  in  cross  examination.
             Furthermore, I had a distinct advantage  over  them,  and  the
             other  witnesses  whose  evidence  I  had  been  tendered   in
             statement form,  in  that  I  had  the  documentary  interview
             records, as well as hearing the oral evidence of the Appellant
             and Ms  Ionas.   I  reject  Mr  Lawson's  submission  that  in
             discounting the evidence of the witnesses,  I  would  have  to
             find that they were attempting to deceive  the  Tribunal.   On
             the contrary, I accept that they  were  doing  their  best  to
             assist, but I conclude that they have been deceived,  just  as
             the Appellant and Ms Ionas have attempted to  deceive  the  UK
             immigration authorities and, indeed, this Tribunal."

 6. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    observed that the decision arguably disclosed:

         "a lack  of  cogency  of  reasoning  accompanying  the  findings  &
         conclusions  that  the  respondent  had   shown   a   marriage   of
         convenience'    i.e.    a    marriage    contracted     for     the
         sole/predominant/decisive purpose of securing residence  rights  in
         the light of the respondent's concessions that there had been 'some
         kind of relationship' between the parties and that they  had  lived
         together previously in Italy, and the  judge's  acknowledgement  of
         "some"  consistencies  in  the  parties'  evidence  (24),  a   lack
         otherwise of consistency in their  evidence  invariably  concerning
         their  respective  recollections  forming  the  focus  of   concern
         arguably not an uncommon feature of  many  a  marriage  or  durable
         relationship, of which lack of consistency  arguably  undue  weight
         was attached."

 7. The grounds of challenge that led to the grant of  decision  cited  the
    potential material errors of law referred to in R (Iran) & Ors  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA  Civ  982  and  argued  under  the  heading  "Perverse  and
    irrational findings, Sham Marriage" that the finding  that  the  couple
    had a sham marriage was not one that was properly open to the  Tribunal
    in the light of the concessions made.  This was with reference  to  the
    Presenting Officer having reportedly conceded there was "some  kind  of
    relationship between the appellant and sponsor".   The  concession  was
    also made that they had lived together in Italy.   After  reference  to
    the  Tribunal  decision  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage   of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), the grounds continue:

         "Given that the FTTJ finds that the appellant and the sponsor lived
         together under the same roof the  finding  that  the  marriage  was
         entered into for the sole purpose of circumventing the  immigration
         rules is not sustainable.  Regardless of the concerns of  the  FTTJ
         it is more likely than not that the marriages goes beyond the  sole
         purpose of circumventing immigration rules,  particularly  as  they
         has [sic] lived together in Italy as had been conceded.

         The manner in which the FTTJ comes to his conclusions is  one  that
         is not open to him on the balance of probabilities.  Given that the
         sole issue was whether the marriage was a sham it is submitted that
         the decision is fatally flawed."

 8. Mr Timson sought at the outset of the hearing to amend the  grounds  to
    argue inadequate reasons by the judge with reference to his  assessment
    of the evidence of the witnesses and not confined to that  aspect.   He
    referred to the grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal which in
    his submission expanded the grounds of challenge.  This was opposed  by
    Ms Pettersen who contended that  the  grounds  were  based  on  alleged
    perverse and irrational findings.

 9. I refused the application.  It  was  open  to  the  granting  judge  to
    comment on the ground of challenge, but that commentary cannot be taken
    as an expansion of that ground or the  intervention  of  a  new  ground
    unless this is specifically stated.  All Judge Simpson appeared  to  be
    saying  is  that  inconsistency  of  evidence  regarding   respect   of
    recollections was arguably not an uncommon feature.  This must be  read
    in the context of a challenge made  on  the  basis  of  perversity  and
    irrationality.  The opportunity for the appellant to amend the  grounds
    arose on the grant of permission if on reflection it was considered the
    grounds pleaded were inadequate.  This has  not  happened.   Rigour  is
    required in the approach to these appeals  and  I  did  not  receive  a
    satisfactory explanation why an application to amend was only  made  at
    the outset of the hearing despite Mr  Timson's  urging  on  the  point.
    Even if I were persuaded to grant an amendment I am not persuaded  that
    a ground based on inadequate  reasons  would  on  the  face  of  it  be
    sustainable.  The  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the  two
    witnesses at paragraph [36] needs to be read  in  the  context  of  his
    summary of the additional witnesses' evidence  set  out  in  paragraphs
    [16] to [21 and it can be readily understood by reference to  paragraph
    [36] why the judge considered the evidence of Ms Lane and Disani to  be
    somewhat vague.  A satisfactory explanation is given why he  reached  a
    different conclusion from that urged by the witnesses.

10. A further reason for refusing the grant of permission  was  because  as
    observed by Ms Pettersen, the grounds of challenge were settled by  the
    appellant's legally qualified representatives.  This  was  not  a  case
    where grounds drafted by an appellant in person missed an  obvious  and
    perhaps Robinson obvious point.

11. In the course of subsequent submissions Mr Timson maintained his attack
    on the quality of the judge's  decision.   He  accepted  that  all  the
    evidence had been considered but returned to the point that  no  direct
    findings had been made on the evidence of the additional witnesses.  He
    readily acknowledged that even if a couple were in a  relationship,  it
    could nevertheless be  accepted  that  a  marriage  could  still  be  a
    marriage of convenience.  Nevertheless, he maintained that the  judge's
    analysis of the relationship  was  flawed  and  he  suggested  that  no
    reasonable judge would take the  approach  taken  by  Judge  Fisher  by
    reference to the witnesses.  He  maintained  his  attack  based  on  no
    reasonable judge  would  reach  Judge  Fisher's  conclusion  without  a
    finding on the relevant evidence.

12. By way of response Ms Pettersen contended that the  additional  witness
    evidence was in similar form (referring to the mistakes that  had  been
    made by the parties to the interview).  Even if it could be said  Judge
    Fisher had failed to set out the detail of the reasons why he found the
    witnesses' evidence to be vague, the judge had explained why he had not
    accepted the evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor.   The  judge  was
    clearly aware of all the evidence.

13. By way of response and with candour, Mr Timson reiterated that even  if
    there were a relationship it might still be a marriage of  convenience.
    He also  accepted  that  the  evidential  burden  could  shift  to  the
    appellant however it was incumbent upon the judge to make a finding  on
    the evidence.  This was "not too much to ask".

14. Having regard to the decision as a whole  and  the  evident  care  with
    which Judge Fisher set out  the  evidence  before  him,  including  the
    testimony of the appellant, sponsor and the two additional witnesses, I
    am satisfied that Judge Fisher's conclusions were  rationally  open  to
    him on the evidence, that his conclusions were adequately explained and
    there was no basis on which it can  be  said  that  his  findings  were
    irrational or perverse.

15. I have cited above Judge Fisher's reasoning from [27] to [36].  Earlier
    in the decision between [3] and [21] the judge set out  in  detail  the
    evidence.  This included at [5] a record of the  appellant's  testimony
    under cross-examination that he had arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
    October 2015, left in January 2016 and not returned  until  March  2018
    and not 2017.  This was a key point as it was the sponsor's evidence in
    interview that they had been  together  for  a  period  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2017.  The judge records  at  [9]  that  the  appellant  was
    challenged in relation to the sponsor's evidence on this  aspect.   His
    answer that the sponsor may have got things mixed  up  was  clearly  at
    odds with her evidence revealed in the detailed interview.

16. The issue over the parties' movements in 2017 prior to their engagement
    and ultimate marriage in February 2018  were  not  matters  of  concern
    raised in the  refusal  letter,  as  in  the  interviews  both  parties
    appeared to have accepted they were together for a period  of  time  in
    2017 in the United Kingdom.

17. Judge Fisher correctly directed himself as to the approach  as  to  the
    burden of proof.  In my judgment he was  rationally  entitled  to  give
    weight to the points of concern raised by the respondent and to look at
    the way in which the  appellant  sought  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden that had shifted to him having regard to the evidence  given  at
    the hearing.  It is clear from a reading of the  records  of  interview
    that the parties had not been able to  give  a  consistent  account  of
    their movements and events two days prior to that interview or  of  the
    application of a significant sum of �5,000 assistance  which  they  had
    been provided with.

18. As accepted by Mr Timson,  the  judge  did  not  overlook  any  of  the
    evidence.  His findings were open to him on what he saw and  heard  and
    in my judgment his decision is without material error.  I dismiss  this
    appeal.


Signed                                  Date 23 January 2020

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

