
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00111/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2020 via Skype for Business|On 28 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                               KEVIN MARGJONI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by Briton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Anderson, Counsel, instructed by the
                    Government Legal Department

This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected to by the
parties.  The form of hearing was V (all parties save for the judge
participating remotely). A face to face hearing was not held because it was
not practicable, and all issues could be determined on paper.

The documents that I was referred to are a letter from the Secretary of
State dated 30 June 2020 applying to withdraw from the appeal, and a costs
application from the appellant, which was a page long, the
contents of which I have recorded. The order made is described at the end
of these reasons.

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

 1. The full details of the decision under  challenge  and  the  procedural
    history to this matter are  set  out  in  my  error  of  law  decision,
    promulgated on 13 November 2019.  That decision may  be  found  in  the
    Annex to this decision.

 2. In summary, this is a substantive appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 18 December 2018 to refuse to grant the  appellant,  a
    citizen of Albania, a permanent residence card in respect of his former
    marriage to an Italian citizen.  The error of law decision is essential
    reading before reading the remainder of this disposal decision.

 3. By a letter dated 30 June 2020, the  respondent  applied,  pursuant  to
    rule 17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  to
    withdraw her case in this appeal, inviting me to allow the  appellant's
    appeal.  The respondent stated that  she  had  taken  the  decision  to
    withdraw her case in light of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  evidence
    submitted, and "material changes since the date of the  decision  under
    appeal".  The  letter  conceded  that  the  impugned  decision  of  the
    respondent under consideration in the appeal  featured  two  errors  of
    law.  The letter added that  the  appellant  would  be  issued  with  a
    permanent residence card, provided he was able to provide the necessary
    supporting documents, or a further decision would be issued.

 4. The qualitative role of the Tribunal in considering whether to  consent
    to withdrawals, pursuant to rule 17(2), is limited to ensuring that the
    withdrawing party understands the implications of  withdrawal  and  has
    taken an informed  decision:  see  Anwar  (rule  17(1):  withdrawal  of
    appeal) [2019] UKUT 125 (IAC).  Mr Anderson confirmed that the decision
    was taken by following consideration of the matter by the Secretary  of
    State's officials.  The respondent is legally represented and  has  the
    resources and expertise to understand the implications of her decision.
     I consent to the withdrawal.  I see no reason not to do so.

 5. In light of the respondent's concession, I allow this appeal.

COSTS APPLICATION

 6. The appellant has applied for costs of �4,542,  arising  from  what  he
    contends to have been the  respondent's  unreasonable  conduct  of  the
    appeal.

 7. The power for the Upper Tribunal to make a costs award against a  party
    may be found in section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
    2007, read with rule 10 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  In particular, rule 10(3) provides, where relevant:

          "...the Upper Tribunal may not make an order in respect  of  costs
         or expenses except -

         [...]

         (d)  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers  that  a  party   or   its
         representative has acted unreasonably  in  bringing,  defending  or
         conducting the proceedings..."

 8. Mr Mustafa submits  that,  by  conceding  that  the  impugned  decision
    featured  an  error  of  law,  the  respondent  acted  unreasonably  by
    defending these proceedings.

 9. I reject that submission.

10. In my error of law decision,  I  identified  various  issues  that  the
    appellant would have to address by way of further evidence at a resumed
    hearing,  in  order  to  determine   the   substantive   issues   under
    consideration in the appeal.  At [65]  to  [67]  of  my  error  of  law
    decision, I said:

         "[65]    Drawing the above analysis  together,  it  is  clear  that
         there are a range of factors which will need to  be  considered  in
         order to determine whether the purported marriage celebrated by the
         appellant and the sponsor was valid.

         [66] This matter will be relisted before the Upper Tribunal  for  a
         fact-finding  hearing  to  consider  the  facts   surrounding   the
         marriage, in light of the considerations outlined in this decision.



         [67] I  permit  the  appellant  to  adduce  such  further  evidence
         concerning the ceremony, his intentions and that of the sponsor, as
         necessary in order to enable sufficient findings of fact to be made
         in order to determine whether the marriage was sufficiently  within
         the terms of  the  MA  1949  to  benefit  from  the  "knowingly  or
         wilfully" caveat, and whether it may be valid on any other basis."

11. The appellant served a revised bundle of evidence, seeking  to  address
    the above points, on 19 June  2020.   The  bundle  featured  a  witness
    statement from the appellant dated 14 June 2020.

12. Under the circumstances, it was entirely reasonable for the  respondent
    to maintain her opposition to the appeal until she  had  sight  of  the
    additional evidence.

13. Although the respondent has now conceded  that  the  original  decision
    letter featured an error of law on two discreet bases, it is noteworthy
    that the appellant did not advance his appeal on those bases.  An early
    issue in the case was whether  the  appellant's  marriage,  which  took
    place in the Albanian Embassy in London, was governed by Albanian  law,
    or English law.  Mr Mustafa pursued the rather fanciful submission that
    the marriage should be treated as though having taken place in Albania.
     He also contended that the publication of a collated list of  approved
    premises for the purposes of the Marriage Act 1949 on www.gov.uk on  23
    November 2012 somehow conferred on  marriages  at  unapproved  premises
    before that date, such as the  appellant's  marriage  ceremony  at  the
    Albanian Embassy, validity they would  not  otherwise  enjoy,  with  no
    focus on the "knowingly and wilfully" matter identified at heart of  my
    error of law decision.  That too was a fanciful submission.

14. It was not until my error of law decision  identified  defects  in  the
    respondent's  decision  concerning   the   "knowingly   and   wilfully"
    requirement in section 49 of the Marriage Act 1949 that the appellant -
    eventually - provided evidence concerning his state  of  mind  for  the
    purposes of section 49, which has led the respondent  to  withdraw  her
    case  in  these  proceedings.   This  he  did  on  19  June  2020.   By
    considering and responding to that evidence in advance of  the  hearing
    before me, the respondent was doing no more than could be  expected  of
    any responsible litigant, namely keeping her position under review.

15. Accordingly, I do not consider that the respondent  acted  unreasonably
    in defending these proceedings.  As such, the  criteria  for  making  a
    costs  award  in  favour  of  the  appellant  are  not  met,  and  this
    application for costs against the respondent is dismissed.

16. I make no order as to costs.



Notice of Decision

The appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  18  December  2018  is
allowed.

The appellant's application for costs against the respondent is refused.

I make no fee award.  Had the appellant collated the evidence  he  belatedly
provided on 19 June 2020 at  a  much  earlier  point,  the  need  for  these
proceedings to be brought could have been avoided altogether.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith Date 15 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00111/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2019                 |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                               KEVIN MARGJONI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by Briton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


17. This case concerns (i) whether a marriage conducted in the premises  of
    a diplomatic mission located in the United Kingdom according to the law
    of the sending State is valid under the law of England and  Wales;  and
    (ii) the application of the principle of the presumption  of  marriage.
    These points go to whether the appellant is  entitled  to  a  right  to
    reside under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016
    ("the 2016 Regulations") on the basis that he was at the material times
    the family member of an EEA national.

Factual background

18. The appellant, Kevin  Margjoni,  is  a  citizen  of  Albania,  born  20
    February 1977. On 18 June 2012, he married  Marika  Rossi,  an  Italian
    citizen  ("the  sponsor"),  in  a  ceremony  apparently  conducted   in
    accordance with Albanian law, in the Albanian Embassy in  London.   The
    marriage was subsequently registered with the Albanian authorities  and
    was later recognised by the Commune of Verona.

19. On 22 March 2013, the respondent issued the appellant with a  residence
    card as the "family member of an EEA national", valid  until  22  March
    2018, in respect of his marriage to the sponsor.  On 20 July 2018,  the
    appellant applied for a permanent residence card, on the basis that  he
    had accrued five years' continuous residence  in  accordance  with  the
    2016 Regulations.  On 8 November 2018, the  parties  obtained  a  legal
    separation of their marriage before the Ordinary Court of Verona.

20. On 18 December 2018, the respondent refused the appellant's application
    for a permanent residence card, on the basis that his marriage  to  the
    sponsor was not valid.  The Albanian Embassy  was  not  on  a  list  of
    "approved premises" for  the  purposes  of  section  26(1)(bb)  of  the
    Marriage Act 1949.  In addition, the respondent considered the parties'
    (unmarried) relationship  to  be  one  of  convenience.   This  is  the
    decision which was the subject of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and is the underlying decision  under  consideration  in  this
    appeal.

21. In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  3  April  2019,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain dismissed the appeal.  The judge agreed with the
    respondent that the marriage was not valid, as the Embassy was  not  an
    "approved premises" for the purposes of the MA 1949.   The  judge  also
    accepted  the  respondent's  case  that  the  marriage   was   one   of
    convenience; the parties had been invited to attend marriage interviews
    with the respondent, twice, and had failed to do so, each  time.   That
    was sufficient, held the  judge,  to  discharge  the  burden  upon  the
    respondent to demonstrate that the relationship was one of convenience.

22. Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan granted permission to  appeal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge had not adequately considered
    the impact of the Italian authorities' acceptance of  the  validity  of
    the marriage, and that he failed  properly  to  consider  the  relevant
    evidential  burden  of  proof  applicable  to  the  identification   of
    marriages of convenience.

23. The matter was first listed before me on  31  July  2019.   Mr  Mustafa
    proposed to focus his submissions on that occasion on the  validity  of
    the appellant's marriage under Albanian law, which, in his  submission,
    was the lex loci celebrationis applicable to the marriage ceremony.  In
    light  of  Mr  Mustafa's  proposed   submissions,   I   adjourned   the
    proceedings, with the  directions  that  each  party  was  address  the
    following questions:

             1.   Do the requirements  of  Marriage  Act  1949  to  approve
             premises  for  marriages  apply  to  ceremonies  conducted  in
             foreign states' diplomatic premises in the United Kingdom?

             2.   For the purposes of the lex loci celebrationis  doctrine,
             in view of the  location  of  the  ceremony  in  the  Albanian
             embassy, which country did the  marriage  take  place  in  and
             which legal regime governed it?

     The parties complied  with  my  directions,  each  serving  a  skeleton
argument.

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

The 2016 Regulations

24. Regulation 15 of the 2016 Regulations governs acquisition of the  right
    of permanent residence.  Where relevant, it provides:

           "15 Permanent right of residence

               1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
                  the United Kingdom permanently -

                  [...]

                  (b)  a family member  of  an  EEA  national  who  has  not
                       himself an EEA national but who has  resided  in  the
                       United Kingdom with the EEA  national  in  accordance
                       with these regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
                       five years..."

25. Regulation 19(2) provides that the Secretary  of  State  must  issue  a
    person who is not an EEA  national  who  has  the  right  of  permanent
    residence under regulation 15 with a permanent residence card no  later
    than six months after an application is received, upon  the  production
    of (a) a valid passport; and (b) proof that the person has a  right  of
    permanent residence.

26. "Family member" is defined by regulation 7(1)(a) to include the  spouse
    of an EEA national.  A "spouse" does not include a party to a "marriage
    of convenience".  Regulation 2(1) defines a "marriage  of  convenience"
    to include:

         "...a  marriage  entered  into  for  the  purpose  of  using  these
         Regulations, or any other right conferred by the EU Treaties, as  a
         means to circumvent-

             (a)  immigration rules applying to non-EEA nationals (such  as
             any applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

             (b)  any other criteria that the  party  to  the  marriage  of
             convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to  enjoy  a
             right to reside under these Regulations or the EU Treaties..."

27. Regulation 22 of the 2016 Regulations makes provision for the Secretary
    of State to verify whether certain persons  enjoy  a  right  to  reside
    under the Regulations.  It provides, where relevant:

          "(1)  This regulation applies where the Secretary of State-

             (a)  has reasonable doubt as to whether a person ("A")  has  a
             right to reside or a derivative right to reside; or

             (b)  wants to verify the eligibility  of  a  person  ("A")  to
             apply for an EEA family permit or documentation  issued  under
             Part 3.

         (2)  Where this regulation applies,  the  Secretary  of  State  may
         invite A to-

             (a)  provide evidence to support the existence of a  right  to
             reside or a derivative right to reside (as the case  may  be),
             or to support an application  for  an  EEA  family  permit  or
             documentation under this Part; or

             (b)  attend an interview with the Secretary of State.

         (3)  If A purports to have a right to reside  on  the  basis  of  a
         relationship with another person ("B"), (including, where  B  is  a
         British citizen, through having lived with B in another EEA State),
         the Secretary of State may invite B to-

             (a)  provide information about their relationship or residence
             in another EEA State; or

             (b)  attend an interview with the Secretary of State.

         (4)  If without good reason A or B (as the case may be)-

             (a)  fails to provide the information requested;

             (b)  on at least two occasions, fails to attend  an  interview
             if so invited;

                  the Secretary of State may  draw  any  factual  inferences
                  about A's entitlement to  a  right  to  reside  as  appear
                  appropriate in the circumstances.

         (5)  The Secretary of State may decide following the drawing of  an
         inference under paragraph (4) that A does not  have  or  ceases  to
         have a right to reside.

         (6)  But the Secretary of State must not decide  that  A  does  not
         have or ceases to have a right to reside on the sole basis  that  A
         failed to comply with this regulation."

Approved Premises - the Marriage Act 1949

  28. The Marriage Act 1949 ("the MA 1949") governs  marriages  in  England.
      It imposes certain procedural and substantive requirements which  must
      be met in order for parties to a marriage conducted in England  to  be
      regarded  as  valid,  for  example  relating  to  the   superintending
      official, the presence of witnesses,  access  of  the  public  to  the
      ceremony etc.   Among  those  requirements  is  the  necessity  for  a
      marriage to be conducted in a location permitted by the Act.   Certain
      premises may be "approved premises" for the conduct of marriages:  see
      section 26(1)(bb).  Section 46A of the regime enables the Secretary of
      State to make regulations as to the "approved  premises"  regime:  see
      the Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Approved  Premises)  Regulations
      2005.  Those Regulations enable local authorities to approve  premises
      where marriages may be celebrated, provided certain criteria are  met.
      Regulation 10 makes provision for a register of approved  premises  to
      be maintained by each local authority  granting  approval.   There  is
      also a consolidated list of approved premises available on the  gov.uk
      website.

  29. Section 49 of the MA 1949 provides that certain  marriages  under  the
      Act will be void for non-compliance with the essential formalities  of
      the Act, in certain circumstances.  It provides, with emphasis added:

             "If any persons knowingly and wilfully  intermarry  under  the
             provisions of this Part of this Act-

             [...]

                  (ee)  in the case  of  a  marriage  purporting  to  be  in
                  pursuance  of  section  26(1)(bb)  of  this  Act,  on  any
                  premises that at the time the marriage is  solemnized  are
                  not approved premises;

              ...the marriage shall be void."

Burden and standard of proof

30. It is for the appellant to demonstrate that he meets  the  criteria  in
    regulations 15 and 19  of  the  2016  Regulations  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities standard.  In the first instance, he  does  not  have  to
    demonstrate  that  the  marriage  or  relationship  was  not   one   of
    convenience, but it is necessary for him to establish that the marriage
    was valid, in order  to  have  accrued  residence  rights  in  his  own
    capacity pursuant to it.

31. Where an appellant has established that he or she is a party to a valid
    marriage, the legal burden rests with the respondent to establish  that
    it is a marriage of convenience.  See Rosa v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14 at [24], where the Court  of  Appeal
    said, with emphasis added:

         "the legal burden lies on the Secretary of State to prove  that  an
         otherwise valid marriage is a marriage  of  convenience  so  as  to
         justify the refusal of an application for a  residence  card  under
         the EEA Regulations"

    The reference to an "otherwise valid marriage" conveys the  expectation
    - consistent with the burden of proof to  which  applicants  under  the
    2016 Regulations  are  subject  -  that  it  is  for  an  applicant  to
    demonstrate that a marriage is valid.  Having done so, it will  be  for
    the respondent to demonstrate that the  marriage  (despite  its  formal
    validity) was one of convenience.

32. For further details concerning marriages of convenience, see Papajorgji
    (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC),
    Agho v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  1198
    at, e.g., [13],  and  Sadovska  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 54 at, e.g., [28].  Throughout,  the  respondent
    bears the legal burden of demonstrating that the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience.  The burden is not discharged merely by demonstrating that
    there  is  a  "reasonable  suspicion"  that  the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience, although if the respondent does so, the appellant will  be
    expected to respond to the allegation: see Rosa at [24]  to  [27].   In
    those circumstances, the evidential burden  shifts  to  the  appellant.
    The basic rule is this: "he who asserts must prove" (Sadovska at  [28],
    per Lady Hale).

33. By analogy, the same process applies to allegations that  an  unmarried
    partner was in a relationship of convenience.

DISCUSSION

Relationship of convenience

  34. I  will  deal  first  with  the  relationship  of  convenience  point.
      Although the refusal letter had not accepted  the  purported  marriage
      between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  to  have  been  valid,  it
      nevertheless addressed whether the relationship between  the  two  had
      been one of convenience.

  35. It is not necessary to resolve the validity of the marriage  point  in
      order to dispose of this issue, which can be dealt with shortly, as Mr
      Tarlow realistically accepted at  the  hearing.   Regulation  22(3)(a)
      enables the Secretary of State to invite  a  person  to  an  interview
      where that person seeks to rely on a relationship - any relationship -
      with another person in order to establish a right to reside, where the
      Secretary of State has reasonable doubt about whether  the  individual
      has a right to reside, or wants  to  verify  the  eligibility  of  the
      individual to apply  for  documentation  under  Part  3  of  the  2016
      Regulations.

  36. The operative wording of the refusal letter was as follows:

         "To  enable  the  Secretary  of  State  to  fully   consider   your
         application, you and your EEA or Swiss national unmarried  partner,
         Marika Rossi, were invited to attend an interview on 15  July  2018
         or 4 July 2018.

         As you  have  failed  to  attend  an  interview  on  at  least  two
         occasions, the Secretary of State may draw factual inferences about
         your rights to reside  in  the  UK.  You  have  failed  to  provide
         evidence to support  your  reasons  to  be  unable  to  attend  the
         interviews.

         Based on the above  information  and  the  failure  to  attend  the
         marriage into the on two separate occasions, we have inferred  that
         there are reasonable grounds to suspect that your  relationship  is
         one of convenience  for  the  sole  purpose  of  you  obtaining  an
         immigration advantage. You are therefore  considered  as  a  former
         unmarried partner of an EEA national."

  37. As may be seen from the above extract, the sole basis upon  which  the
      respondent purported to be able to treat the relationship between  the
      appellant and the sponsor as one of convenience was the failure of the
      parties to attend the marriage interviews. The refusal letter does not
      outline the basis upon which the  respondent's  concerns  led  to  the
      invitations to the marriage  interviews  being  issued  in  the  first
      place, nor does it provide  any  other  basis  setting  out  what  the
      concerns of the respondent were concerning  whether  the  relationship
      was one of convenience.

  38. I consider this approach to fall foul of regulation 22(6) of the  2016
      Regulations, which prohibits the  respondent  from  deciding  that  an
      individual is in a marriage of convenience "on the sole basis  that  A
      failed to comply with this regulation." The sole basis upon which  the
      respondent purported  to  treat  the  relationship  as  being  one  of
      convenience was the failure to attend the interviews, or  for  failing
      to  provide  reasons  for  not  attending  the  interviews,  which  is
      essentially the same objection.  As such,  the  respondent  misapplied
      regulation 22(4) and (5).  It was not open to her to decide  that  the
      appellant and sponsor were in a marriage of convenience in the absence
      of any additional material demonstrating that  there  were  reasonable
      grounds for suspicion.

  39. Addressed pursuant to the evidential pendulum outlined  in  paragraphs
      31 and 32,  above,  (applied  by  analogy  to  any  "relationship"  of
      convenience  under  the  2016  Regulations),  it  follows   that   the
      respondent has not established the presence of reasonable grounds  for
      suspicion.  There was no basis upon which the appellant could properly
      have been expected to respond to the respondent's  concerns,  and  the
      evidential pendulum did not swing to  him.   The  respondent  has  not
      discharged the legal  burden  she  bears  of  demonstrating  that  the
      relationship was one of convenience.

  40. It follows, therefore, that this aspect of  Judge  Hussain's  decision
      involved the making of an error of law.  The impact of that  error  on
      the outcome of the appeal in large part turns on whether there  was  a
      valid marriage between the appellant and the sponsor.  This is because
      it is only if the appellant was validly married to the sponsor that he
      will be defined as a "family member" for the purposes of accruing  the
      right of permanent residence in his own capacity.

Validity of the marriage: Marriage Act 1949

41. The next question to resolve is whether the marriage was valid for  the
    purposes of the appellant satisfying the definition of "family  member"
    in regulation 7 of the 2016 Regulations.

42. The judge summarised the respondent's reasoning concerning the validity
    of the marriage in these terms, at [4]:

         "All marriages  that  take  place  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  be
         recognised as valid must be carried  out  in  accordance  with  the
         requirements of the  Marriage  Act  1949.  For  a  marriage  in  an
         embassy, or other diplomatic premises to  be  valid,  the  location
         must be approved and appear in  the  approved  premises  list.  The
         Albanian embassy was not on such a list."

43. At [11], the judge accepted the respondent's analysis that the marriage
    was not valid:

         "The Tribunal is of the opinion that the  appellant's  marriage  is
         not recognised as a valid one in English law because  it  does  not
         conform with the requirements of the Marriage  Act  1949,  for  the
         reasons given by the Secretary of State."

44. It is common ground that the  Albanian  embassy  is  not  an  "approved
    premises" for the purposes of section 26(1)(bb) of the MA  1949  for  a
    marriage conducted under that Act.  The essential question arising from
    that fact is what is the impact of that deficiency on the  validity  of
    the marriage?

Lex loci celebrationis

45. Mr Mustafa's primary submission is that,  as  the  marriage  had  taken
    place in the Albanian Embassy, it was subject to Albanian law.  It  had
    been registered with the Albanian authorities and was  not  subject  to
    the jurisdiction of the law of England and Wales,  he  submitted.   The
    unique diplomatic status  of  the  embassy  means  that  the  lex  loci
    celebrationis is Albanian law,  and  there  could  be  no  dispute,  he
    submits, that the marriage is valid on that basis.  On that basis,  any
    non-compliance with the MA 1949 was immaterial.

46. In a skeleton argument prepared for these proceedings, Mr Tarlow relied
    on Radwan v Radwan [1973] Fam 24 to  resist  this  submission.   Radwan
    concerned the recognition of a talaq administered pursuant to  Egyptian
    law in the Egyptian consulate in London, for the purposes of the law of
    England and Wales.  Had the talaq been issued in Egypt,  the  lex  loci
    celebrationis would have been Egyptian law, and the  talaq  would  have
    been recognised in this jurisdiction.  English law  made  no  provision
    for the recognition of a talaq administered in England.

47. Following an extensive survey of the authorities and academic  writings
    concerning the status of diplomatic premises, Mr Justice  Cumming-Bruce
    held at [31] that:

         "In all of [the authorities] I find a  consensus  of  opinion  that
         there is no valid foundation for the proposition, or alleged  rule,
         that  diplomatic  premises  are  to  be  regarded  as  outside  the
         territory of the receiving State."

48. My attention has not been drawn to anything that demonstrates that  the
    position has changed since Radwan.  On the contrary, the  position  has
    been reinforced.

49. Mr Tarlow relied on Dukali v Lamrani v HM Attorney General [2012]  EWHC
    1748 (Fam).   In January 2002, a joint  British-Moroccan  wife  married
    her Moroccan husband pursuant to a Moroccan civil ceremony of  marriage
    conducted at the  Moroccan  Consulate  in  London.   The  ceremony  was
    performed by a qualified Moroccan Udul, or Adoul (a notary).  There was
    no compliance or purported compliance with any of the  requirements  of
    the English Marriage Acts 1949 to 1994.  The ceremony was  followed  by
    wedding  parties  in  London,  a  honeymoon  abroad,   and   subsequent
    cohabitation, with the "marriage" lasting for an effective duration  of
    around 7 and a half years.  At all material times, the parties lived in
    London.

50. It was common ground that the marriage had been conducted correctly  so
    far as Moroccan law was concerned, and the marriage was registered  in,
    and recognised by, Morocco.  The marriage broke down  and  the  parties
    obtained a divorce pursuant to judicial proceedings in Morocco, in June
    2011.  The issues in the case concerned whether the wife  was  entitled
    to financial relief from the husband under English law.  In turn,  that
    issue was to be determined by reference to whether the marriage in  the
    Consulate was valid under, and recognised by, the law  of  England  and
    Wales.

51. At [23] and [24], Mr  Justice  Holman  rejected  the  notion  that  the
    validity of the marriage fell to be determined by anything  other  than
    English law,  even  though  it  had  been  conducted  in  the  Moroccan
    Consulate:

         "23.  It thus seems that, in 2002, both these  parties  were  under
         the impression or belief that their ceremony  of  marriage  was  of
         legal effect in both Morocco and England, and that that belief  was
         fully shared by  the  staff  of  the  Consulate  within  which  the
         marriage took place. It has, however,  been  established  that  the
         Moroccan Consulate in London is not, and never has been, registered
         or approved by the General Register Office or the  local  authority
         as a place or venue for a  marriage  and  is  not  an  approved  or
         registered building under the Marriage Acts 1949 to 1994.  Although
         the Moroccan Consulate rely on  the  Vienna  Convention  for  their
         opinion and belief that the marriage is "valid under English  law",
         it is now too firmly established to admit of any argument (and none
         was suggested or addressed to me) but  that,  for  the  purpose  of
         marriage or divorce, the premises of a consulate are  part  of  the
         territory of the receiving State and not of the sending State. This
         was firmly established by the case of Radwan v Radwan [1973] Fam 24
         which has been invariably followed  and  applied  without  question
         ever since.

         24.  In short, this was a marriage that was  contracted  wholly  in
         England,  even  although  within  the  premises  of  the   Moroccan
         Consulate. No rule is more  firmly  established  in  this  area  of
         English private international law  than  that  formal  validity  is
         governed by the law of the place where a  marriage  is  contracted,
         viz in this case England." (Emphasis added)

52. As may be seen from the added emphasis, above, the Radwan approach  was
    held by the High Court to  remain  good  law.   The  Consulate  was  in
    London, not Morocco, and that is where the marriage  took  place.   The
    validity of the purported marriage fell to  be  determined  by  English
    law, rather than Moroccan law.  The marriage was held  to  be  a  "non-
    marriage", as it had not complied  with,  nor  was  it  recognised  by,
    domestic law.

53. Nothing in the  authorities  relied  upon  by  Mr  Mustafa  permits  or
    requires a departure from the Radwan approach.

54. Mr Mustafa highlighted the Hague  Convention  on  the  Celebration  and
    Recognition of the Validity of Marriages, 14  March  1978.   Article  9
    provides,

         "A marriage celebrated by a diplomatic agent or  consular  official
         in accordance with his law shall similarly be considered  valid  in
         all Contracting  States,  provided  that  the  celebration  is  not
         prohibited by the State of celebration."

    This is of no assistance to the appellant.  There is no suggestion that
    the United Kingdom is a party to this treaty, still less  that  it  has
    been ratified and incorporated into domestic law.

55. Contemporary diplomatic practice confirms this approach.  For  example,
    in Satow's Diplomatic Practice, 7th edition (Oxford  University  Press,
    2016) at [13.8] the position is summarised as follows:

          "...it is now everywhere accepted that it does not mean  that  the
         diplomat is not legally present in the receiving State or that  the
         embassy is deemed to be foreign territory.   Marriage,  or  crimes,
         occurring on diplomatic mission premises are  regarded  in  law  as
         taking place in the territory of the receiving State..."

56. In light of the above,  I  reach  the  following  findings.   Marriages
    conducted in diplomatic premises located in  the  United  Kingdom  take
    place in the territory of the United Kingdom.  Their validity is to  be
    determined by reference to the law of the United  Kingdom  jurisdiction
    within which the diplomatic premises  is  located.   For  the  Albanian
    Embassy in London, the lex loci celebrationis to determine the validity
    of the marriage is the law of England and Wales.

57. The judge was, therefore,  correct  to  analyse  the  validity  of  the
    marriage through the lens of domestic law; it is  on  that  same  basis
    that I must examine his approach, in  order  to  ascertain  whether  it
    involved the making of an error of law.

Approved premises list

58. Mr Mustafa submits that the approved premises regime  cannot  apply  to
    marriages conducted before 23 November 2012.  That was  the  date  upon
    which the current list  of  all  approved  premises  was  published  on
    www.gov.uk.  As such,  he  submits,  at  the  time  this  marriage  was
    celebrated, 18 June 2012, the current restrictive requirements  of  the
    "approved premises" regime  were  not  in  force.   A  marriage  in  an
    unapproved premises cannot be void under section 49(ee) on this  basis,
    submits Mr Mustafa, with the result that the judge erred in law.

59. This submission is misconceived.  The consolidated  list  of  premises,
    published  on  gov.uk  on  23  November  2012,  had  no  legal   effect
    whatsoever.   It  was  simply  a  consolidated  list,   collating   the
    individual approvals granted  by  local  authorities  pursuant  to  the
    approved premises regime.  The approved premises regime was created  by
    the Marriage Act 1994, and commenced for all purposes by 1 April  1995.
    There can be no suggestion that marriage  in  an  unapproved  premises,
    prior to the publication of the list, was not subject to the  statutory
    approved premises requirement contained in the 1949 Act.   The  ability
    to get married in an approved premises has existed since 1 April  1995.
    The fact that the current consolidated list of  all  approved  premises
    was not published online until 23 November 2012 cannot, therefore, cure
    a defect in a marriage which took place before that  date  in  premises
    which are not approved.

60. No error of law arose on this basis.

Knowingly or wilfully

61. Section 49 of the MA 1949 provides that  marriages  are  void  if  "any
    persons knowingly or wilfully" marry "under the provisions of this Part
    of this Act" in breach of the provisions.  An  innocent  mistake  which
    meant that an essential formality was  overlooked  does  not  render  a
    marriage void.  A deliberate breach of the conditions of the  1949  Act
    would render the marriage void.  The effect of section  49  can  be  to
    "save" a marriage celebrated otherwise  than  in  conformity  with  the
    requirements of the 1949 Act, provided the mistake was innocent.

62. In order to obtain the benefit of the "knowingly or wilfully" caveat in
    section 49, it is necessary for the parties to  have  sought  to  bring
    their ceremony within the provisions of the Act in the first place: the
    marriage must be "under the provisions of this Part of this Act".   The
    section 49 protections  are  mirrored  by  section  11(a)(iii)  of  the
    Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, which provides that a  marriage  shall  be
    void where the parties, "have  intermarried  in  disregard  of  certain
    requirements as to the formation of marriage."  The term "in disregard"
    correlates to the "knowingly or wilfully" requirement of section 49  of
    the 1949 Act; it requires the  parties  (i)  to  have  known  what  the
    requirements of the Act were; and (ii) to have married in  defiance  of
    those requirements.

63. It appears that the "knowingly or wilfully" requirement for a  marriage
    to be void was included to reflect, in part, the established  doctrines
    concerning the presumption of the validity of marriages.

64. The legislative origins of the  "knowingly  and  wilfully"  requirement
    were traced in MA v JA v HM Attorney General [2012] EWHC 2219 (Fam)  to
    the Marriage Act 1823; the insertion of the  caveat  was  described  at
    [44] as lying in the desire to alleviate the previously  harsh  effects
    of non-compliance with the requisite formalities.   The  facts  of  the
    case  involved  an  Islamic  marriage  conducted  otherwise   than   in
    accordance with the MA 1949.  The court had to  determine  whether  the
    Islamic marriage ceremony  conducted  by  the  parties  resulted  in  a
    marriage which was "sufficiently within" the MA 1949 such that  it  was
    entitled to legal recognition as a valid marriage (see  [82]),  whether
    it was a marriage which was a void marriage  (which  would  bring  some
    advantageous consequences under the Matrimonial Causes  Act  1973),  or
    whether it resulted in a "marriage" that was of  no  effect  whatsoever
    under English law.  The relationship had not broken down.  The  parties
    sought a declaration pursuant to section 55(a) of the  Family  Law  Act
    1986 that their marriage was a valid marriage at its inception.  By the
    time of the proceedings, they had cohabited as man and wife for  around
    10 years.

65. Mr Justice Moylan, as he then was, observed,

         "The circumstances in which a  marriage  was  void  were  expressly
         restricted no doubt in part because of the presumption in favour of
         finding that a marriage had been validly created."

    The court found that the ceremony had  created  a  marriage  which  was
    entitled to be recognised as valid under English law; see [78], below.

66. Returning to the present matter, at no point in the refusal letter  did
    the respondent consider whether the appellant "knowingly  or  wilfully"
    married in breach of the requirement to marry in an approved  premises.
    Neither did the judge.  The assumption in the refusal  letter,  and  in
    the decision of the  judge  below,  is  that  non-compliance  with  the
    requirement to be married in an "approved premises" automatically leads
    to the conclusion that the marriage is not valid.  That  is  incorrect.
    By  overlooking  the  requirement  that  the  marriage  be   contracted
    "knowingly and wilfully" in breach of the provisions of  the  MA  1949,
    the judge made an error of law.

67. The question then arises as to whether the error of law was such that I
    need to set the decision aside.

68. It is not clear from  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to  whether  the  appellant  was  "knowingly  or  wilfully"
    marrying in unapproved premises.  His statement speaks of the  marriage
    "being registered with the Council in Albania", but provides no further
    detail of whether he considered that  he  was  marrying  in  conformity
    with, or otherwise in accordance with, English law.  His  statement  is
    silent as to why  he  chose  to  marry  in  the  embassy,  rather  than
    elsewhere.  As such, it is not possible to ascertain from the  material
    before the Upper Tribunal whether the appellant "knowingly or wilfully"
    married in defiance of  the  approved  premises  regime.   It  will  be
    necessary for the matter  to  be  reheard  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    consider the intentions of the appellant and the sponsor,  and  whether
    they knowingly and wilfully married in disregard of the requirements of
    the Act.

69. Other considerations are likely to be relevant to the question  of  the
    validity of the marriage, which will also have to be considered at  the
    resumed rehearing.   I have set some  of  these  out  below,  in  order
    highlight the issues upon which the Tribunal will have to make findings
    of fact.

Presumption of marriage

70. There have been a number of authorities in the family courts concerning
    when a  ceremony,  ritual  or  other  form  of  purported  marriage  is
    sufficient to be regarded as a marriage under  the  MA  1949,  and,  by
    contrast, when the same was of no effect at all.

71. Even where there is non-compliance with  the  requirements  of  the  MA
    1949, certain presumptions of marriage may  be  engaged.   There  is  a
    presumption of marriage  that  follows  from  a  ceremony  followed  by
    cohabitation: see Mahadervan v Mahadervan [1964] P 233, per Sir Jocelyn
    Simon P. (as he then was), at 244.

72. There is also a presumption from cohabitation, which  is  described  at
    [3.154] of Rayden & Jackson on  Relationship  Breakdown,  Finances  and
    Children (September 2019, LexisNexis) in these terms:

         "Where there is no positive evidence of any marriage  having  taken
         place, where parties have cohabited for such a length of  time  and
         in such circumstances so as to  have  acquired  the  reputation  of
         being spouses, a lawful marriage may be presumed to exist."

73. The presumption is an evidential one and may be rebutted,  particularly
    through evidence of non-compliance with  the  requirements  of  the  MA
    1949.   There  comes  a  point  where   the   non-compliance,   whether
    inadvertent or deliberate, is so significant, where the ingredients  of
    the ceremony of  marriage  were  so  far  removed  from  the  essential
    requirements of  the  legislative  framework,  or  where  the  parties'
    intention was not even to purport to marry under the MA 1949  that  the
    marriage is, in legal terms, a "non-marriage".

74. The question has been considered in a long line of authorities.  I will
    highlight a selection below.

75. In R v Bham [1966] 1 QB 159, the Court of Criminal  Appeal  allowed  an
    appeal against a conviction for the offence of solemnising  a  marriage
    other than in a licenced building.   The  defendant  had  conducted  an
    Islamic marriage ceremony, creating a potentially polygamous  marriage.
    The ceremony was conducted in a private house after  the  parties  were
    informed by the superintendent registrar that it would not be  possible
    for them to marry under the MA 1949, as it was not  clear  whether  the
    "husband" was already married.  The court held that the MA 1949 was  of
    no application to a ceremony which did not purport to be a marriage  of
    the kind allowed under English law, and  quashed  the  conviction.   At
    [168], the court held:


         "It does not seem to the court that the provisions of the Act  have
         any relevance or application to a ceremony which is  not  and  does
         not purport to be  a  marriage  of  the  kind  allowed  by  English
         domestic law."

76. The decision in Bham has been followed in a number of cases.  In AM  v.
    AM [2001] 2 FLR 6, Mr Justice Hughes (as he then  was)  considered  the
    validity or otherwise of an Islamic marriage in which both parties knew
    that the man was already married.  He considered the reasoning in  Bham
    to be of equal application to cases concerning  potential  declarations
    of nullity.  At [58], he said:

         "In England a marriage can only  be  effected  under  the  Marriage
         Acts, either according to the rites of the Church of England  (Part
         II of the 1949 Act) or  under  certificate  of  the  Superintendent
         Registrar (Part III). A marriage which  purports  to  be  conducted
         under these Acts may nevertheless be void for  want  of  formality.
         Not every breach of the required formalities has this  effect,  but
         some do. They are set out in ss 25 and 49  of  the  1949  Act.  But
         unless a marriage purports to be of the kind  contemplated  by  the
         Marriage Acts, it is not, I hold, a marriage for the purposes of  s
         11 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973. No doubt it is  possible  to
         envisage cases where the question whether a particular ceremony  or
         other event does or does not purport to be a marriage of  the  kind
         contemplated by the Marriage Acts is a fine one." (Emphasis added)

    Earlier in [58], Hughes J had observed that no distinction lay  in  the
    fact that Bham concerned the  MA  1949,  rather  than  the  Matrimonial
    Causes Act 1973:

         "Although [Bham] was strictly a decision upon the Marriage Act 1949
         rather than upon the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973,  I  am  satisfied
         that the reasoning must apply to the  latter  and  to  the  present
         case".

77. In MA v JA v HM  Attorney  General  at  [85],  the  court  agreed  with
    previous authorities that:

         "it is neither possible nor sensible to set out a  definitive  test
         for determining whether a ceremony results in a  'non-marriage'  or
         results in a marriage potentially valid within the 1949 Act..."

    The court recalled Collett v Collett [1968] P 482,  a  case  concerning
    the validity of a marriage conducted in the British Embassy  in  Prague
    in 1948.  The ceremony had been hastily arranged to take place during a
    temporary break during repeated periods of the  bride's  detention  and
    interrogation by the  Communist  authorities,  between  which  she  was
    seemingly permitted some form of temporary release.  None of the notice
    requirements of English law concerning the validity of the marriage had
    been met, and the marriage had not been registered under  the  domestic
    legislation then in force.  At 491F, Mr Justice Ormrod observed that:

         "The general tendency has been  to  preserve  marriages  where  the
         ceremonial aspects were in order rather than to invalidate them for
         failure to comply with the statutory provisions leading up  to  the
         ceremony."

78. In MA, the High Court concluded that the ceremony did  create  a  valid
    marriage: it had been  conducted  in  the  presence  of  an  authorised
    person; the parties thought that they were contracting a marriage valid
    under English law; even though  the  officiating  Imam  knew  that  the
    ceremony was not valid under English law, he had  assumed  the  parties
    shared his knowledge and had not discussed it with them;  the  ceremony
    took place in a registered building; the ceremony was of  a  kind  that
    would produce a valid marriage, and the parties did not "knowingly  and
    wilfully" intermarry in disregard of the requirements of the MA 1949.

79. In Akhter v Khan [2018] EWFC 54, the Family Court was concerned with an
    Islamic marriage  conducted  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  the
    requirements of the MA 1949.  The marriage took place in  London.   The
    parties  intended  to  conduct  a  civil  ceremony  to   secure   legal
    recognition of the marriage, but never  did.   They  cohabited  for  18
    years as man and wife and had four children.  The prospect  of  divorce
    prompted the question as to whether  the  parties  were  ever  formally
    married in the first place.  If the  marriage  was  void,  the  parties
    would be entitled to a decree of nullity  and  enjoy  the  accompanying
    ability  to  obtain  relief.   By  contrast,  if  the  status  of   the
    relationship was not such that it may even regarded as a marriage, even
    a void marriage, it is a non-marriage,  and  would  bring  with  it  no
    entitlement to relief.

80. Mr Justice Williams summarised the relevant principles as  follows,  at
    [92]:

         "The  starting  point  in  relation  to  the   interpretation   and
         application of section 11 of the Matrimonial Causes Act  1973  must
         therefore be the net result of the series of  cases  considered  by
         Moylan J (as he then was) in MA v JA (above).

             a. Unless a marriage purports to be of the  kind  contemplated
             by the marriage acts it will not be within section 11

             b. What brings a ceremony within the scope of the  act  or  at
             what stage the cumulative effect of the failures  is  to  take
             the ceremony wholly outside the scope of the 1949 Act  has  to
             be approached on a case by case basis (see for instance K v  K
             [2016] EWHC 3380, [2017] 2 FLR 1055).

             c. The court should take account of the  various  factors  and
             features  mentioned  above  including  particularly,  but  not
             exhaustively: (a) whether the ceremony or  event  set  out  or
             purported to be a lawful marriage; (b) whether it bore all  or
             enough of the hallmarks of marriage; (c) whether the three key
             participants  (most  especially  the   officiating   official)
             believed, intended and understood the ceremony as giving  rise
             to the status of lawful marriage."

    Williams J additionally outlined a  range  of  further  factors  to  be
    considered,  in  order  to  read  the  relevant   primary   legislation
    compatibly with the European Convention on Human Rights.  At  [94],  he
    said:

         "Incorporating those considerations into the starting  point  leads
         me to conclude that the approach should be somewhat  more  flexible
         in particular to reflect the Article 8 rights of  the  parties  and
         the children.

             a. Unless a marriage purports to be of the  kind  contemplated
             by the Marriage Act 1949 it will not  be  within  section  11.
             What brings a ceremony within the scope of the Act or at  what
             stage the cumulative effect of the failures  is  to  take  the
             ceremony wholly outside the scope of the 1949 Act  has  to  be
             approached on a case  by  case  basis.  When  considering  the
             question of a marriage the court should  be  able  to  take  a
             holistic view of a process rather than a single ceremony

             b. The court should take account of the  various  factors  and
             features  mentioned  above  including  particularly,  but  not
             exhaustively: (a) whether the ceremony or  event  set  out  or
             purported to  be  a  lawful  marriage  including  whether  the
             parties had agreed that the necessary legal formalities  would
             be undertaken; (b) whether  it  bore  all  or  enough  of  the
             hallmarks of marriage including  whether  it  was  in  public,
             whether it was  witnessed  whether  promises  were  made;  (c)
             whether  the  three  key  participants  (most  especially  the
             officiating official) believed, intended  and  understood  the
             ceremony as giving rise to the status of lawful  marriage  (d)
             whether the failure to complete all the legal formalities  was
             a joint decision or  due  to  the  failure  of  one  party  to
             complete them."

    On the facts of the case, the marriage was held to be  void,  entitling
    the wife to a decree of nullity,  and  the  consequential  relief  that
    would follow.

Conclusion

81. Drawing the above analysis together, it is clear that there are a range
    of factors which will need to  be  considered  in  order  to  determine
    whether the purported marriage celebrated  by  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor was valid.

82. This matter will be relisted before the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  fact-
    finding hearing to consider the  facts  surrounding  the  marriage,  in
    light of the considerations outlined in this decision.

83. I permit the appellant to adduce such further evidence  concerning  the
    ceremony, his intentions and that of the sponsor, as necessary in order
    to enable sufficient findings of fact to be made in order to  determine
    whether the marriage was sufficiently within the terms of the  MA  1949
    to benefit from the "knowingly or wilfully" caveat, and whether it  may
    be valid on any other basis.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Hussain involved the making of an error of law and  is
set aside.

The matter will be reheard in the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to  determine
whether the marriage between the  appellant  and  sponsor  was  valid  under
English law.



DIRECTIONS

 1. Within 28 days of the resumed hearing date, the  appellant  must  serve
    any witness statements or further evidence he seeks  to  rely  upon  in
    order to enable the necessary findings of fact to be  reached  in  line
    with the considerations outlined in this decision.
 2. Both parties are to serve skeleton arguments  within  14  days  of  the
    resumed hearing date.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 8 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

