
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00497/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 5 October 2018                           |On: 16 October 2018           |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     PN
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat of Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 26  August  2015.   She
      appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue her with
      a  family  permit  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") to join her adoptive  Italian
      national father in the UK.

   2. The appellant's application was made on the basis that the sponsor and
      his wife had formally adopted  her  as  their  child  in  Nigeria.  In
      support of the application the sponsors produced a  Nigerian  adoption
      order dated 27 July 2016 issued by the Magistrate's Court of  Anamabra
      State of Nigeria.

   3. The respondent refused the appellant's application on the  basis  that
      adoptions taking place after 3 January 2014 had to  be  recognised  in
      The Adoption (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013  and  that
      Nigerian adoptions were not recognised on that list  in  the  UK.  The
      respondent was therefore not satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
      adoption rules  and  was  not  satisfied  that  the  adoption  was  in
      accordance  with  a  decision  taken  by  a  competent  administrative
      authority or court in a country whose adoption orders were  recognised
      by the UK. The respondent  was  accordingly  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant was the family member of an EEA national in accordance  with
      regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations. The respondent considered further
      that the appellant had submitted no evidence showing that her adoptive
      father had approached any authorities in the UK prior to  the  claimed
      adoption in Nigeria as required under the Adoption Act  2002  and  the
      Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations 2005. The respondent  was
      not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of regulation 12
      of the EEA Regulations.

   4. The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  The  Entry  Clearance
      Manager reviewed the grounds of appeal but maintained the decision  on
      the basis that the adoption had taken place after 3 January  2014  and
      that the relative legislative provisions applied. The decision did not
      breach the appellant's Article 8 rights.

   5. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cooper
      on  14  February  2018.  The  sponsors  appeared   without   a   legal
      representative. The judge dismissed the appeal on  the  basis  of  the
      laws and regulations relied upon by the respondent.

   6. The appellant, having found legal representation, sought permission to
      appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal on the basis of  a  failure
      to consider the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  SM  (Algeria)  v  Entry
      Clearance Officer, UK Visa  Section  [2018]  UKSC  9  which  concerned
      identical issues. In that case the Supreme Court found that  a  person
      in the appellant's position could  be  seen  as  an  'extended  family
      member' under Article 3.2(a) of the Directive which  would  include  a
      child for whom the EU citizen had assumed parental responsibility. The
      Supreme Court decided to refer to the CJEU the question of  whether  a
      person in the appellant's position could be classed as a direct family
      member within Article 3.2(c). The grounds asserted that the First-tier
      Tribunal had failed to consider staying the proceedings to  await  the
      outcome of the referral to the CJEU.

   7. Permission was granted on those grounds.

   8. In his Rule 24 response the Respondent did not  oppose  the  grant  of
      permission and invited the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  with  a
      fresh continuance  hearing  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  was
      affected by the reference to the CJEU.

   9. Accordingly, at the error of law hearing, I set aside  Judge  Cooper's
      decision.  However  it  was  agreed  by  all  parties  that  the  most
      appropriate course was for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal, given that there would be a need for live evidence  and  for
      findings of  fact  to  be  made  about  the  nature  of  the  parental
      relationship between the sponsors and the  appellant  and  other  such
      relevant matters.

DECISION

  10. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Cooper.








Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  5 October
2018
