

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00583/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 13th September 2018                        |On 26th September 2018       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                RUBINA IQBAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated  21  December  2015,  refusing  the
         appellant's application for a residence card.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Farrelly, promulgated on 19 June 2017.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 3 July 2017.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Hodgkinson, dated 28  December
         2017.

 2. Mr Shoaib submitted that the absence of a response from the SSHD  under
    rule 24 showed that  the  FtT's  decision  was  materially  wrong.   He
    referred to the various documents on which the appellant had relied  in
    the FtT, relating to registration, licensing and trade associations  in
    Belgium, a fee paid on closing the business, a certificate  of  no  tax
    due, the resale of the sponsor's business at a loss of 3000 euros,  and
    residence permits in Belgium. He submitted that there was no reason for
    the appellant to invent a case under the regulations,  when  she  could
    have qualified through earnings under the immigration rules.   Previous
    representatives had advised the appellant and sponsor to proceed  based
    on treaty rights rather than under the rules.  He said that the  appeal
    (as brought to the FtT) should be allowed.

 3. Mr Govan accepted that no rule 24 response had been made, but said that
    the appeal was nevertheless opposed, for the following reasons.   There
    was a difference between formally  setting  up  a  business  and  being
    economically  active.   The  respondent's   decision   was   based   on
    insufficiency of evidence of trading.  The appellant was on  notice  of
    that issue throughout.  The appellant  criticised  the  observation  at
    paragraph 13 that the  documentation  provided  by  the  appellant  was
    minimal, but that  was  followed  by  specific  analysis  of  what  was
    provided to show that it went to registration not  to  trading.   There
    was delay in the FtT, where the hearing took place on 7 March 2017, but
    nothing to show that impacted on the decision, which should stand.

 4. In reply Mr Shoaib said that the sponsor spoke little French of Flemish
    but enough to run the business; it had been run on a  paperless  basis;
    as the bank accounts had been closed, no records could now be obtained;
    and that the Belgian government records of  starting  and  closing  the
    business, and of residence cards, were "clear evidence of trading".

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. The first ground of appeal, "irrational findings  of  facts",  is  only
    disagreement.  It specifies nothing which might amount to  error  on  a
    point of law.

 7. The second  ground,  "erroneous  assessment  of  evidence",  says  that
    evidence was  overlooked,  but  relies  on  reference  to  evidence  of
    registration not of trading, and does not grapple with the  distinction
    between the two.

 8. The second ground goes on to take  a  point  of  delay,  but  fails  to
    identify any evidence allegedly overlooked which bore on the conclusion
    reached.  There was undesirable delay, but  nothing  to  show  that  it
    renders the decision unsafe.

 9. The FtT's decision  was  reached  on  the  view  that  the  appellant's
    evidence went to formalities of registration rather  than  of  economic
    activity. The grounds and submissions repeat the case put to  the  FtT,
    but do not show that analysis to have involved the making of any  error
    on a point of law.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            25 September 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
