
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00495/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision on Papers (P)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 June 2020                      |On 9 July 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                              MR SOHAIB SATTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Behan, promulgated on 13  September  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens on 13 March 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The appellant applied for a Residence Card as the family member  of  an
    EEA national. That application was refused  on  14  January  2019.  The
    decision letter made reference  to  inconsistencies  in  the  responses
    given by the appellant and his  spouse  during  a  marriage  interview.
    Three specific issues were identified.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant gave evidence to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  did  his
    spouse.  The judge considered there to be force in the submission  that
    the alleged inconsistencies referred to in the  decision  letter  could
    not be considered as such. The judge  nonetheless  concluded  that  the
    appellant and his spouse were in a marriage of convenience.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The sole ground of appeal argued that the judge misdirected herself  as
    to the burden of proof. In  essence,  she  conceded  that  the  alleged
    inconsistencies referred to by the respondent were not  inconsistencies
    but then proceeded to dismiss the appeal on other issues which were not
    raised by the respondent.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

Procedure

 7. Directions dated 6 April 2020 were served on the parties  which  stated
    that a provisional view had been taken that the matter could be decided
    without a hearing and invited written submissions regarding whether the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and  whether  that  decision
    should be set aside. The parties were further invited to submit reasons
    if it was considered that a hearing was necessary.

 8. The appellant forwarded written submissions by email  on  7  May  2020,
    which was followed by a response from the respondent on  13  May  2020.
    The appellant made no submissions regarding whether the  error  of  law
    could be decided on the papers. The respondent considered that an  oral
    hearing might be  appropriate,  despite  conceding  that  the  decision
    contained a material error of law.

Decision on error of law

 9. I have taken into consideration all the documents before me in reaching
    my decision and have decided that the error of law issue can be  fairly
    considered on the papers, given the parties agreement that  a  material
    error of law was made by the judge.

10. The First-tier Tribunal judge dismissed the appellant's appeal, not  on
    the basis of the respondent's reasons for concluding  that  he  entered
    into a marriage of convenience but for entirely different  reasons.  In
    doing so, the judge failed to provide any reasoning as to  whether  the
    respondent met the initial evidential burden upon her, Agho [2015] EWCA
    Civ 1198 considered. This much is accepted by the respondent.

11. Once  the  judge  had  decided  there  was  force  in  the  appellant's
    submissions regarding the reasons for  refusal,  she  was  required  to
    address those reasons and come  to  a  conclusion  as  to  whether  the
    respondent had discharged the burden upon her. While  it  may  well  be
    that the description of the matters relied upon by  the  respondent  as
    inconsistencies  was  a  misnomer,  they  were  issues  which  required
    adjudication. There is merit in the appellant's submissions as  to  the
    judge's reliance on her subjective view of  the  relationship  and  the
    inadequacy of the reasons provided.

12. I agree with the parties that there is a material error of law  in  the
    approach that the judge has taken to the case, which has deprived  both
    the appellant and the respondent of a  fair  hearing.  The  appropriate
    course is for the case to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Behan.


Signed:                                 Date 23 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara






