
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: EA/00105/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th January 2018                         |On 12th February 2018          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           mr Abishankar Sivakumar
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel, instructed by Ratna & co,
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reading I shall continue to refer to Mr  Sivakumar  as  the
    Appellant; he is a citizen of Sri Lanka who appealed against a decision
    of the Secretary of State refusing to grant him a residence card.   His
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 19th  April  2017  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations as well as Section 82 of the 2002 Act on EEA grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal.  It  was  submitted
    that the judge had  erred  in  law  by  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    Sponsor, a German national, who had also acquired  British  citizenship
    was an EEA national for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations.   It  was
    submitted that the judge's finding overlooked the  definition  of  "EEA
    national" in Regulation 2 namely "a national of an EEA state who is not
    also a British citizen".

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the appeal came before me  on
    the above date.  A Rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the Appellant
    indicating that the decision disclosed no legal error in the  light  of
    the European Court of Justice decision in Toufik Lounes v SSHD C-165/16
    (14th November 2017) the Appellant's case being "on all fours" with the
    ratio decidendi in Lounes mutatis mutandis.

 4. Before me Ms Everett relied on  the  grounds  but  indicated  that  the
    Secretary of State might be in some difficulty  having  regard  to  the
    latest jurisprudence.

 5. For the Appellant reliance was placed on the case of Lounes referred to
    above.

 6. Having heard (brief) oral submissions from both parties I  reserved  my
    decision.

Conclusions

 7. In her decision Judge  Bird  found  that  there  had  been  freedom  of
    movement by the Appellant's Sponsor  who  was  a  German  national  and
    continued to be one. He had entered the United Kingdom  exercising  his
    right of free movement and commenced employment which he retained. Much
    of the discussion before the Judge seems to  have  centred  around  the
    interpretation to  be  drawn  from  the  case  of  McCarthy  v  The  UK
    (C3434/09) but as the judge correctly  pointed  out  Mrs  McCarthy  had
    never exercised freedom of movement rights which was different  to  the
    position to the appeal before her where the Sponsor continued to  be  a
    German citizen and continued to exercise Treaty rights.  The Judge went
    on to allow the appeal for the reasons she  gave  concluding  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to a residence card.

 8. It is unclear to what extent  the  Regulation  2  point  was  canvassed
    before the Judge but the factual matrix of Lounes is  very  similar  to
    the facts of this case. Ms Ormazabal, a Spanish national moved  to  the
    United Kingdom and became a naturalised British citizen  and  later  on
    married Mr Lounes an Algerian national. He  went  on  to  apply  for  a
    residence  card  which  application  was  refused.  He  appealed   that
    decision. It is  not  necessary  to  do  more  than  record  the  Grand
    Chamber's conclusion that he was  eligible  for  a   derived  right  of
    residence under Article 21 (1) TFEU on  conditions which  are  set  out
    in that decision.

 9. As indicated  Ms  Everett  said  that  when  the  point  was  taken  on
    Regulation 2 it did seem to be a good point on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State but events had proved otherwise.

10. In these circumstances it can be said that there is no error of law  in
    the judge's decision which must stand.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.

13. I was not asked to continue the anonymity order and see no need  to  do
    so.



Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 8th February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
