
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00594/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                           |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                 SUKHPAL [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Iengar, Counsel, instructed by Aston Bond
For the respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is a re-made decision  following  the  setting  aside  of  the
        decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  H  Suffield-Thompson,
        promulgated on 19 March 2018, who allowed the appeal of Mr  Sukhpal
        [S] (appellant) against the respondent's decision dated 23  October
        2015 refusing to issue him a residence card as confirmation of  his
        right to reside in the UK under the provisions of the EU Treaties.


     2. In a decision promulgated on 25 September 2018 I explained why  the
        making of the judge's decision involved the making  of  a  material
        error on  a  point  of  law.  I  adjourned  the  hearing  and  gave
        permission to  both  parties  to  adduce  further  evidence  having
        indicated to the parties that if the appellant's estranged wife has
        been a qualified person (or indeed an EU national with a  permanent
        residence) for a continuous period of 5 years since their marriage,
        even if they separated within that time,  then  the  appellant  may
        have attained a right of permanent residence.


     3. At the start of the hearing to remake the decision Mr Walker served
        on Ms Iengar and the Tribunal a copy of a decision dated 4 November
        2015 in which the respondent revoked the appellant's residence card
        because his spouse was not exercising Treaty rights as a  qualified
        person. Ms Iengar indicated that the focus of her submissions would
        now  centre  on  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  current
        partner.

Background


     4. The appellant is a national of India, born in 1987. He entered  the
        UK on 3 April 2011 as a Tier 4 (General) Student, with leave  valid
        to  20  December  2014.  The  appellant  married  [MW]   (hereafter
        'spouse') on 18 February 2012. She is  a  Polish  national.  On  24
        August 2012 the appellant was issued a residence card as the family
        member of an EU national exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  as  a
        qualified person. Although the respondent had considered curtailing
        the  appellant's  leave  to  remain  because  his  college  stopped
        sponsoring him, curtailment did not proceed due to the issuance  of
        the residence card. The appellant and his spouse had  a  son,  [A],
        born on 16 September 2013. [A] is a Polish national.


     5. On 14 May 2015 the appellant applied for a new residence  card.  He
        was open and forthright in this application. His relationship  with
        his spouse had broken down and they had separated. The  application
        was accompanied by a Child Arrangements and Prohibited Steps  Order
        issued by the Family Court at Slough on 5 February 2015. Under  the
        terms of the Order [A] was to live with his  mother  but  he  could
        spend time with the appellant every Sunday from 11:00 to 18:00. Any
        further contact could be agreed between the parties.  The  covering
        letter accompanying the application stated that the appellant was a
        self-sufficient individual in employment and that his now estranged
        wife was also working. The covering letter claimed that [A]  needed
        his father and that it would be  unreasonable  for  the  spouse  to
        raise [A] without support from the appellant. Reference was made to
        CJEU decision in Zambrano (C-34/09)  which  relates  to  derivative
        rights of residence.

     6. In his Reasons For Refusal Letter the respondent was not  satisfied
        that the appellant had established a derived right of residence, as
        set out in Reg 15A of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

     7. The respondent  then  set  out  the  provisions  of  Reg  7,  which
        establish the requirements for someone to be treated  as  a  family
        member of an EEA national. The respondent stated,


             "Due to your  separation  from  your  wife  and  son  and,  in
             particular, the court order awarding custody of the  child  of
             this union to her (as the mother at a separate  address),  the
             relationship, cohabitation & dependency  no  longer  exist  in
             your case."


     8. Having cited extracts from the Family Court Order,  the  respondent
        refused to issue a residence card because  the  appellant  did  not
        meet the definition of family  member  in  Reg  7.  The  respondent
        stated that the appellant had submitted  "...  some  evidence  only
        that your EEA national sponsor is exercising free movement rights."
        In the actual Notice of Immigration Decision the respondent  stated
        that the appellant did not meet the requirements for  the  issuance
        of a residence card under Reg 8  of  the  2006  Regulations  as  an
        extended family member.


     9. By this  time  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
        decision came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  had
        entered into a relationship with  Ms  [IN]  (hereafter  'partner'),
        also a Polish national. In a  signed  witness  statement  dated  23
        February 2018 the partner claimed she was working in the UK and had
        two children from another  relationship,  and  that  one  of  these
        children enjoyed a close relationship with their biological father.




      Documentary evidence


    10. There were two large bundles of documents filed with the First-tier
        Tribunal containing, inter alia, the  appellant's  Indian  passport
        and  his  residence  card  issued  in  August  2012,  [A]'s   birth
        certificate  and  Polish  passport,  the  Child  Arrangements   and
        Prohibited Steps Order dated 5 February 2015, the partner's  Polish
        ID card, payslips and  bank  account  statements  relating  to  the
        partner, wage slips relating to the estranged  spouse  dating  from
        2012 to 2014, the estranged spouse's P60s for 2012  and  2013,  and
        her bank account statements from 2012 to  2013.   There  were  also
        payslips,  P60s  and  bank  account  statements  relating  to   the
        appellant,  and  copies  of  his   current   partner's   children's
        passports. There were also statements from the appellant  and  from
        his estranged spouse. In his  statement  the  appellant  maintained
        that his spouse had been exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK,  and
        that she was now in a new relationship. In her statement the spouse
        confirmed that she and the appellant were not yet divorced  because
        of the cost, but that divorce was imminent.


    11. Two further bundles of documents were filed  and  served  with  the
        Upper Tribunal.  These  contained  a  further  statement  from  the
        appellant, dated 6 November 2018, and a statement from his partner,
        also  dated  6  November  2018.  In  the  appellant's  most  recent
        statement he confirmed that his estranged spouse had only  recently
        started to work, and he was not sure whether she was employed on  a
        permanent basis. He confirmed that he  still  had  regular  contact
        with his son, who resided with the estranged spouse, and that  this
        sometimes involved his son  staying  overnight.  He  described  the
        difficulties he believed he would encounter in trying to maintain a
        relationship with his son if he was removed to India. He  confirmed
        that he had been living with his current partner for over  2  years
        and that their relationship was genuine. He confirmed that she  had
        two children and they all resided together as  a  family  unit.  He
        confirmed that his partner's  son  had  no  relationship  with  his
        biological father and that the appellant was  a  father  figure  to
        him, and that the biological father of his partner's  daughter  did
        have contact with her. he stated that his  partner  was  exercising
        Treaty rights as  evidenced  by  the  payment  of  taxes,  national
        insurance, and pay slips.


    12. In her statement the applicant's partner confirmed they  had  lived
        together for more than  2  years,  that  they  were  in  a  durable
        relationship, and that this  assertion  was  supported  by  various
        items of documentary evidence. she repeated the evidence  contained
        in the appellant's statement concerning her children, and confirmed
        that the appellant continued to have a relationship with  his  son.
        She confirmed that she worked  in  the  UK  and  referred  to  bank
        account statements and wage slips in support.

    13. The new bundles additionally contained wage slips and bank  account
        statements relating to the appellant which were  addressed  to  his
        partner's residence, wage slips relating to the partner,  P60s  for
        the tax years ending April  2017  and  April  2018  confirming  the
        partner's employment with Pizza Express,  bank  account  statements
        relating to the partner, mobile phone documents  addressed  to  the
        appellant at  his  partner's  residence,  and  photographs  of  the
        appellant with his son and with his partner  and  her  children.  A
        further  statement  from  the  appellant's  estranged  spouse   was
        provided,  signed  but  not  dated,  confirming   the   appellant's
        relationship  with  his  son  and  that  she   recently   commenced
        employment.

Oral evidence

    14.  Both the appellant and his partner adopted  their  statements.  In
        his oral evidence the appellant confirmed that he met  his  partner
        in Pizza Express, where she was a waitress, in December  2015,  and
        that they started to live together in February  2016.  His  partner
        continued to work for Pizza Express. Also living with them were his
        partner's  two  children,  her  partner's  mother   (although   she
        sometimes returned to Poland), and,  on  occasions,  the  partner's
        brother would visit. He gave the details of his  current  employer.
        In cross-examination the appellant  described  his  weekly  contact
        with his son, and that his son sometimes stayed overnight. He still
        intended to obtain a  divorce  but  finances  prevented  this  from
        happening at the moment. He confirmed the circumstances in which he
        left the matrimonial home and commenced living with his partner.


    15. In her oral evidence the applicant's partner gave evidence relating
        to her relationship with the appellant that was consistent with his
        evidence. This included details of when and where  they  met,  when
        they began to cohabit, details of her employment,  details  of  the
        people who lived at her residence, and details of  the  appellant's
        relationship with his son. She confirmed that theirs was a  durable
        relationship. She has never been married but wanted  to  stay  with
        the appellant. Marriage itself was not important to her.

    16. Mr Walker relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and the decision
        revoking  the  appellant's  previous  residence  card.  Mr   Walker
        indicated  there  was  no  reason  to  question   the   appellant's
        credibility  or  that  of  his  partner.  He  submitted  that   the
        respondent was entitled to refuse the application for  a  residence
        card as the estranged wife was not  exercising  Treaty  rights,  as
        evidenced in the decision revoking the residence card  in  November
        2015. Mr Walker, very properly, indicted that he could not take the
        matter any further.

    17. Having indicated my preliminary view that  the  appellant  and  his
        partner were indeed in a durable relationship and that she was  and
        continued to exercise Treaty rights as a worker, Ms Iengar accepted
        that reliance on Art 24 of the Charter of  Fundamental  rights  did
        not  assist  the  appellant  as  his  son's  mother  had  not  been
        exercising Treaty rights herself until  very  recently.  Ms  Iengar
        also accepted that the respondent had a discretion  as  to  whether
        the issue  a  residence  card  under  Reg  17  of  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. I indicated that I would
        allow the appeal to the extent that I found the  appellant  was  an
        extended family member within the  terms  of  Reg  8  of  the  2006
        Regulations, and that it would be for the respondent  to  determine
        whether to issue a residence card pursuant to Reg 17  of  the  2006
        Regulations.

Discussion

    18. This appeal is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
        (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006,   although   those
        provisions  are  not  materially  different  from  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. Reg 8(5)  provides  that
        the partner of an EEA  national  with  whom  he  is  in  a  durable
        relationship is an extended family member. A person who  meets  the
        definition  of  extended  family  member  may  be  granted  an  EEA
        residence card, after an extensive examination  of  their  personal
        circumstances (Regs 17(4) and (5)).


    19. I agree entirely with Mr Walker's observation  that  there  was  no
        reason to question the credibility of the appellant or his partner.
        Their evidence was given in a direct  and  forthright  manner,  and
        there was no discernible attempt at embellishment.  Their  evidence
        was measured, inherently plausible, and consistent. Their  evidence
        was also support by documentary evidence confirming  the  partner's
        Polish nationality, her employment with Pizza  Express,  and  their
        joint residence as a family unit. I have no reason to  doubt  their
        claim to have commenced cohabitation around February 2016 and  that
        they are in a genuine and subsisting relationship. I therefore find
        that the requirements of Reg 8 are made out. The appellant is in  a
        durable relationship with a EEA worker and is therefore an extended
        family member.

    20. The issuance of a residence  card  under  Reg  17(4)  of  the  2006
        Regulations is however within the discretion of the respondent, and
        the respondent must  undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the
        appellant's personal circumstances. This examination  must  however
        be carried out  within  the  factual  matrix  established  in  this
        decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the  Tribunal  finds  that  the
appellant is an Extended Family Member of an EEA national, within the  terms
of Reg 8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


[pic]                               8 November 2018

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



