
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00413/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2019                 |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             MISS HENA TABASSUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Litchfield (instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Fowell in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, promulgated on 25 June 2019.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 23  October  1986.  She
    had appealed a decision of the Secretary of State, taken on 14  January
    2019, to refuse her application for permanent residence under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 3. The appellant had made an application under regulation 15(1)(f) on  the
    basis that, being a person with a retained right of residence, she  had
    resided continuously in the United Kingdom thereafter  for  five  years
    and was entitled to permanent residence.

 4. The application was refused on the basis that, although  she  had  been
    granted previously a residence card on the basis of having  a  retained
    right of residence, that was in error and the Secretary  of  State  was
    not now  satisfied  that  her  EEA  national  former  spouse  had  been
    exercising treaty rights at the date of the divorce. There was said  to
    be a gap in the evidence of her former husband's earnings between April
    2016 and April 2017.

 5. The judge in considering that issue noted the gap  in  the  documentary
    evidence and was unable to  find  that  the  former  husband  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights either at the time the divorce  was  initiated
    or indeed when it formally ended. He found there was no  evidence  that
    he had been exercising Treaty rights in the UK  at  any  time  after  5
    April 2016, over a year before the divorce and dismissed the appeal.

 6. The grounds upon which permission to appeal to the upper  Tribunal  was
    granted argue that the judge erred  in  failing  to  consider,  in  the
    alternative, that  there  was  evidence  that  the  appellant's  former
    husband had acquired a right of  permanent  residence  and  accordingly
    Regulation 10(5)(a) applied.

 7. Before us Mr Bramble conceded there was clearly an error of law in that
    there was an issue to be decided as to whether that the EEA spouse  had
    accumulated five years and thus a right to permanent residence in which
    case the later gap with regard to  his  earnings  was  irrelevant.  The
    judge had not considered that point and he indicated that the notes  of
    hearing from the Home Office Presenting Officer before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal indicated that that had been an issue.

 8. Having conceded that there was an error of law in the decision, it  was
    agreed that it should be set aside. It was then agreed that  we  should
    proceed immediately to redecide the matter on the basis of the evidence
    before us. The evidence that we had indicated that from  2010  the  EEA
    national had been working and tax records from 2011 show  that  he  had
    been continuously working until April 2016. There was no evidence  that
    he had left the UK at any time. That being the case and in the  absence
    of any evidence to  the  contrary,  Mr  Bramble  accepted  and  we  are
    satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that  the  EEA  national  had
    acquired  permanent  residence  prior  to  the  divorce  and  thus  the
    appellant was entitled to succeed under regulation 10(5)(a).

Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal having made a material  error  of  law  in  its
    Decision and Reasons, as  set  out  above,  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 25 June 2019 is set aside.

10. We redecide the appeal and allow it under the EEA regulations.

11. There was no application for an anonymity  direction,  and  we  see  no
    justification for making one.


Signed [pic]                            Date 19 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


