
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/00954/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2018                            |On 31 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SYED ALI HAIDER SHAH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Lucky, R & A Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The SSHD has appealed against a First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  decision
    dated 30 May 2018 in which it  allowed  Mr  Shah's  appeal,  against  a
    decision dated 4 January 2018 refusing his application for a  residence
    card on the basis that he was a family member of a British citizen  who
    has exercised his Treaty rights by genuinely living in Ireland, an  EEA
    state, in accordance with the principles established in  R  v  IAT  and
    Surinder Singh (C-370/90) [1992] ECR I-04265.

Background

 2. Mr Shah is a citizen of Pakistan who is married to  a  British  citizen
    ('the sponsor').  Mr Shah  entered  the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  as  a
    student in 2009 and remained as such until his leave was  curtailed  to
    10 May 2015.  He moved from the UK to Ireland on 18 March 2015.  He met
    the sponsor in Ireland and they got married there on 21 May 2016.

 3. The sponsor worked in Ireland but they both returned to reside  in  the
    UK from 15 May 2017.   This followed the Irish authorities granting him
    a residence card based upon his marriage to the  sponsor  on  15  March
    2017 and the UK granting him a family permit for a period of six months
    when he returned to the UK for a visit on 26 April 2017.

 4. Upon his return to the UK, Mr Shah applied for  a  residence  card  but
    this was refused in a decision dated 4 January 2018.  In  summary,  the
    SSHD accepted that the sponsor exercised Treaty rights in  Ireland  but
    did not accept that residence in the UK was genuine  and  concluded  it
    was done as a means of circumventing immigration law.

The appeal to the FTT

 5. The FTT heard and recorded detailed evidence provided by  Mr  Shah  and
    the sponsor in the decision at [7] to [30], before making the following
    findings of fact from [35]:

          i) The sponsor was exercising Treaty rights in Ireland [35].

         ii) After their one day visit to the  UK  on  26  April  2017  the
             couple returned to Ireland [36].

        iii) Notwithstanding his contrary claim, Mr Shah  was  not  granted
             any lawful status in Ireland until he was granted a  residence
             card in February 2017 (there are different dates provided  for
             this, elsewhere it is said the residence card was provided  on
             15 March 2017 but nothing turns on this difference), which was
             based upon his marriage [37].

         iv) Mr Shah and the sponsor gave  contradictory,  implausible  and
             incredible evidence regarding the sponsor's siblings [38], the
             intention to return to live in the UK [39] and the reasons for
             returning to the UK [40].

          v) Mr Shah and the sponsor returned to live in the  UK  when  his
             passport  was  stamped  with  a  six-month  family  permit  at
             Manchester airport on 26 April 2017 [40].

 6. Having made those factual findings the FTT said this at [41]:

         "Yet, the issue in this  appeal  is  whether  the  appellant's  EEA
         sponsor's wife moved the centre of her life to  Ireland...Whilst  I
         find the appellant has not provided an  accurate  account  in  some
         areas of his evidence and reject his explanation that the move back
         to the UK was due to Brexit, given the  time  his  wife  lived  and
         worked after her marriage to the appellant, on balance, I find  she
         did move the centre of her life to Ireland.  Consequently, I  allow
         the appeal."

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
    that the FTT:

          i) failed to  consider  all  the  relevant  factors  set  out  in
             Regulation 9(3) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regs') and  unlawfully  restricted
             its analysis to regulation 9(3)(a) alone;

         ii) failed to consider all the relevant evidence  in  relation  to
             those factors.

 8. On 29 June 2018, the FTT (Judge Landes) granted the SSHD permission  to
    appeal observing it  to  be  arguable  that  the  FTT  failed  to  make
    sufficient findings as the issue of whether the centre of the sponsor's
    life transferred to Ireland was only one factor in the determination of
    the genuineness of the residence.   Judge  Landes  also  observed  that
    whilst  the  finding  that  the  centre  of  the  sponsor's  life   has
    transferred was a strong  indication  that  residence  in  Ireland  was
    transferred, it remained arguable that had  all  the  relevant  factors
    been considered, a different conclusion might have been reached.

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Tan relied upon the grounds of appeal.   Mr
    Lucky invited me to find that when the decision is read as a whole, all
    the relevant factors in regulation 9(3) were taken into  account,  such
    that the FTT decision was adequately reasoned and contains no error  of
    law.

10. After hearing from both  representatives,  I  indicated  that  the  FTT
    decision contains an error of law but that the appropriate  course  was
    to remit to the same FTT judge and to preserve  the  findings  of  fact
    made.  Both Mr Tan and Mr Lucky did not oopose my suggestion that given
    the particular features of this case, any remittal  should  be  to  the
    same FTT.  I now provide my reasons.

Legal framework

11. Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regs states as follows:

         "(1) If the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
         Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F")  of  a
         British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.

         (2)  The conditions are that-

             (a)  BC-

                  (i)  is residing in  an  EEA  State  as  a  worker,  self-
                  employed person, self-sufficient person or a  student,  or
                  so resided immediately  before  returning  to  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

                  (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence  in  an
                  EEA State;

             (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

             (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

         (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State  is  or
         was genuine include-

             (a)  whether the centre of BC's life transferred  to  the  EEA
             State;

             (b)  the length of F and  BC's  joint  residence  in  the  EEA
             State;

             (c)  the nature and quality of the F and BC's accommodation in
             the EEA State,  and  whether  it  is  or  was  BC's  principal
             residence;

             (d)  the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;

             (e)  whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC  was
             in the EEA State.

         (4)  This regulation does not apply-

             (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the EEA  State  was
             as a means for circumventing any immigration laws applying  to
             non-EEA nationals to which F would otherwise be subject  (such
             as any applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

             (b)  to a person who is only  eligible  to  be  treated  as  a
             family member as a result of regulation 7(3) (extended  family
             members treated as family members).

         (5)  Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is  to  be  treated  as
         holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the purposes of
         the application of these Regulations to F.

         (6)  In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is only to be  treated  as  having
         acquired the right of permanent residence in the EEA State if  such
         residence would have led to the acquisition  of  that  right  under
         regulation 15, had it taken place in the United Kingdom.

         (7)  For the purposes of determining whether, when treating the  BC
         as an EEA national  under  these  Regulations  in  accordance  with
         paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified person-

             (a)  any requirement to have comprehensive sickness  insurance
             cover in the United Kingdom still applies, save that  it  does
             not require the cover to extend to BC;

             (b)  in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated  as  a
             worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC is not required  to
             satisfy condition A;

             (c)  in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker  as
             defined in regulation 6(1), BC  is  not  required  to  satisfy
             conditions A  and,  where  it  would  otherwise  be  relevant,
             condition C."

12. Regulation 9 finds its genesis not from the relevant Directive  but  in
    Surinder Singh, a case which involved the return to  the  UK  with  her
    third country spouse of a British national who had exercised her  right
    of free movement by working and living in Germany,  with  her  husband,
    for a period of almost three years.  In other words, in order  to  make
    the right  of  free  movement  effective,  such  ancillary  rights  are
    required to be implied on return to the national's country  of  origin,
    whereby the national retained the right to be accompanied by his or her
    spouse.   The relevant principles  established  by  Surinder  Singh  as
    applied in O and B v Minister von Immigratie  [2014]  3  WLR  799  have
    therefore been transposed into regulation 9.

Discussion

13. I accept that the FTT made a clear  finding  that  the  centre  of  the
    sponsor's life transferred to  Ireland  for  the  period  of  time  she
    resided there between May 2016 and May 2017.  The question for the  FTT
    was not merely whether the centre of the sponsor's life transferred  to
    Ireland but whether Mr Shah's and the sponsor's  residence  in  Ireland
    was genuine.  That this is so is clear from the wording of regulation 9
    as well as the  authorities  cited  above.   To  use  the  language  of
    regulation 9:

           - It was not disputed that the  sponsor  was  exercising  Treaty
             rights and  acquired  the  right  of  permanent  residence  in
             accordance with regulation 9(2)(a);

           - Although there was no clear finding to this  effect,  the  FTT
             appears to have accepted that the couple  resided  in  Ireland
             for the purposes of regulation 9(2)(b);

           - That meant that the FTT was obliged to  address  whether  both
             parties' residence in Ireland was genuine for the purposes  of
             regulation 9(2)(c).

14. The FTT erred in law in allowing the appeal without fully and  properly
    resolving the genuineness of both parties residence  in  Ireland.   The
    factors in regulation 9(3) are a helpful checklist in this  regard.   I
    agree with Judge Landes that whilst the finding that the centre of  the
    sponsor's life has transferred was a strong indication  that  residence
    in Ireland was genuine, it was not  necessarily  determinative  of  the
    issue.  The FTT ought to have considered in particular the  nature  and
    quality  of  their  accommodation  in  Ireland,  the  degree  of  their
    integration in Ireland and any evidence suggesting  that  residence  in
    Ireland was used as a means of circumventing immigration control.   Had
    all the relevant factors been considered, a different conclusion  might
    have been reached.

Remedy

15. I have had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement and I have decided that this is an appropriate  case
    to remit to the same FTT Judge.  I have taken this unusual step because
    the FTT heard detailed oral evidence and made findings  of  fact,  both
    positive and negative, that have not been the subject of any challenge.
     The FTT failed to make findings on  certain  relevant  issues  and  it
    would be proportionate for her to remake her decision in light  of  her
    past fact findings and the further findings that are necessary in order
    to properly reason whether the residence of  each  of  the  parties  in
    Ireland was genuine.

Decision

16. The decision of the FTT to allow the appellant's  appeal  involved  the
    making of an error of law.  I set it aside and direct that it shall  be
    remade by the same FTT (Judge Malik).


Signed   Dated
M. Plimmer    23 October 2018

Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

