

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
EA/00252/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12th November 2019                    |On 14th November 2019           |
|                                         |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                          GODWIN OLUWASEUN OGUNNIYI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms L Appiah, of Counsel, instructed by Isaac
                 Akande & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1982.  He  arrived  in
       the UK lawfully in May 2010 as a  student,  having  visited  the  UK
       previously. After 2012 he made a number of  applications  to  remain
       which were not successful,  and  an  appeal  against  one  of  these
       decisions was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Lingam
       in September 2017. He applied for a derivative residence card as his
       mother's carer and the application was refused in a  decision  dated
       4th January 2019. His appeal against the decision was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge H Clark in a determination promulgated  on
       the 26th July 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge MacDonald on 15th October  2019  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  making
       findings that the appellant's sister could and  would  do  shopping,
       cleaning and go to medical  appointments  for/with  the  appellant's
       mother when arguably there was  no  evidence  in  support  of  these
       findings.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In oral submission from Ms Appiah and in the grounds  of  appeal  it
       was argued, in summary, as follows. The key question is whether  the
       appellant's mother would be  forced  to  leave  the  UK/EEA  if  the
       appellant were not in the  UK.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  at
       paragraph 29 that the appellant's sister was not working  and  could
       do  shopping,  cleaning  and  accompany  their  mother  to   medical
       appointments. However, the evidence of the appellant  was  that  all
       his siblings had children and could not care for their  mother,  and
       in oral evidence he said that his sister was studying at the current
       time. The  evidence  of  the  occupational  therapist  is  that  the
       appellant, cooks, cleans, shops and provides mobility  in  the  home
       environment  for  his  mother.  The  finding  with  respect  to  the
       appellant's sister, that she could take over from him as she was not
       working and  has  school  age  children,  was  therefore  not  based
       lawfully on evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. It was further argued that this error is material to the outcome  of
       the appeal as in the context of the very extensive 24 hour  personal
       care provided by the appellant, and  documented  in  the  Reablement
       Case Management Report of Social Services on his mother, it was  not
       open to the First-tier Tribunal to  conclude  that  Social  Services
       would in reality be able to provide  this  level  of  care  for  the
       appellant's mother.

    6. I did not need to call on Mr Avery.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The First-tier Tribunal correctly directs itself to  the  applicable
       law with respect to derivative rights of residence under  Regulation
       16(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 at paragraphs  8  to
       10 of the decision.  This  test  is  then  clearly  applied  in  the
       conclusion at paragraph 32 of the decision. The First-tier  Tribunal
       makes careful  findings  based  on  the  Islington  NHS  Trust  Care
       Assessment  with  respect  to  the  appellant's  mother's  needs  at
       paragraphs 26 and 27 of the decision, and finds that  the  appellant
       is his mother's primary carer. There is a legally correct  direction
       at paragraph 27 of the decision that the fact that the appellant and
       his mother would miss each other if not allowed to stay together and
       the fact that the current arrangement for her care by him  might  be
       the most desirable, and indeed would  appear  to  be  saving  Social
       Services considerable  cost,  does  not  qualify  the  appellant  to
       remain, as even if these things are the case  they  would  not  mean
       that his mother would be required to leave the UK if  the  appellant
       was forced to depart.

    8. I find that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the  finding  at
       paragraph 29 of the decision that it was likely that the appellant's
       sister would do shopping, cleaning and take her  mother  to  medical
       appointments during the day particularly given that she is currently
       studying and has young children. It was however open to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to find that the appellant's mother  has  other  close
       relatives other than the appellant for her  emotional  needs  as  is
       done at paragraph 32 of the decision.

    9. I find that it was reasonable for the First-tier Tribunal to find at
       paragraphs 31 and 32 of the decision that the  appellant's  mother's
       care needs would be reassessed by Social Services if  the  appellant
       were not there to assist her. This was  particularly  reasonable  as
       clearly Social Services are aware  of  the  appellant's  mother  and
       monitoring her case and ensuring she obtains relevant  services.  It
       was not an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to  assume  that
       Social Services would fulfil  their  statutory  obligations  to  the
       appellant's mother and provide her with the 24  hour  care  that  is
       currently needed, and given by the appellant,  if  he  were  removed
       from the UK. It was also open to the First-tier Tribunal to find  at
       paragraph 32 of the decision that the appellant's mother would  also
       have other close relatives to  turn  to  in  the  UK  for  emotional
       support, as she has three other children in the UK, two sons  and  a
       daughter. As a result I find that there was no material error in the
       decision that the appellant's mother would not be compelled to leave
       the UK if he were forced to leave the UK, and that thus he  was  not
       entitled to a derivative residence card.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal
      under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.




Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    12th  November
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


