
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00717/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 11th of December 2017               |On 10th January 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               MR SHOUKAT KHAN
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 24th of September 1986.
      He appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Khawar sitting at Taylor House on 8th of February 2017  who  dismissed
      his appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 8th  of  January
      2016. That decision was to  refuse  to  issue  the  Appellant  with  a
      permanent residence card as confirmation of a right to reside  in  the
      United Kingdom as the spouse of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
      rights for a continuous 5-year  period  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").
      The Appellant's case was that he and  the  sponsor  [ZS]  a  Hungarian
      citizen, were married by way of an Islamic Nikkah in Pakistan and that
      the  marriage  broke  down  in  2015.  His  argued  that  he  met  the
      requirements of a retained right of residence following  the  couple's
      divorce also finalised in Pakistan.


   2. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that she  was  not
      satisfied the Appellant could prove that he  had  been  in  a  durable
      relationship for a 5-year period with the sponsor or that the  sponsor
      was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
      period of 5 years. The appeal was listed as an oral  hearing  but  the
      Judge was informed  that  by  the  presenting  officer  that  she  had
      instructions not to engage  with  the  appeal  relying  instead  on  a
      decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala [2016] UKUT 411  that  extended
      family members did not have a right of appeal under  Regulation  8  of
      the 2006 Regulations.


   3. The Judge dismissed the appeal on 2  grounds.  Firstly,  that  in  the
      light of the Upper Tribunal decision there was no valid appeal  before
      him. Secondly even if Sala was overturned by a later decision  of  the
      Court of Appeal (which in fact happened) the Appellant's appeal failed
      on the merits because there was no  evidence  to  establish  that  the
      marriage to the sponsor was legally valid in Hungary and therefore  it
      fell foul of the Upper Tribunal authority of Kareem [2014] UKUT 24.


   4. The Appellant appealed against that decision and permission to  appeal
      was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnan  on  9th  of
      October 2017. He found that it was arguable that the Appellant  had  a
      right of appeal for 3 reasons. Firstly, the Appellant had been  issued
      with a residence card and was now seeking a permanent residence  card.
      This was an exception to the ratio in Sala which only applied  to  1st
      time applications for a residence card  by  extended  family  members.
      Secondly, it was arguable that  the  Appellant  was  not  in  fact  an
      extended family member under Regulation 8 but a  family  member  under
      Regulation 7 if the marriage to the sponsor was itself valid. Thirdly,
      Kareem had been overturned by the Court of Appeal in the case of Awuku
      [2017] EWCA Civ 178. The test was no longer whether the  marriage  was
      valid in the country of the EEA sponsor.


   5. As envisaged by Judge Khawar, the Court of Appeal in the  case  of  MK
      Pakistan did indeed overturn the decision in Sala. Whilst MK  Pakistan
      is potentially subject to an onward appeal to the Supreme  Court,  for
      the purposes of this appeal it is clear that there were  a  number  of
      material errors of law in  the  Judge's  determination  such  that  it
      should be set aside and the matter remitted back to the first tier for
      a rehearing. I have some sympathy for the position the  Judge  was  in
      because at the time he heard this case Sala was  still  good  law  but
      because the common  law  operates  in  a  retrospective  fashion,  his
      decision now reveals a material error of law.


   6. After some discussion in court I indicated that I did not think it was
      appropriate for this case to remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  the
      effect of the errors of law were such that no proper  hearing  had  in
      fact taken place at first instance. Both advocates  agreed  with  that
      and in accordance with the Senior President's  direction  I  indicated
      that I would remit the matter back to the First-tier which I now do to
      be heard de novo with no findings preserved.


 7. One further issue was raised by counsel. The Appellant had been  unable
    to produce evidence of the sponsor's self-employment  as  he  had  lost
    contact with her. Counsel asked me to make a  direction  in  the  terms
    outlined in the case of Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 for the Respondent  to
    make enquiries of HMRC as to the sponsor's self-employment  record.  As
    this is material to the issues in  the  case  and  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant has made reasonable if unsuccessful enquiries thus far I make
    a direction in the terms I set out below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be reheard de novo by any  Judge  save
    Judge Khawar.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

I direct that  the  Respondent  should  use  her  best  endeavours  to  make
    enquiries of HMRC as to the working record of the sponsor in this case,
    [ZS] date of birth [ ]  1970  national  insurance  number  [  -  ]  and
    thereafter supply the Appellant with the results of those enquiries.



Signed this 15th of December 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge







