
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/00107/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2019                 |On 17th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                WEI DIDI WANG
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, of Counsel, instructed by David Tang & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of  China  born  on  7th  July  1968.  He
       applied for an EEA residence card based on his marriage to a Belgian
       citizen, Ms Xiao Wei Fei, in March  2014  but  was  refused  by  the
       respondent in August 2014 on the  basis  the  marriage  was  one  of
       convenience, and the appeal was dismissed in April 2015 by Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Barker. The appellant  then  overstayed  and
       applied to remain on human  rights  grounds  in  October  2018.  The
       application was refused although  the  respondent  accepted  in  the
       refusal decision that the relationship between the appellant and  Ms
       Fei  was  genuine.  In  November  2018  the  appellant  made  a  new
       application for a residence card, which was refused  in  a  decision
       dated 18th December 2018.  His appeal against the decision to refuse
       the residence card was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Turner
       in a determination promulgated on the 10th July 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew
       on 2nd September 2019 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in failing to consider whether the
       evidence concerning  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and
       sponsor was capable of casting light on their intention at the  time
       of the marriage, applying Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Lam applied to amend his  grounds
       to include a challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on
       the basis that there was a failure to consider whether the appellant
       was entitled to succeed in his appeal on  the  basis  of  a  durable
       relationship  under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2016 given the findings  with  respect  to  the  current
       state of the relationship between the appellant and Ms Xiao Wei Fei.
        Mr Walker agreed that it was appropriate to allow this amendment to
       the grounds. Mr Lam relied upon this ground if I was not with him in
       his challenge to the decision dismissing the appeal on the basis  of
       the marriage.

    5. The grounds of appeal, in short summary, argue that  the  respondent
       had a suspicion that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  The
       appellant relied upon  two  matters  as  rebutting  that  suspicion:
       firstly that there was evidence of cohabitation such as council  tax
       payments which came into being  after  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Barker; and secondly the concession of the respondent
       made in the letter of 11th October 2018 that  the  relationship  was
       genuine. In the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Turner  it
       is said at paragraphs 19 and  20  that  she  is  not  bound  by  the
       respondent's concession and in any case the  relationship  may  have
       developed from one of convenience at the start to a genuine  one  in
       2018. However, there is no evidence to support this proposition of a
       development in the relationship, which is therefore unlawful  as  it
       is based on pure speculation.

    6. Mr Lam argued further in oral submissions that the decision  of  the
       previous judge, Judge of the First-tier Barker, was clearly  legally
       incorrect as it was decided on the basis that the burden of proof to
       show that the marriage was genuine was on the appellant when in fact
       the burden to show that it was one  of  convenience  lies  with  the
       respondent: this misstatement is set out at paragraph 3 and again at
       paragraph 30. As such it should not have been the starting point for
       Judge Turner that the marriage was one of convenience; and when  the
       evidence of cohabitation and the finding  that  the  respondent  had
       made a concession that the relationship was genuine  and  subsisting
       in 2018 was put in the balance the only rational  outcome  was  that
       the respondent had not shown the marriage to be one of  convenience.



    7. I informed Mr Walker that I did not find that there was an error  of
       law in the decision dismissing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
       marriage but asked that he make submissions on remaking with respect
       to the durable relationship as I found that it had been an error  of
       law by the First-tier Tribunal not to go on to  consider  Regulation
       8(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016. Mr Walker said  that
       the respondent conceded that there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       partner relationship akin to marriage in  the  decision  of  January
       2018. He therefore accepted that the appellant and Ms Xiao  Wei  Fei
       had a durable relationship, and there should be consideration by the
       respondent as to whether to issue a residence permit.

    8. I informed the parties that in the circumstances the appeal would be
       allowed on the basis that I find that the appellant and Mr  Fei  are
       in a durable relationship, but only to the extend  that  the  matter
       would be remitted to the respondent for a decision as to  whether  a
       residence permit should be granted which would require an  extensive
       examination of all of his personal circumstances.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    9. The First-tier Tribunal clearly understood that it was  argued  that
       there was further documentation showing cohabitation and that it was
       argued that there was a  concession  by  the  respondent  about  the
       relationship being genuine in  the  human  rights  decision  of  the
       respondent in October 2018, see paragraphs 5 and 6 of the decision.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal correctly then took the previous decision of
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Barker as the  starting  point  for
       the decision-making on the question as to whether the  marriage  was
       one of convenience, see paragraphs 10 and 12 of the decision.  Judge
       Barker found the appellant and his  wife  gave  evidence  which  was
       confused, considerably  different,  conflicting,  inconsistent  with
       each other, significantly in conflict with each other and which  was
       poor in quality, see paragraphs 23,  24,  25,  27  and  30  of  that
       decision. I  find  that  the  characterisation  by  this  First-tier
       Tribunal that the appellant and  his  wife  were  found  not  to  be
       credible witnesses was one that was accurate and rationally open  to
       the First-tier Tribunal. Whilst there is an error in the  burden  of
       proof in the decision of Judge Barker this was not adopted  by  this
       First-tier Tribunal, and there has not been shown to be any  reasons
       why it was not correct for this First-tier Tribunal  to  start  from
       the position that the evidence of the appellant and his wife was not
       credible.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal directed itself properly that following Rosa
       the question is the intentions  of  the  parties  at  the  time  the
       marriage was entered into, and that evidence post  the  marriage  is
       only relevant in so far as it demonstrates whether it was genuine at
       the time it was entered into by the parties, see paragraph 11 of the
       decision. Rational reasons  are  given  for  finding  that  the  new
       documentary evidence simply shows cohabitation and a joint  business
       venture, and not that  appellant  and  Ms  Fei  were  in  a  marital
       relationship, see paragraphs 12 to 16 of the decision.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal then goes on to consider the evidence in the
       respondent's  letter  of  11th  October  2018  and  finds  that  the
       respondent  had  found  that  the  relationship  was   genuine   and
       subsisting at that time from the way  the  decision  was  made,  see
       paragraphs 18 and 19 of the  decision,  but  finds  that  given  the
       starting point of the evidence of the appellant  and  his  wife  not
       being credible, and the inconclusive other  new  evidence  that  the
       concession meant that there was an acceptance of a  relationship  in
       2018, but not  that  there  was  a  genuine  marriage  when  it  was
       contracted,  and  thus  concludes  for  rational  reasons  that  the
       predominate purpose of the marriage at the time it was contacted had
       been shown by  the  respondent  as  being  to  gain  an  immigration
       advantage. I find therefore that the First-tier Tribunal did not err
       in  law  in  dismissing  the  appeal  under  Regulation  7  of   the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 on the basis that  the  appellant
       was not a spouse of his Belgian wife because the marriage was one of
       convenience at the time it was contracted.

   13. However, I find that the First-tier Tribunal did err in  law  as  it
       ought then to have gone on to consider whether the relationship  was
       one which qualified as a durable relationship under Regulation  8(5)
       of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 considering  that  it  was
       found that the  respondent  had  found  that  the  relationship  was
       genuine and subsisting in the decision of 11th October 2018 refusing
       the human rights  claim,  see  paragraph  19  of  the  decision.  At
       paragraph 20 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal found that this
       was "some form of relationship" but did not consider whether it  was
       a durable relationship,  but  simply  concluded  that  the  original
       marriage had been shown to  have  been  contracted  for  reasons  of
       convenience.

   Conclusions - Remaking

   14. Mr Walker conceded for the respondent that the  relationship  was  a
       durable one based  on  the  concession  in  2018,  the  evidence  of
       cohabitation, and  accepted  that  the  appellant's  partner  was  a
       citizen of Belgium who was exercising Treaty rights in the UK  as  a
       worker.

   15. In these circumstances I remake the appeal so as to allow it to  the
       extent that it is remitted to the respondent to consider by  way  of
       an extensive examination of the appellant's  personal  circumstances
       whether to exercise discretion to issue  a  residence  permit  under
       Regulation 17(5) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  given
       that the relationship between the appellant has been found  to  have
       developed into  a  durable,  genuine  and  subsisting  one  akin  to
       marriage.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. I re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 to the extent that it is found that
      the appellant and Ms Xiao Wei Fei are now in  a  durable  relationship
      akin to marriage and that the  Secretary  of  State  must  now  decide
      whether to issue a registration certificate to  the  appellant  as  an
      extended family member of a qualifying EEA national.




Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    15th  October
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






