
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00103/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 September 2019                           |On 11 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                             MARTINA ZIEMAN-ROTH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Germany who was born on 18 February 1959.
     On 2  October  2018,  the  appellant  applied  for  a  certificate  of
    permanent residence under reg 15 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016 (SI 2016/1052 as amended).  The basis of her application was  that
    she had resided in the UK with her husband, also a German citizen,  for
    a period of at least 5 years and he was a  'qualified  person'.   On  7
    December 2018, the Secretary of State refused her application.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  The  appeal
    was dealt with by Judge Suffield-Thompson on  26  February  2019.   She
    determined the  appeal  'on  the  papers'  as  the  appellant  had  not
    requested a  hearing.   The  judge  was  not  satisfied,  on  what  she
    described as the  "quite  scant"  evidence",  that  the  appellant  had
    established her claimed period of residence or  that  her  husband  had
    worked in the UK, as a doctor, for the period relied upon.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by the FtT (Judge Scott-Baker) on 23 April 2019.

 4. At the hearing before me, the appellant  appeared  in  person  and  the
    respondent was represented by Mr Howells.

 5. The basis of the appellant's appeal is that the judge  failed  to  take
    into account a bundle of documents sent by the  appellant  to  the  FtT
    under cover of a letter dated 14 February 2019.  The appellant  helpful
    provided a composite bundle  in  four  parts.   Part  3  contained  the
    documents which she relied upon as having been sent to the  FtT  on  14
    February 20-19 but not considered by the judge.

 6. Having considered the documents in the Tribunal's file,  in  particular
    the bundle of documents relied upon by the appellant under cover  of  a
    letter of 14 February 2019, Mr Howells accepted this  bundle  had  been
    received by the FtT on 19 February 2019 prior to the  judge's  decision
    on 26 February 2019 but the documents had not reached the  judge  prior
    to her decision, and had not, as a result, been taken into  account  by
    the judge.  Mr Howells  accepted  that  this  was  a  procedural  error
    amounting to a legal error and  the  judge's  decision  should  be  set
    aside, the appeal re-heard and a fresh decision made.

 7. I accept Mr Howell's concession: it  is  correct.   Albeit  through  no
    fault of her own, the judge failed to take into account  the  documents
    submitted by the appellant under cover of her  letter  of  14  February
    2019.  Those were received by the FtT prior to the judge's  reason  but
    were not, for what ever reason, linked with the judge's file  prior  to
    her decision being made 'on the papers'.  That was a  procedural  error
    which vitiates the judge's decision and I set it aside.

















Decision

 8. The FtT's decision involved the making of an error of law.   It  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

 9. Given that the appellant has not, in effect, had a fair first  hearing,
    the appropriate disposal of the appeal is to remit it to the  FtT.   In
    addition, there is further evidence which the  appellant  may  wish  to
    rely upon  in  support  of  her  claim.   I  was  also  told  that  the
    appellant's  husband  has  recently  been  granted  a  certificate   of
    permanent residence.  Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the FtT for
    a de novo re-hearing before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            5 September 2019



