
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00946/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 23 October 2018                      |On: 5 November 2018             |
|                                         |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 azlan qarib
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Anyene, instructed by Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 25  June  1994.  He  appeals,
with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue him  with  a
residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006 as the family member (spouse) of an EEA national.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Thomas dismissed his appeal.

The appellant entered the UK on 1 March  2011  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
student until 30 July 2012. His leave was  subsequently  extended  until  13
February 2013. On 23 May 2016 he applied for  a  residence  card  under  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the  family  member
of an EEA national, namely his spouse, a Romanian national. It appears  from
the application form (section D.5.16) that at the time  of  the  application
there had only  been  a  religious,  Islamic  marriage,  but  the  appellant
subsequently underwent a civil marriage on 11 August 2016 (page E1-2 of  the
respondent's appeal bundle) and provided the respondent  with  his  marriage
certificate.

The respondent refused the application on 2 December  2016.  The  respondent
noted that the only evidence of the EEA sponsor's employment was a  copy  of
a letter from her employer Mute Solutions Limited which did not provide  any
business or website  address  and  could  not  therefore  be  verified.  The
respondent attempted to call the telephone number given in  the  letter  but
the call went straight to  voicemail  and  a  search  of  Google  failed  to
identify a website for the company. The  respondent  noted  that  a  company
matching that of the sponsor's employer  appeared  on  the  Companies  House
website but that was not considered sufficient to confirm that  the  sponsor
was exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.  In  the  absence  of  any  other
supporting evidence of the sponsor's employment such as P60s, wage slips  or
employer's letter on letter head, the respondent concluded  that  there  was
insufficient evidence to demonstrate that she  was  economically  active  in
the UK as an employed person. The respondent therefore refused to issue  the
appellant with a residence card.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas on 23 October 2017. The appellant  appeared
at the hearing and gave oral evidence but the sponsor was  not  present.  It
was said that she had a back problem and  therefore  could  not  attend  the
hearing. The appellant said that his wife had worked for Mute Solutions  Ltd
from November 2016 to March 2017. She was currently in different  employment
which commenced around 26 September 2017, but he had no  evidence  of  that.
He said that she was working at night in a DPD warehouse.

Judge  Thomas  considered  that  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's   claimed
employment with Mute Solutions was insufficient to prove her employment  and
that there was no evidence of  the  current  claimed  employment  with  DPD.
There was no evidence of how the sponsor had been exercising  treaty  rights
from March 2017 onwards. The judge found that the  appellant  had  therefore
failed to discharge the burden of proving that he was the family  member  of
an EEA national who was a qualified person exercising treaty rights  in  the
UK. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the basis that the appellant's application  had  been  supported
by all relevant documentation including an employer's  letter  and  payslips
and that the decision was unreasonable  and  unfair.  The  grounds  asserted
that the appellant's representatives had forwarded documents  regarding  the
sponsor's current job which commenced on 30 October 2017. The documents  had
been sent to the Tribunal on 5  November  2017  and  were  received  by  the
Tribunal on 8 November 2017, before the appeal was determined by the  judge.
The judge therefore erred by not  considering  the  documents.  The  grounds
asserted further that the judge had ignored Article 8.

Permission was  initially  refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on a renewed  application,  on  4
September 2018. On the basis that a bundle of documents  had  been  received
by the First-tier Tribunal on 8 November 2017 which purported to  show  that
the sponsor was employed from 30 October 2017, albeit that it was not  clear
whether or not it had been passed to  the  judge  before  the  decision  was
promulgated, there was arguably a  procedural  irregularity  in  failing  to
take that evidence into account.

At the hearing before me, Mr Anyene submitted that the judge's  decision  at
[3] acknowledged that the EEA national sponsor had worked until  March  2017
and from 26 September 2017 and that the judge had therefore erred at [8]  by
saying that there was  no  evidence  of  employment  from  March  2017.  The
documents sent to the  Tribunal  before  the  determination  of  the  appeal
included a contract of employment  which  commenced  seven  days  after  the
hearing. There was therefore evidence before the judge that the sponsor  was
working.

Mr Avery submitted that the  appellant's  submissions  mischaracterised  the
decision of the judge as she had merely summarised the evidence at  [3]  and
concluded that it was insufficient to demonstrate that the EEA national  was
exercising treaty rights. The further  evidence  was  also  insufficient  to
show the exercise of treaty rights. There was no material error of law.

DECISION

Contrary to the submissions made by Mr Anyene the  judge  made  no  positive
findings at [3] in relation to the  sponsor's  employment,  but  was  merely
summarising the appellant's evidence. The judge's findings were made at  [8]
and were plainly that the evidence was not sufficient  to  demonstrate  that
the sponsor had been, or currently  was  working.  The  appellant's  grounds
refer to relevant documentation including an employer's letter and  payslips
having been produced with the application, but that is clearly not the  case
as the only evidence of employment produced was a  copy  of  a  letter  from
Mute Solutions Limited. The judge noted at [8] that the appellant  ought  to
have been able to evidence that employment by documents such as a  contract,
payslips, bank statements and tax documents, but he  had  clearly  not  done
so. On that basis, and for the reasons properly given, the judge  was  fully
entitled to conclude that there was insufficient evidence to show  that  the
EEA national sponsor had been  working  for  such  a  company  and,  in  the
complete absence of  any  supporting  documentary  evidence,  that  she  was
working for DPD.

Permission was granted, in any event, on the separate issue of  the  further
documentary  evidence  produced   after   the   hearing   but   before   the
determination of the appeal. Whether or not the  judge  was  aware  of  that
evidence, it was within the possession of the Tribunal and  therefore  ought
to have been taken into consideration. There was plainly  an  error  on  the
part of the Tribunal in failing to  address  that  evidence.  However  I  am
entirely in agreement with Mr Avery that that error  is  immaterial,  as  it
takes the case no further. The only evidence in the bundle of documents  was
a copy of a contract of employment  for  the  sponsor's  claimed  employment
with Phone Fixed Ltd, which was to commence  on  30  October  2017,  a  week
after the appeal was heard. The  original  document  was  not  produced  and
neither was the copy accompanied by any payslips or other such  evidence  to
show that the sponsor had actually commenced  working  there.  The  evidence
was therefore wholly deficient in seeking to demonstrate  that  the  sponsor
was exercising treaty rights and suffered from the  same  defects  as  those
referred  to  by  the  judge  at  [8]  in  regard  to  the  other  evidence.
Accordingly even if the judge had considered  that  evidence  it  could  not
possibly have led to any other outcome.

There was, accordingly no material error on the part  of  the  judge.  There
was nothing in the evidence produced  by  the  appellant  either  before  or
subsequent to the appeal hearing to  adequately  demonstrate  that  the  EEA
national was a qualified person exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  The
judge's decision, that the appellant was not entitled to a  residence  card,
was fully and properly open to the judge on the evidence available.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed: [pic]                           Dated:           24 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
