

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal Number: EA/00318/2019
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 30 January 2020                         |on 5 February 2020            |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        JESSICA LORENA RUALES ALCUSIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ecuador, born on 21 September 1988.   She
    applied for a permanent residence card  in  terms  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA)  Regulations  2016,  based  on  a  retained  right  of  residence
    following separation from her former EEA sponsor.

 2. The respondent refused her application by  a  letter  dated  4  January
    2019, giving several reasons.

 3. FtT Judge Sorrell dismissed the appellant's appeal for reasons given in
    her decision promulgated on 12 June 2019.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  UT  on  26  June
    2019.  FtT Judge Chohan granted permission on 7 November 2019.

 5. Mr Aslam did not seek to pursue those aspects of the grounds  going  to
    the position  of  the  children,  the  European  Charter  and  sickness
    insurance.  He relied only on the grounds  based  on  the  respondent's
    policy, cited at [8] of the grounds, on the difficulties which  victims
    of domestic violence may face in producing evidence.  He termed this as
    a "lowered burden".  He submitted that in finding a lack of evidence of
    the exercise of treaty rights,  the FtT failed to apply that  approach.
    The evidence might have left it unclear whether the appellant's husband
    had spent the necessary period  in  the  UK,  but  it  was  capable  of
    yielding an inference that he had, and the FtT should  have  so  found.
    His last known whereabouts were in Spain, but that did not  necessarily
    mean that he had returned there permanently.

 6. The respondent's decision is firstly based on the appellant  not  being
    divorced, and therefore not meeting the terms  of  regulation  10.   Mr
    Aslam accepted that this was  a  difficulty,  but  suggested  that  the
    application might have been  granted  under  some  other  part  of  the
    regulations.

 7. Mr Govan submitted that the case could not have succeeded on  any  view
    of the evidence before the FtT.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. There are cases where the respondent, or the FtT, should  discern  that
    an application made in one category succeeds in another;  but  this  is
    not such a case.

10. The appellant explicitly on her application form and  in  the  covering
    letter from her solicitors asked for a residence  card  in  a  category
    based on her being divorced.  She was not divorced.   At  no  stage  of
    proceedings has she  explained  how  her  appeal  might  overcome  that
    obvious point.

11. Even if she had evidence by which she might have succeeded  in  another
    category (which is doubtful) it was not incumbent on the respondent  or
    the FtT to identify that, contrary to her express representations;  and
    she has no relevant ground of appeal to the  UT.   (She  is  still  not
    divorced.)

12. There was a plain absence of evidence that the appellant's  spouse  had
    exercised treaty rights for at least 5 years; and  the  respondent  had
    not been asked to make enquiry, or to  take  a  generous  view  of  the
    evidence.

13. It has not been shown that the FtT erred on any point of law.

14. Further, the respondent is correct in  submitting  that  there  was  no
    evidence by which the appeal might sensibly have been allowed.

15. The appellant has leave to remain.  Although there  are  advantages  in
    obtaining a residence card, any  route  lies  by  way  of  an  accurate
    application to the  respondent,  supported  by  such  evidence  as  the
    appellant can reasonably obtain, and supplemented, if  appropriate,  by
    an approach to the respondent to make further enquiries.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      31 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




