
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01405/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 May 2017                               |On 14 June 2017               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    [l b]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Karim of Counsel instructed by M A
Consultants (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Talbot, promulgated on 7  November  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant  admission  to  the  UK  and  to  revoke  her  EEA
    residence card.

 2. Permission was granted as follows

         "It is arguable that the Judge has made credibility findings across
         too narrow a part of the spectrum of the available  evidence.   The
         Judge has encapsulated the basis for the findings as to credibility
         at paragraph 18 of the decision.


         It is arguable that the  scope  of  the  material  referred  to  at
         paragraph 18, without making findings of fact  across  at  least  a
         part of the remaining spectrum of evidence, as  delineated  in  the
         permission to  appeal,  has  affected  the  overall  assessment  of
         credibility.  It is arguable that on the basis of the scope of  the
         material considered in the  decision  leading  to  the  credibility
         findings set out, insufficient analysis has been set forward in the
         context of the evidence as to domestic violence."

 3. I heard submissions from Mr. Karim  and  Mr.  Nath  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Submissions

 4. Mr. Karim relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that the judge
    had been entitled to consider both the retained right of residence  and
    the extended family member point as there was  a  right  of  appeal  in
    respect of the retained right of residence.  Therefore, although  there
    was no right of appeal in respect of extended family members, the right
    of appeal in relation to the retained right of residence was a  gateway
    to the Tribunal.  The judge was therefore  entitled  to  consider  both
    issues.  He referred me to paragraph 5 of the  decision  where  it  was
    accepted by the representatives that both issues were before the judge.

 5. He referred me to the Record of Proceedings from  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant and the witness had  given  largely
    consistent evidence, but the judge had focused on one inconsistency and
    used that to determine everything  else.   There  had  been  no  cross-
    examination on the issue of domestic violence.

 6. I was referred to question 20 of  the  Appellant's  interview  at  port
    where she had said that her ex-husband had been hostile and aggressive.
     The judge's findings were silent in respect of this.

 7. In response to the Rule 24 response he submitted that the point made in
    relation to annulment did not hold weight.  Regulation 10  of  the  EEA
    Regulations referred to "termination".  I was referred to Article 13 of
    the Directive which referred to "retention of the right of residence by
    family members in the  event  of  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or
    termination of  registered  partnership".   The  Directive,  which  had
    direct effect, specifically referred to annulment.

 8. Mr. Nath relied on the Rule 24 Response.  In relation to the  reference
    to the "hostile" behaviour of the Appellant's ex-husband at question 20
    of the interview at port,  I  was  referred  to  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision where the judge had set out the evidence.  He agreed that  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    cross-examined on the issue of domestic violence.  However he submitted
    that if the judge wanted to ask questions and delve further  into  this
    he could.  Reference had been made to domestic violence at the hearing,
    and it was a question of establishing how this reference had been made,
    whether by reference to the statement of the Appellant or by  reference
    to questions asked.

 9. At this point I considered the Record  of  Proceedings  from  which  it
    appears that the judge asked some questions  himself  on  the  domestic
    violence issue.  As stated above, it had been accepted by Mr. Nath that
    there had been  no  cross-examination  by  the  Presenting  Officer  in
    relation to domestic violence.  Mr. Nath accepted that it  may  not  be
    clear where the evidence referred to in paragraph  10  had  come  from,
    whether it was from the Record of Proceedings alone or  also  from  the
    witness statement.

10. In relation to the finding in paragraph 20 that there was no supporting
    evidence of domestic violence, Mr. Nath submitted  that  the  Appellant
    had not reported the violence.  The judge had considered  the  evidence
    such as there was before him, and had made a clear finding at paragraph
    20.

11. In relation to the right of appeal as an  extended  family  member,  he
    relied on the Rule 24 Response and the case of  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).  The Home Office position was that the
    right of appeal was in respect of the retained right of residence only.
     However he acknowledged Mr. Karim's point which was that if there  was
    a right of appeal in respect of  one  issue,  other  issues  should  be
    considered.  What had to be considered by the Tribunal was whether  the
    Appellant  had  any  right  to  a  residence  card  under  any  of  the
    Regulations.

12. In response Mr. Karim referred to the fact that  at  paragraph  20  the
    judge had said there was no supporting evidence.  However in  paragraph
    10 he had recited the oral evidence.  The interview  at  the  port  was
    supporting evidence which had been overlooked.  This  evidence  was  in
    the Respondent's bundle.  The findings in paragraph 20 were premised on
    the findings in paragraph 18.  I was referred to paragraph 18(3).   The
    judge stated the Appellant had "never provided any  explanation  as  to
    the ground for an annulment of the marriage".  However, in her  witness
    statement the Appellant had said  that  she  was  not  aware  that  the
    marriage was annulled, did not know what that meant, and had thought it
    was  a  divorce  [3].   This  was  material  evidence  which  had  been
    overlooked.

13. Further, at question 8 of her interview at port, the Appellant had said
    that she was not sure what the divorce was called and had been  of  the
    view that she was agreeing to divorce.  She  did  not  understand  what
    annulment  meant.   This  issue  was   central   to   the   Appellant's
    credibility.  If one aspect of the credibility findings were  defective
    the credibility findings as a whole could not stand.   The  credibility
    assessment had to be holistic.  The Record of Proceedings  showed  that
    extensive questions had been asked of the Appellant  and  Sponsor,  and
    that their responses had been consistent.  The judge  had  not  engaged
    with this.

Error of Law

14. I have carefully considered the decision, in particular  [18]  to  [20]
    where the findings are set out.  In relation to domestic  violence,  it
    was accepted by Mr. Nath that the Presenting Officer at the hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal had not cross-examined the  Appellant  on  this
    issue.  I have considered the Record of Proceedings from which  appears
    that the judge asked a few questions of the Appellant  at  the  end  of
    cross-examination.

15. I have considered the evidence set out at [8]  to  [13].   At  [8]  the
    judge states that he heard evidence from the  Appellant  who  began  by
    confirming the  contents  of  her  two  witness  statements.   He  then
    summarises her evidence.  It is not  clear  from  the  summary  of  the
    evidence which parts are a summary of the witness statement, and  which
    parts are a summary of the oral evidence.

16. In relation to [10] and the findings on the issue of domestic violence,
    in her witness statement the Appellant stated "I rely  on  the  answers
    given in my interview but also wish to add that he was very violent and
    I was beaten and was  very  scared  of  him"  [4].   Taking  this  into
    account, it appears that some of the evidence set out at [10] was  oral
    evidence given in response  to  the  questions  from  the  judge.   For
    example, the Record of Proceedings indicates that the judge  asked  the
    Appellant whether she had sustained  any  serious  injuries.   However,
    paragraph 8 does not contain the judge's findings, but is a summary  of
    the evidence.

17. The judge attached little weight to the Appellant's own evidence as set
    out at [9] to [12] as  he  considered  her  credibility  damaged.   His
    reasons for this finding are set out in paragraph 18.  I have carefully
    considered this paragraph.  There are three main  inconsistencies,  the
    third of which is in relation to whether  the  marriage  was  ended  by
    divorce or annulment.  The judge states that the  Appellant  had  never
    provided any explanation as to the ground for an annulment.

18. However, I find that the Appellant stated in her witness statement [3]:



         "I was not aware that the marriage was annulled, I  don't  actually
         know what this means, I thought this was a divorce, I wanted to  be
         free of the relationship and signed the papers I was given,  and  I
         was told that he will leave me alone if I sign the  papers  and  we
         stayed together for just over a year".

19. Further, in her interview at port, the Appellant was asked at  question
    8 what type of divorce and she stated, "I am not sure.   I  signed  the
    papers but I am not sure what the divorce is called".

20. I find that the Appellant had addressed the  issue  of  the  annulment.
    She had not given "an explanation as to the ground for  an  annulment",
    as she has explained that was  not  aware  of  the  difference  between
    divorce and annulment, or even that her marriage had been  annulled  as
    opposed to terminated by divorce.  I therefore find  that  one  of  the
    three most "glaring" inconsistencies, as  they  are  described  by  the
    judge, is not an  inconsistency  at  all.   The  judge  has  failed  to
    acknowledge that the Appellant had addressed the fact that the marriage
    had been annulled.  The fact that she could not give an explanation  as
    to the ground for annulment, in circumstances where she  did  not  know
    that the marriage had  been  annulled,  does  not  indicate  a  glaring
    inconsistency in her evidence.  The judge's criticism for the  lack  of
    an explanation about annulment is without basis as  the  Appellant  had
    explained both at port and in her witness statement that  she  did  not
    understand what an annulment was.

21. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    in relation to the  credibility  findings  in  paragraph  18.   If  the
    credibility findings are infected in any way, given the holistic nature
    of the credibility assessment, I find that credibility  findings  as  a
    whole cannot stand.

22. However, I have considered  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of
    domestic violence.  At [20] the judge finds: "There  is  no  supporting
    evidence about this  and  this  therefore  this  rests  solely  on  the
    evidence of the Appellant".  However, I  find  that  it  did  not  rest
    solely  on  the  Appellant's  evidence.   There  is  evidence  in   the
    Respondent's bundle in the form of the interview conducted by  UKBA  at
    port.  In this interview conducted in October 2015 the  Appellant  said
    that her ex-husband was hostile to her and aggressive.  She went on  to
    say in her interview that, while  she  had  not  reported  him  to  the
    police, her new boyfriend had told her to take her ex-husband to  court
    to seek "compensation for the aggressive way he treated me"  (questions
    21 to 25).  The judge has not referred to this interview.  He does  not
    appear to have given it any consideration, and there is no reference in
    the decision to the Appellant's statement that her ex-husband had  been
    hostile and aggressive to her.

23. I find, as accepted by Mr. Nath, that there was  no  challenge  to  the
    claim of domestic violence by the Presenting Officer in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge appears to have asked a few questions about it but
    has not accepted the  Appellant's  evidence  because  she  provided  no
    supporting evidence.  However there was supporting evidence in the form
    of the interview with UKBA.  I accept that there was not much detail in
    the Appellant's witness statement in relation to domestic violence, but
    neither was there any cross-examination on this point.

24. I find that the judge has failed to  take  into  account  the  evidence
    before him.  I find that this is a material error of law.

25. In relation to the issue regarding the appeal  as  an  extended  family
    member, I have considered paragraph 5 of the decision  where  it  notes
    that it was accepted and agreed that both issues could  be  decided  by
    the judge.  I find that there is no error of law in  the  consideration
    of both of these routes to entitlement.  I  find  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider all of the routes by which  the  Appellant  had  a
    right to reside under the Regulations, given that she had  a  right  of
    appeal before the Tribunal in respect of  her  claim  for  a  right  to
    reside under regulation 10(5).

26. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given that I  have  found  that  the  credibility
    findings cannot stand, and therefore given the nature and extent of the
    fact-finding necessary to enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, I find that it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

28. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 13 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



