










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01264/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 31 October 2016                  |On: 29 November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                            Ms jekaterina domnych
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  30  March  2016,  dismissing  her
      appeal against the respondent's decision refusing her application  for
      the issue of a permanent residence card pursuant to Regulation  15  of
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


   2. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal as a  paper  case.  The
      appellant did not appear and was not represented.


   3. The Judge noted that the documents before him "are few". Neither party
      provided an appeal bundle. The documents before him were confined to a
      decision  notice,  the  explanatory  letter  written  with   it,   two
      photocopies of passports, two European Health Insurance  cards  and  a
      short letter from the appellant. In addition there was the notice  and
      grounds of appeal.


   4. The Judge accordingly found that "... she had not begun to demonstrate
      any period of continuous residence, let alone that such residence  was
      in accordance with the Regulations" [10].


   5. In granting permission to appeal, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Taylor
      noted that it was apparent that the  First-tier  Judge  did  not  have
      sight of the large appeal bundle  which  the  unrepresented  appellant
      appeared  to  have  sent  in  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It   was
      accordingly arguable that there was an error in law from  the  failure
      to have regard to all of the relevant evidence, albeit that it was not
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge's fault.


   6. The appellant appeared in  person  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   She
      stated that she had submitted all the necessary documents to the First-
      tier Tribunal as well as the respondent. Both  copies  were  sent  via
      recorded Royal Mail delivery on 15 March 2016. She  has  produced  the
      relevant receipts showing that the documents were sent by her on  time
      and were signed for on receipt as per the Royal Mail tracking system.


   7. I have had regard to the extensive bundle of documents that were  sent
      by the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal.


   8. There is a Hatton Cross stamp on the bundle of document  sent  by  the
      appellant showing that the Tribunal received the documents on 22 March
      2016. The documents had also been sent to the Arnhem  Support  Centre,
      and were received there on 17 March 2016.


   9. The appeal was assigned to the Judge on 24 March 2016.


  10. It is unfortunate that the documents were not placed before the First-
      tier Judge whose decision, based upon the  absence  of  documents,  is
      entirely understandable.


  11. However, Mr Staunton has very properly conceded at the outset that  in
      the circumstances, there has been a procedural irregularity such  that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be set aside  and
      re-made.  The appellant agreed.


  12. The parties agreed that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to be re-made as the appellant has not had  an  adequate
      opportunity of having her case properly assessed.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside


The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross)  for  a
fresh decision to be made. At present  there  is  no  agreed  hearing  date,
which accordingly will have to be arranged.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed  Date 26 November 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

