
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01818/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2019                      |On 18 February 2019                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 COLLINS [E]
      (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  06  February
      2017 to refuse to issue  a  residence  card  recognising  a  right  of
      residence as the family member of an EEA national  with  reference  to
      The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
      a decision promulgated on 03 May 2018.

3.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
      following grounds:

        i) The judge's findings were perverse considering the  evidence  of
           cohabitation and the  accepted  fact  that  they  have  a  child
           together.


       ii) The judge erred in making adverse credibility findings based  on
           his own research after the hearing.

      iii) The judge failed to consider the evidence in the  round,  failed
           to give  adequate  reasons  and  took  into  account  irrelevant
           considerations.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

4.    The main issue before the judge was whether the marriage  was  one  of
      convenience contracted solely for immigration purposes.   Although  it
      was open to the judge to make various findings about  the  credibility
      of the witnesses, most of the credibility findings  made  at  [66.1  -
      66.12] related to matters  that  were  relevant  to  whether  the  EEA
      sponsor was likely to be exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK  as  a
      'qualified person', rather than the core issue  of  whether  this  was
      likely to be a  marriage  of  convenience.   The  only  findings  that
      touched on that issue were at [66.6-66.12].

5.    The judge directed himself correctly to the relevant legal  framework;
      then did not apply it. Having referred at [70] to a quote from Tanveer
      Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439 to remind himself that he should look at  the
      evidence as a whole; he failed to do so. At [71] the  judge  used  the
      adverse credibility findings he had already made  to  reject  quite  a
      significant body of evidence,  including  photographs,  correspondence
      from official bodies and bills which indicated that  the  sponsor  and
      the appellant lived together at the same address. The  judge  accepted
      that the couple have a child together and that this was a matter  that
      supported the appellant's case [72] but failed to explain what  weight
      should be  placed  on  this  significant  fact.  The  judge  erred  in
      rejecting  significant  parts  of  the  evidence  based  on   existing
      credibility findings rather than conducting a holistic  assessment  of
      the evidence before coming to his conclusions.

6.    For these reasons I conclude that the decision involved the making  of
      an error on a point of law and it should be set aside.

Remaking

7.    It is not necessary to make detailed findings in remaking  the  appeal
      because Ms Everett accepted that the fact that there was  a  child  of
      the relationship indicated that it may not have  been  a  marriage  of
      convenience solely for immigration purposes.

8.     It  was  open  to  the  respondent  to  express  concerns  about  the
      relationship following the interview in 2015  and  to  rely  on  those
      concerns when the decision was made on 06 February 2017.  Both  events
      took place before the birth of their child. It is  accepted  that  the
      couple have a child together. The documentary  evidence  is  generally
      supportive of the appellant's claim to be living with his EEA  spouse.
      A series of photographs show the couple with their child in  a  number
      of natural situations, including the birth of the child and the naming
      ceremony with family and friends. Most of the concerns that the  judge
      had about the credibility of the witnesses related  to  the  sponsor's
      work history. In respect of the only reason  for  refusal,  which  was
      whether this  is  likely  to  be  a  marriage  of  convenience,  I  am
      satisfied, despite  some  concerns  about  the  consistency  of  their
      evidence, that the weight of the evidence shows that  this  is  not  a
      marriage of convenience.

9.    I conclude that the decision to refuse a residence card  breaches  the
      appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect  of  entry  to  or
      residence in the United Kingdom.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED under the  EEA  Regulations
2016


Signed   [pic]   Date 13 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








