
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01862/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd March 2021                           |On 6th April 2021             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               ARSHAD HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Syeds Law Office Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He appealed the respondent's
      decision of 11th February 2020 to refuse to issue an EEA Residence
      Card as the extended family member of an EEA national exercising
      treaty rights in the UK in accordance with Regulation 8 of the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016
      Regulations").  The appeal was dismissed, on the papers, by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 30th October 2020.


   2. The appellant claims that the conclusion reached by the Judge that the
      appellant has not established, to the required standard, that he is an
      extended family member of the sponsor, for the reasons given by the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge, is irrational.  He claims the Judge appears
      to have misunderstood the claimed relationship between the appellant
      and the EEA national sponsor. Permission to appeal was granted by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 30th November 2020.


   3. The hearing of the appeal before me on 23rd March 2021 took the form
      of a remote hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.
      The appellant joined the hearing from the offices of his solicitors.
      Although he was able to see me and the representatives throughout, he
      was unable to follow the proceedings because his representatives had
      failed to make any arrangements for an interpreter to assist him.  Mr
      Hussain confirmed that he had spoken to the appellant prior to the
      hearing and the appellant is happy for the hearing to proceed. The
      appellant's sponsor had initially joined the hearing remotely, but
      left part way through.  The representatives were able to see and hear
      me and each other throughout the hearing.  I sat at the Birmingham
      Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in
      exactly the same way as I would have been if the parties had attended
      the hearing together.  I am satisfied: that no party has been
      prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
      right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
      was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
      accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
      hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote
      hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a
      way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


The background


   4. The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th
      July 2011.  There is no information before the Tribunal as to the
      basis upon which the appellant entered the UK. It appears that in May
      2014 he was served with an 'IS151A', 'Notice of Removal'.  Under cover
      of a letter dated 30th October 2019, from M&K Solicitors, the
      appellant made an application for a Residence Card.  The covering
      letter, which is to be found at pages 5 to 8 of the respondent's
      bundle states, inter alia:


         "... Our client is the extended family member of the EEA national.
         Our client is the maternal nephew of his EEA sponsor, namely
         Mohammad Nazir Khan Zia whom is a Dutch National exercising his
         treaty rights in the UK as a worker.


         Our client has been supported by his uncle for many years. Our
         client's sponsor used to initial (sic) send money to our client in
         Pakistan and then continued to provide him with financial support
         when he came to the UK. Once the sponsor was in the UK our client
         moved in with his uncle who now provide our client with continual
         financial and accommodation support...."


   5. Various documents were provided in support of the application.  In her
      decision dated 11th February 2020, the respondent said:


         "You claim that your EEA sponsor is the cousin of your mother. As
         such, this department would expect to see evidence of your EEA
         sponsor's parents and birth certificates to demonstrate that your
         mother shares the same parent as one of your EEA sponsor's parents,
         however no such evidence has been submitted.


         As you have failed to effectively evidence your relationship no
         further consideration has been given to the other requirements
         which need to be satisfied under the Regulations including whether
         your EEA national sponsor is exercising Treaty rights as a
         qualified person ...."


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson


   6. At the appellant's request, the appeal was determined on the papers.
      Judge Suffield-Thompson noted, at [6], that the appellant had provided
      a bundle of documents which included the witness statement of the
      sponsor, a skeleton argument, the sponsor's ID, the birth certificates
      of both the appellant and sponsor, proof of cohabitation and proof of
      dependency.  The findings and conclusions of the Judge are set out at
      paragraphs [14] to [16] of the decision.


         "14. The appellant made his application for a residence card on the
         basis that he is an extended family member of the sponsor. In his
         application form (Respondent's Bundle, page 27) he states that the
         sponsor is a first cousin of his mother. In the sponsor's statement
         he initially claims that he is the appellant's "uncle" but then
         goes on to give a complicated family history which ends with the
         sponsor stating that:


             "this makes the appellant's mother my cousin sister and the
             appellant nephew "


         but at the end of his WS (para.9) the sponsor again states that the
         appellant is his nephew and not a cousin.


         15.  The sponsor goes on to explain why he cannot produce any
         written evidence to show that he is biologically related to the
         appellant. The EEA Regulations are very clear in that although
         there is no limit on the distance of the relationship between the
         EEA national and the extended family member as long as they can
         provide valid proof of the relationship between them. He suggests
         (WS, para. 3) that it is open to the Home Office to check with the
         authorities in Pakistan, but it is the appellant's appeal and
         therefore it is for him to provide the evidence to support his
         application and appeal and this is not the role of the Home Office.


         16.  I accept from the documentation before me that the appellant
         is living with the sponsor and that there is an element of
         financial dependency but having considered the written evidence
         submitted by the appellant I do not find that he is proved, to the
         required standard, that he is an extended family member of the
         sponsor. The appeal is dismissed."


The appeal before me


   7. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that
      culturally, relationships are often described differently.  The
      relationship described in the covering letter to the application
      appeared to be one of uncle/nephew, but it appears from the
      information that was provided by the appellant that the relationship
      between the EEA national sponsor and the appellant is more aptly
      described as 'Great Uncle/Great Nephew'.  That however is not a
      concession that the appellant and the EEA sponsor are related as
      claimed, whether as described in the covering letter to the
      application or in the documents relied upon by the appellant in
      support of his appeal.  The respondent does not accept that the
      appellant has established that he is related to the EEA national.  It
      is for the Tribunal to consider whether the evidence relied upon by
      the appellant to establish that relationship is sufficient to satisfy
      the Tribunal that the appellant and the EEA national are related as
      claimed.


   8. Having heard briefly from the parties, I informed the parties that I
      am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
      vitiated by a material error of law and must be set aside.


   9. At paragraph [14] of the decision, the Judge refers to the evidence of
      the appellant and his sponsor.  It is noted that in his application
      and the appellant stated that the sponsor is a first cousin of his
      mother.  As a starting point, the EEA sponsor would be an uncle of the
      appellant.  The Judge then refers to the witness statement of the
      sponsor, who describes himself as the appellant's 'uncle' and the
      relationship being one of 'uncle/nephew'.  In the final sentence, the
      Judge states: "... at the end of his WS (para. 9) the sponsor again
      states that the appellant is his nephew and not a cousin".  Insofar as
      the judge appears to identify some inconsistency in the evidence set
      out in the application and witness statement of the sponsor, no
      inconsistency is apparent. The appellant does not claim to be a cousin
      of the sponsor but maintains that the sponsor is a first cousin of his
      mother.  It is in my judgement difficult to identify from what is said
      at paragraphs [14] and [15] of the decision, the reasons for the
      conclusion reached that the appellant has not proved, to the required
      standard, that he is an extended family member of the sponsor.


  10. I accept it would be open to a judge to conclude that the appellant
      has not established that he is an extended family member of the
      sponsor, but here, it appears the judge relies upon an inconsistency,
      that as I say, is not apparent.  The relationship described in the
      covering letter to the application may be at odds with other evidence
      before the Tribunal, but Judge Suffield-Thompson fails to refer to the
      documents that were relied upon by the appellant in support of his
      appeal.  At pages 9 and 10 of the appellant's bundle, the appellant
      provided copies of the 'Birth Registration Certificates' for the
      appellant and his sponsor. I note that both of those certificates were
      issued on 24th August 2019.  At pages 11 and 12 of the bundle there is
      a genogram providing a graphic representation of the claimed
      relationship, and at page 13, there is what is described as a
      Relationship Certificate.  None of these documents are referred to by
      Judge Suffield-Thompson in her analysis of the evidence, and although
      it may have been open to her to conclude that she could attach little
      or no weight to those documents, she failed to engage with the
      documents and consider whether they lend any support to the claims
      made by the appellant.


  11. Before me, Mr Hussain submits Judge Suffield-Thompson appears to have
      found the appellant is living with the sponsor and that there is an
      element of financial dependency, at paragraph [16] of her decision.
      That in my judgement is not a finding that can be preserved.  The
      Judge does not set out any reasons for reaching the finding.  The test
      for dependency is a purely factual test that is fact specific and
      requires an examination of the personal circumstances of the
      appellant.  It requires a holistic examination of several factors,
      including financial, physical, and social conditions and Judge
      Suffield Thompson fails to consider adequately or at all whether the
      appellant was dependent upon the sponsor or a member of his household
      prior to his arrival in the UK as required by Regulation 8(2).  Judge
      Suffield-Thompson was not assisted in her task by the failure of the
      appellant and his representatives to file and serve evidence
      addressing the issues that arise in the appeal.  I note for example,
      that there was no statement at all from the appellant explaining the
      family circumstances in Pakistan, how he and his family supported
      themselves, how the family met their essential living costs, the basis
      upon which the appellant arrived in the UK or what the appellant has
      been doing since his arrival in the UK.


  12. As to disposal, although the standard directions issued to the parties
      require the parties to prepare on the basis that if there is an error
      of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal
      will go on to remake the decision, I am just  persuaded by Mr Hussain
      that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
      hearing de novo with no findings preserved.  The respondent had failed
      to consider the application beyond considering whether the appellant
      is related to the EEA sponsor as claim.  I am surprised that in the
      absence of any express concession by the respondent that the other
      requirements are met, the appellant and his representatives failed to
      turn their minds to the evidence that would be required to establish
      the entitlement to a Residence Card.   I have decided that it is
      appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,
      having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
      Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view, in determining the
      appeal, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary
      will be extensive.


  13. For the avoidance of any doubt, although the decision of the
      respondent focused upon the relationship between the appellant and the
      EEA national sponsor, and the respondent gave no further consideration
      to the other requirements which need to be satisfied under the 2016
      Regulations, the appellant must proceed upon the basis that it will be
      for the appellant to establish his entitlement to a Residence Card at
      the hearing of the appeal and he must assume that no concessions are
      made by the respondent.


  14. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  15. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Suffield-Thompson
      promulgated on 30th October 2020 is set aside.


  16. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


      V. Mandalia


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia                   23rd March 2021

