
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01849/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2018                      |On 2 May 2018                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                             PATRICIA CSIKOSOVA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:     Herself
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Senior Presenting
Officer)


    1. This is the appeal of Patricia Csikosova, a citizen of Slovakia  born
       5 September 1981, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  of
       25 July 2017, itself brought against the refusal of  her  application
       for permanent residence as an EEA national, dated  3  February  2017.
       Although the Appellant began these proceedings in  her  maiden  name,
       following her subsequent marriage she has taken  her  husband's  name
       and so should be known as Patricia Giles.


    2. The Appellant's application of 31 December 2016 was  refused  because
       the Secretary  of  State  considered  inadequate  evidence  had  been
       provided of five years' continuous residence whilst exercising Treaty
       Rights. Whilst the Appellant had provided  a  letter  from  Starbucks
       Coffee Company UK Ltd of 2 February 2010  confirming  her  employment
       there since 22 December 2009, and a January 2017 letter from  KBA  UK
       Ltd confirming her employment from 29 April 2013, both those letters,
       and other material including P60s,  were  photocopies  and  thus  not
       accepted as reliable.


    3. Grounds of appeal stated that original payslips,  P60  and  a  letter
       from her employer were now being supplied. The Appellant wrote in the
       application form that she had been working and contributing to the UK
       for over five years, and indeed had done so since 31 August 2003.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal noted  the  burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the
       Appellant to establish continuous residence of five years  exercising
       Treaty Rights. By now she had provided a "virtually (2 were  missing)
       unbroken run of original wage slips with  a  satisfactory  employer's
       letter from KBA and P60s covering the period" from 29 April  2013  to
       31 December 2016.


    5. In order for her to demonstrate five years'  continuous  exercise  of
       Treaty Rights, she would need to establish a further period  of  work
       from 31 December 2011 until 28 April 2013.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       did not consider she had done so:

        a) An employer's letter of 10 February 2017 from Starbucks
           attesting to her employment at the relevant dates was not
           original as the signature was photocopied, and the original
           letters from that employer were related to a trial deployment
           and performance review in 2010;






        b) Her wage slips covered only October 2012 to spring 2013, and






        c) A P60 for April 2012 to April 2013 nevertheless left a question
           mark over the period from 31 December 2011 until April 2012.

    6. Accordingly, whilst on balance of probabilities she had satisfied the
       First-tier Tribunal that she had worked  from  April  2012  until  31
       December 2016, that still left a shortfall of several  months,  since
       31 December 2011, preventing her from proving a  working  history  of
       five years.


    7. Grounds of appeal of 4 August 2017 stated  that  the  only  available
       evidence from Starbucks had been a printout from an email: like  many
       companies, they operated on a  paperless  basis.  She  had  requested
       further evidence. She suggested that HMRC could provide  confirmation
       were the information sought from them.


    8. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal  on  23  January
       2018 because it perceived  a  Robinson-obvious  point:  her  original
       grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  launched  the
       instant proceedings had made the assertion of lengthy residence since
       2003 and that the Appellant was accordingly  entitled  to  have  that
       ground adjudicated upon.


Findings and reasons


    9. Before me the  Appellant  sought  to  rely  on  fresh  evidence,  not
       available at the time of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,
       by way of HMRC records proving her length of residence in the UK. She
       quite properly acknowledged  that  the  only  concrete  evidence  she
       possessed which made good the  gap  in  her  evidence  of  exercising
       Treaty Rights, as perceived by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  post-dated
       its decision.


   10. In those circumstances, as  I  explained  to  the  Appellant  at  the
       hearing, Ms Isherwood was perfectly entitled to defend the appeal  on
       the basis that no relevant evidence had been overlooked by the First-
       tier Tribunal. The ground on which permission to appeal  was  granted
       was something of a red herring. The Appellant made  an  assertion  in
       her  grounds  of  appeal  that  was,  unfortunately,  unsupported  by
       documentary evidence. Such  an  assertion  could  not  undermine  the
       conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal which had already put in  issue
       the  period  of  her  claimed  residence  because  of   a   lack   of
       corroborative evidence.


   11. I have no reason to doubt the Appellant's  indication  that  she  now
       possesses evidence of her history of contributions to HMRC throughout
       her UK residence. However, that evidence is not admissible before the
       Upper Tribunal unless an error of law is shown in the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal.


   12.  The  Appellant  may  very  well  have  a  perfectly  viable  further
       application to make to the Secretary of State, and she is  of  course
       free to do so at any time. She would have the advantage of being able
       to point out the acceptance of a significant period of  work  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal. But there is no error of law in the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal, and I accordingly dismiss her appeal.


  Decision:


  The appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                            Date: 5 April 2018
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
