

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01821/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2017                     |On 31 October 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between


                        JENN ROSSLEY CECILIO ROVILLOS
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr. S. Karim of counsel, instructed by MA
                   Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms P. Hastings, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on 11 October 1988, is a  citizen  of  The
      Philippines.  She had married  her  husband,  who  is  a  national  of
      Slovakia, on 6 August 2013.  On  8  August  2014  she  applied  for  a
      residence card as the dependent of an EEA national for a third time.

   2. On 20 October 2015 she was refused a residence card on the basis  that
      the Respondent believed that her marriage was one of  convenience  and
      that she had not established that her husband was exercising a  Treaty
      right in the United Kingdom.

   3. She appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid dismissed her  appeal
      in a decision promulgated on 17 February 2017. The Appellant  appealed
      against this decision and on 31 August 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Baker granted her permission to appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

   4. At the start of the hearing, counsel for the  Appellant  handed  up  a
      copy of MM v Secretary of State for the Home Department & Others which
      dealt with a number of cases in which First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid
      had made errors of law. The Home Office Presenting Officer handed up a
      copy of a decision to dismiss an earlier appeal by the Appellant  made
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie.


   5. Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting Officer  made
      brief oral submissions and I have referred to these submissions, where
      relevant in my findings below.

Findings

   6. The Appellant did not attend the  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Majid which took place on 14 December 2016. The Judge  correctly
      referred himself to  the  provisions  contained  in  rule  28  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) Immigration and Asylum  Rules
      2014 and found that on the evidence before him the Appellant had  been
      notified of the date of the hearing. There is a  letter  in  the  file
      which confirms that a letter was sent to her home address on  21  July
      2016.


   7. The Appellant had submitted that there was a  postal  strike  at  that
      time and that this was why she did not receive  the  notice.  However,
      she had not provided any evidence that this was the case  or,  in  the
      alternative, explained why she would not have received a  notice  sent
      to what was said to be her matrimonial home. Counsel for the Appellant
      suggested that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  should  have  asked  his
      clerk to telephone the Appellant when she did not arrive but  was  not
      able to point to there being a relevant telephone number in the papers
      before the Judge. .


   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also considered whether it  was  in  the
      interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.  In  particular,  in
      paragraph 5 of his decision he found that "fairness  required  by  the
      overriding objective does not demand that this  case  should  be  left
      unresolved.  Therefore,  in  the  interest  of  expeditious  and  just
      disposal of cases that  the  appeal  was  dealt  without  any  further
      delay". As a consequence, I do not find that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge made any procedural errors when proceeding with the appeal.

   9. However, in both paragraphs  3  and  7  of  his  decision,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Majid referred to the need to  take  into  account  the
      provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  did  not  refer  to  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations, which were  relevant
      to the appeal before him.


  10. Furthermore, he did not address either of the two issues which had led
      to her application being refused, which were that it was asserted that
      her marriage was one of convenience and that she had not been able  to
      establish that her husband was exercising a Treaty right in the United
      Kingdom.


  11. In my view, it was not sufficient to rely on the Respondent's  reasons
      for refusing the application without particularising them.

  12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also erred in law by drawing an  adverse
      inference in paragraph 6 of  his  decision  from  the  fact  that  the
      Appellant had not arranged for a legal representative  to  attend  the
      hearing. As counsel for the Appellant noted, such an  inference  would
      have serious implications for anyone appearing in  person  before  the
      Tribunal.

  13. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in paragraph 8
      of his decision when he said that he had born in mind that the  burden
      of proof was on the Appellant. This is  not  the  case,  when  it  was
      alleged that a marriage was one of convenience.  The  Respondent  bore
      the initial evidential burden, as confirmed by Sadovska v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department (Scotland) [2017] UKSC  54  and  Rosa  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14.

  14. The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that the  Respondent  had
      met the initial burden of proof in the decision letter but  the  Judge
      did not explicitly refer to this in his decision or indicate  that  he
      was aware of the test to be applied when it was  asserted  that  there
      had been a marriage of convenience.


  15. As a consequence, I find that there were arguable  errors  of  law  in
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid's decision.

Decision

16.  The appeal is allowed.

17.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
by a First-tier   Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid
and First-tier Tribunal Judge   Gillespie.


Date:  27 October 2016


    Nadine Finch


Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

