
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
EA/01885/2015

                                                  EA/01886/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th May 2017                          |On 6th June 2017                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                       mr Rashid Marikar Maujud Markar
                    miss Fathima Bushra Mohammadu Farook
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants in this case, Mr Rashid Marikar Maujud Markar, and  Miss
    Fathima Bushra  Mohammadu  Farook  are  husband  and  wife.   They  are
    citizens of Sri Lanka and  they  have  sought  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moran promulgated on 4th November
    2016 who refused, on the basis of a lack of jurisdiction, their  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to remove them from the UK which  had
    been made on the basis that they did not have or ceased to have a right
    to reside under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 2. Within the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moran, who  heard  the
    case on 11th October 2016 at Hatton Cross, it was noted that the appeal
    arose out of a decision made on 10th September 2015 as set out  in  the
    notice of a person  liable  to  removal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 and that the notice stated that the Appellants had  no
    right to reside under the  Regulations  and  they  were  liable  to  be
    detained in paragraph 62 of Schedule 2  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    pending the decision of whether or  not  removal  directions  would  be
    made.  It stated within the notice that fraud had been used in order to
    obtain or attempt to obtain a right to reside, because the Sponsor  who
    Mr Markar confirmed was a Swedish national, it was said did not live in
    the UK and was not exercising treaty rights.

 3. Judge Moran decided that there was no jurisdiction to hear the  appeal.
    He stated in paragraph 6 of his decision that since the application was
    made the Upper Tribunal had decided the case of Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
    Appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).  Judge Moran found that  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal: Albania) had considered the issue as to whether
    or not an extended family member refused a residence card had  a  right
    of appeal under Regulation 26 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    and the fact that the Upper Tribunal found there was no such  right  of
    appeal. Judge Moran stated that if there was no right of appeal in such
    a case, then it follows that there can be no right  of  appeal  against
    the decision of the Respondent to set out  in  the  notice  dated  10th
    September 2015 that was  issued  to  the  Appellants.   He  stated  the
    crucial reasoning being that the Appellants have no  entitlement  to  a
    residence card as extended family members.  He stated the issue was one
    of a matter of discretion only and therefore he found that there was no
    EEA decision within the meaning of Regulation 2 that  gave  rise  to  a
    right of appeal under Regulation 26.

 4. The Appellants have now sought to appeal against that decision. At  the
    hearing before Judge Moran, when filing their Notice of Appeal  and  as
    at today they were not legally represented.

 5. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is stated that:-

         "I am appealing this, the Judge decision to refuse my case.  I  had
         resident card before which Home Office gave to me.   They  took  it
         back, but because they have previously given to me.  I do not think
         the new law applies to me."

 6. Clearly the judgment under appeal was the judgment of Judge  Moran  and
    permission to appeal has been given in this case by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Landes on 21st April 2017 who in granting  permission  to  appeal
    extended the time for filing the application by a period of one day  on
    the grounds that she found that the Appellants were  unrepresented  and
    it was  thought  that  the  period  for  lodging  the  application  for
    permission to appeal runs from  the  date  the  decision  is  received,
    rather than the date of the decision itself, and therefore she did find
    there  was  a  good  explanation  for  the  delay  and  extended   time
    accordingly.  She further found that it was arguable that the judge had
    made an error of law in dismissing the appeal for want of  jurisdiction
    based upon the Sala case and found that it was arguable  that  in  this
    case the actual decision under appeal was the decision  to  remove  the
    Appellants from the United Kingdom under Section 10  of  the  1999  Act
    which arguably was an EEA decision for the purposes of Regulation 2.

 7. I am grateful to the  assistance  I  have  had  this  morning  from  Mr
    Armstrong, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  in  respect  of  this
    appeal.  I have fully taken account of the Respondent's Rule 24  notice
    dated 4th May 2017 in which it was argued that the  Respondent  opposed
    the appeal. It was argued that  the  judge  entirely  directed  himself
    appropriately.  It was stated within the Grounds of Appeal that it  was
    not clear what the Appellants were appealing against and  therefore  it
    was said that the Respondent  at  that  stage  was  unable  to  comment
    further until more information had been obtained. I note that Mr Markar
    had written to the Tribunal on 19th May 2017 saying that Sala  did  not
    apply to his case.

 8. I bear in mind that the Appellants are not legally represented but they
    have clearly appealed the jurisdictional decision taken by Judge  Moran
    that  there  was  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  their   appeal   in   the
    circumstances of their case.

 9. I am grateful to the assistance I have been given by  Mr  Armstrong  in
    that regard who has quite properly told me  that  the  decisions  under
    appeal were the decisions which were taken  to  remove  the  Appellants
    from the United Kingdom pursuant to Section 10 of the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 and which were  made  in  accordance  with  Regulations
    19(3)(a)  and  19(3)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    pursuant to Regulation 21(b)(2) and Regulation 24(2).   It  was  stated
    specifically within both of the Notices of Immigration Decision and the
    decision to remove dated 9th October 2015, in respect of each Appellant
    that they were entitled to appeal that decision while they were in  the
    UK by virtue of Regulation 26.

10. I am grateful to Mr Armstrong for his concession that the  decision  as
    to whether or not they are removed from the UK does amount  to  an  EEA
    decision under Regulation 2 and therefore in fact it does give rise  to
    a right of appeal.  The definition of an EEA decision in  Regulation  2
    includes under sub-paragraph (c) a person's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. The Regulations further make clear that  under  Regulation  19(3)(a)  a
    family member of an EEA national may be removed if he does not have  or
    ceases to have a right  to  reside  under  the  Regulations  and  under
    Regulation 24(2) where a decision is taken to remove  under  Regulation
    19(3)(a) or (c) a person is to be treated as if he  were  a  person  to
    whom Section 10(1)(a) of the 1999 Act applied and that  Section  10  of
    that Act, removal of certain persons unlawfully in the  UK,  is  to  be
    applied accordingly.

12. The decision by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  case  of  Sala  was  not
    considering the circumstances of a person in respect of whom a decision
    to remove from the United Kingdom had been made under Section  10.   It
    was dealing specifically with the situation of someone who was  seeking
    a residence card confirming whether or not they were entitled to reside
    in the UK as an extended family member and the Upper Tribunal  in  that
    case found that if someone was seeking a residence card on the basis of
    them claiming to be an extended family member that there  no  right  of
    appeal against that decision, because in effect  it  was  a  matter  of
    discretion for the Secretary of State rather than a matter of right  to
    any entitlement in terms of the issue of the residence card.  That is a
    far cry from the situation that is faced by these  Appellants  where  a
    decision has been made to remove them from the United Kingdom which  is
    being appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  As is now  conceded  by  Mr
    Armstrong it is clear that in that  regard  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Moran did err in terms of jurisdiction. There was jurisdiction to  hear
    this appeal and he should have proceeded to hear the appeal.

13. Given the fact it amounts to an error in jurisdiction,  the  Appellants
    were deprived of a fair hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.   This  was
    therefore a material error in law such that the decision should be  set
    aside and remitted back for a re-hearing de novo  in  respect  of  both
    Appellants before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moran.  I do not accept when the Appellants did not have
    a full hearing at the First-tier Tribunal that it can be said that  any
    error was not material and the judge would have  necessarily  dismissed
    their appeals in any event.

14. I therefore allow both Appellants' appeals.

Anonymity Direction

15. I note that no anonymity direction  was  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Moran and no anonymity  direction  has  been  sought  before  me.
    There is no reason in this case  why  there  should  be  anonymity  and
    therefore I do not make any anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

    I set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moran  as
    containing a material error of law.

    I remit the appeals of both Appellants back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a rehearing de novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moran.


Signed                                  Date 5th June 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty


