
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/01609/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 16th March 2018                     |          On 09th April 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        Mr md shahed ahmed choudhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hosein
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 20th August 1979.  The
    Appellant applied for a residence card as the extended family member of
    an EEA national.  That application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 23rd January 2016.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal came
    before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Mitchell  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 5th May 2016.  Judge Mitchell  following  the  Upper  Tribunal
    guidance in Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411  (IAC)  held
    that there was no statutory right of appeal against the decision of the
    Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to a  person  claiming
    to be  an  extended  family  member.   Following  that  decision  Judge
    Mitchell felt he had no alternative but to dismiss the appeal for  want
    of jurisdiction.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Tribunal on 18th  July  2017.   On
    20th December 2017 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Foudy  granted
    permission to appeal reminding herself that the decision  in  Sala  had
    been overturned by the Court of Appeal in October 2017.

 3. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    legal representative Mr Hosein.   The Respondent appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Tarlow.

 4. I am considerably assisted by the approach of Mr Tarlow in this  matter
    who acknowledges that following the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    that there is jurisdiction for an appeal to be heard  in  this  matter.
    He thus accepts that there has to be inevitably a material error of law
    in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   That  is  not  a
    criticism of the judge.  He was merely following the law as it stood at
    that time.

 5. In such circumstances bearing in mind that there  has  been  no  actual
    hearing of the issues in this matter no application is made for  me  to
    proceed on finding a material error of law to rehear the matter.  I  am
    asked to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.  This  I  do
    along with giving appropriate directions.



Decision and Directions

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside.  Directions  are  given  hereinafter  for  the
    rehearing of this matter.

      1) On the finding that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in that the  Tribunal  is
         seized with jurisdiction to hear the appeal  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the matter is remitted back to
         the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

      2) That the appeal be heard at Taylor House  on  the  first  available
         date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.  The appeal is  to  be
         before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than  Immigration
         Judge Mitchell.

      3) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve an  up-to-
         date bundle of both subjective and/or objective evidence upon which
         they seek to rely  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the  restored
         hearing.

      4) That the Appellant's legal representative  has  indicated  that  no
         interpreter is required.  In  the  event  that  an  interpreter  is
         required then the Appellant's legal representatives must notify the
         Tribunal service within seven days of receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 06 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 06 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




