
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01874/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2016                   |On 6 December 2016                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Nuzhat Naz                                        |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Respondent   |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Permission has been granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Birk  who,  following  a
    hearing on 18 April 2016, dismissed the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  a
    national of Pakistan born on 14 April 1987, against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 1 February 2016 under the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the "2006 EEA Regulations").

 2. The applicant had made an application, most recently on 10 August 2015,
    for a residence card as the extended family member  of  her  uncle,  Mr
    Mohmmad Arif Goher (hereafter the "sponsor") who is a Belgian  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom. She said that Mr  Goher
    is the first cousin of both of her parents and that she  was  dependent
    upon him when she was in Pakistan as well as in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  that  the  applicant  was  an
    extended  family  member  under  regulation  8(5)  of  the   2006   EEA
    Regulations. She decided that the appellant had not produced sufficient
    evidence to show that she was related as claimed to  the  sponsor.  She
    therefore refused the application under regulation 17(1)(b) of the 2006
    EEA Regulations.

 4. In addition, the Secretary of State also decided that the applicant had
    not provided evidence of her dependency on the  sponsor  at  any  time,
    either in Pakistan or in the  United  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  she  also
    refused the application under regulation 8(5).

 5. The appellant requested that her  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") be decided 'on the papers'. The judge  therefore  proceeded  to
    decide the appeal on the material before him.

 6. At [9] of his decision, the judge said that he did not have any of  the
    documentary evidence that the appellant referred to in her statement as
    to birth or death certificates and he therefore had nothing from  which
    he could ascertain or determine the relationship between the  appellant
    and the sponsor. On that basis, he said that the appeal  must  fail  to
    establish  any  family  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.

 7. In addition, the judge said that he had no documentary evidence or  any
    evidence from the sponsor to confirm the  appellant's  contention  that
    her sponsor used to send her money every 6 months. He  therefore  found
    that the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  prior  and/or  present
    dependency and/or residence and so she did not meet  the  criteria  set
    out in regulation 8.

 8. On 4 November 2016, an Upper Tribunal Judge ("UTJ") granted  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 9. It appears that the UTJ was unaware of the fact that, on  19  September
    2016, the Upper Tribunal reported the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right  of
    appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). This was a decision in an appeal heard
    before Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice  President,  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb. The Upper Tribunal held in Sala that there is no statutory right
    of appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a
    residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family member.

The hearing

10. The appellant was unrepresented  at  the  hearing.  She  asked  for  an
    interpreter in the Urdu language but also said that she would  be  able
    to proceed without an interpreter. I informed her that a request for an
    interpreter has to be made in advance of a hearing date as  it  is  not
    possible for an interpreter to be provided immediately upon request.  I
    informed her that, in view of the fact that it appeared that the  ambit
    of the hearing was limited as I would explain shortly, I  would  assess
    whether she was able to  understand  the  proceedings  and  participate
    effectively before making a decision as to whether an  adjournment  was
    necessary.

11. In addition, given that there was a prior issue of jurisdiction, it was
    my preliminary view, having considered the  overriding  interest,  that
    any adjournment would not serve any useful purpose as the appellant was
    not legally represented  and  therefore  she  would  be  in  no  better
    position to deal with the jurisdiction issue even if  the  hearing  was
    adjourned. However, if I had formed the view that  she  was  unable  to
    participate in the hearing due to language  difficulties,  I  would  of
    course have adjourned the hearing.

12. In the event, I found that I was able to explain the  legal  issues  to
    the appellant in simple terms so that she understood the issues and was
    able to participate effectively. I was  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    understood everything I said and that she was able  to  participate  in
    the hearing fully.

13. I explained to the appellant that what appears to have happened in this
    case is  that  it  appears  that  she  (the  appellant)  had  submitted
    documents to the Secretary of State which she said were relevant to the
    issues raised in the decision letter and that she did  not  know  until
    she received the judge's decision that  the  judge  did  not  have  the
    documents she had submitted to the Secretary of State. I  informed  the
    appellant that, in such circumstances, it is likely that a  case  would
    ordinarily be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for another  decision
    to be made on the appeal.

14. However, in this particular case, the  respondent  relies  on  Sala  in
    which it was held that an extended family member does not have a  right
    of appeal. I  explained  in  simple  terms  the  meaning  of  the  term
    "extended family member" and "family  member".  I  explained  that  the
    Upper Tribunal had held in Sala that an extended family member does not
    have a right of appeal.

15. The appellant asked why in that case we were having  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal at all. I explained that it may be  that  the  judge
    who granted permission was not aware of the decision in  Sala  or  that
    the decision was Sala was reported after permission had  been  granted.
    Either way, I had to deal with the issue as to whether she had a  right
    of appeal.

16. The appellant asked me to take into account the fact that she had  made
    her application some time ago, i.e. before the decision  in  Sala.  She
    said that she first applied for a residence card as an extended  family
    member on 28 February 2015 and that that application was refused on  20
    April 2015. She said that her case is a genuine one. She was  dependent
    upon her sponsor when she was in Pakistan as well as after her  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.

17. The appellant also said that she had human rights which the  respondent
    had not considered. I informed her that it is not possible for  her  to
    rely upon human  rights  grounds  in  an  appeal  under  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.

18. The appellant then said that she had a lot of diseases and did not feel
    well. I asked whether she was trying to say that she  was  not  feeling
    well at the hearing. She said "No, not that". She then went on  to  say
    that she has a son in Pakistan. She  and  her  husband  are  separated.
    There is no one to look after her in Pakistan. She would therefore like
    me to grant her some right to remain in the United Kingdom whether that
    be on the basis of Article 8 or some other basis.

19. I informed the appellant that I will  have  to  decide,  in  the  first
    place, whether she had a right  of  appeal.  In  that  regard,  I  will
    consider whether the relevant regulations were worded differently as at
    the date of her application or the respondent's decision.

20. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

21. I have considered carefully the appellant's submission that Sala should
    not be applied because she first applied for a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member in February 2015.  It appears that she has  made
    more than one application,  her  first  being  the  application  on  28
    February 2015.  Of course, strictly speaking, what matters is the legal
    position as at 1  February  2016  because  this  is  the  date  of  the
    decision. The date of application is  not  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction because a right of appeal (if there is a right of  appeal)
    arises against the decision made.

22. However, whether one considers the wording of the relevant  regulations
    as at February 2015 or February 2016, the  result  is  the  same.   The
    wording  of  the  following  regulations  have  remained  the  same  or
    materially the same at all relevant times:

    i)      regulation 17(4) (which confers a discretion on  the  Secretary
        of State to issue a residence card to an extended family member);

    ii)     regulation 17(5)  which  makes  it  clear  that  the  right  of
        extended family members to admission and residence is a  procedural
        right to have their applications determined following the extensive
        examination of their personal circumstances demanded by  regulation
        17(5) and an exercise of discretion in their favour;

    iii)    regulation 7(3) from which it is clear that, once  a  residence
        card has been issued to an extended family member, that person will
        be treated as a  family  member  only  while  he/she  continues  to
        satisfy the conditions of regulation 8 which  resulted  in  him/her
        being accepted as an extended family member; and

    iv)     regulation 26 which sets out the right of appeal and regulation
        2(1) which defines an EEA decision.

23. Accordingly, in the  absence  of  any  reasoned  legal  basis  for  not
    following Sala, I can see no reason not to follow it.

24. I have therefore concluded that the appellant did not have a  right  of
    appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  of  1  February  2016.
    Accordingly, the judge erred in law in deciding the appeal. It is self-
    evident that the error was material.

25. I therefore set aside the decision of the judge in its  entirety.  None
    of his findings shall stand.

26. I proceed to re-make the decision on the appeal. For the reasons  given
    above, my decision is  that  there  is  no  valid  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent. I therefore dismiss the appeal for want  of
    jurisdiction.

27. The appellant sought to rely upon Article 8.  However,  there  are  two
    difficulties. Firstly, the appellant did not have  a  right  of  appeal
    against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  1  February   2016.
    Accordingly, she is precluded from  relying  upon  Article  8  for  the
    simple reason that she has no right of appeal.  Secondly,  and  in  any
    event, the Court of Appeal held in TY (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1233 human rights grounds cannot be relied upon in an appeal  under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations unless the Secretary of State had issued a one-
    stop notice pursuant to the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002. There is nothing before me that indicates that the appellant  was
    served with a one-stop notice.

28. The remaining points raised by the appellant (as to her health and that
    she has no one to look after  her  in  Pakistan)  cannot  overcome  the
    hurdle that she does not have a right of appeal.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law such that it fell to be set aside. I have  set  aside
    it. None of its findings shall stand.


    I have proceeded to re-make the decision on the appeal. The decision is
    that there is no valid appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    of 1 February 2016 because there was no right of  appeal  against  that
    decision.





[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 5 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
