
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/01788/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 September 2017                       |On 4 October 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            mrs Khalida Boucheneb
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P-J White (the judge), promulgated on 23 December  2016,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 30 September 2015.  That decision had been a refusal of  an
    application for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The Respondent alleged that  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  a  Latvian
    national was one of convenience only.  In so concluding, the Respondent
    had relied upon a previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg in a decision promulgated on 22 July 2014
    (IA/44305/2013).  Judge Beg had made a number  of  significant  adverse
    credibility findings and had concluded that the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

The judge's decision

 3. At paragraph 4 of his decision the judge states in clear terms that the
    burden of proving that the marriage was one of convenience rested  with
    the Respondent.  At paragraph 10  the  judge  states,  "a  marriage  of
    convenience is one entered into  for  immigration  advantage,  and  the
    issue is to be determined at the date the marriage is contracted."

 4. He goes on to make reference to the  well-known  Devaseelan  principles
    and the evidence before him, including evidence  that  was  before  the
    previous judge and certain  materials  that  post-dated  her  decision.
    Overall he concludes that there was nothing before him to displace  the
    findings of Judge Beg.

 5.  At  paragraph  24  he  comments  that  the  appeal  before  him   was,
    "essentially an attempt to re-litigate the decided  issues  by  calling
    much of the same evidence, with some degree of updating."

 6. In paragraph 25 the judge says the following:

         "I should be and am in no doubt that the visit  in  September  2013
         [relating to a home visit by the Respondent, evidence of which  had
         been considered by the previous judge] coupled  with  the  evidence
         put before  Judge  Beg  is  sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial
         evidential burden of showing grounds to believe that this may be  a
         marriage of convenience, and I am not satisfied that  the  evidence
         adduced by the Appellant rebuts that concern.  Accordingly I  find,
         in line with the previous decision and on consideration of all  the
         matters put before me, that this was at the  outset  and  therefore
         unchangeably is a marriage of  convenience,  and  not  therefore  a
         marriage giving rise to free movement rights."




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. Ground 1 asserts that the judge misdirected himself in  law:  obtaining
    an immigration advantage is not the test; such an advantage must be the
    "sole purpose" behind the marriage.

 8. Ground 2 asserts that the judge  has  reversed  the  burden  of  proof,
    particularly in what he has said in paragraph 25 (quoted above).  There
    was no legal burden upon the Appellant.  The judge failed to  expressly
    state that the Respondent had in fact discharged the legal burden.

 9. I will not describe Ground 3, as Mr Briddock  has  stated  that  he  no
    longer wishes to rely upon it.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 10 July 2017.




The hearing before me

11. Mr Briddock submitted that the misdirection in paragraph 10  was  clear
    and material.  In essence he submitted that if the direction was  wrong
    in law everything else that followed must also be wrong.  He  submitted
    that if the correct test had in fact been applied the outcome would not
    necessarily have been the same.  The judge had failed  to  correct  the
    initial error later on in the decision.

12. In respect of the burden of proof issue, Mr Briddock submitted that the
    judge had failed to expressly state that the Respondent had proved that
    the marriage was one of convenience only.  In respect of both grounds I
    was referred to the recent Supreme Court judgment  in  Sadovska  [2017]
    UKSC 54, at paragraphs 24, 29, and 28.

13. Mr Armstrong referred me back to Judge Beg's  decision.   He  submitted
    that even if the judge had correctly expressed himself in paragraph 10,
    the outcome of the appeal would have been the  same  in  light  of  the
    evidence as a whole.  Judge Beg's decision had been the starting point,
    and the judge had found that no new evidence altered that position.

14. In reply Mr Briddock submitted that  there  had  been  evidence  of  an
    ongoing marriage between the Appellant and her husband.  He  emphasised
    the omission of the word "predominant" in paragraph 10 and the  failure
    of the judge to expressly state where the legal burden of proof  rested
    on the core issue in the appeal.




Decision on error of law

15. I reserved my decision on whether there were material errors of law  in
    this case.

16. I have concluded that there are no such  errors  and  I  now  give  my
    reasons.

17. As expressed in paragraph 10 of the decision, the judge's direction  as
    to what constitutes a marriage of convenience is arguably wrong, or  at
    least incomplete.  Simply obtaining an immigration advantage is not the
    test.  In light of  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  Sadovska,  the
    question is whether the "predominant  purpose"  of  entering  into  the
    marriage was to obtain immigration advantage.  On the face of  it,  the
    omission of the term  "predominant"  from  the  judge's  self-direction
    would seem to be significant.  However, the judge was  not  necessarily
    wrong  in  stating  that  "immigration   advantage"   constitutes   the
    underlying basis for what constitutes a marriage of  convenience.   The
    questions in this case are really whether, as a matter of substance and
    having regard to the decision as  a  whole,  that  the  judge  actually
    applied the correct test, or whether the outcome of  the  appeal  would
    have been the same if the correct test had in fact been applied.

18. Looking at the judge's decision as  a  whole  there  are  a  number  of
    significant factors which in my view point towards the conclusion  that
    there is no error, or that any error is immaterial.

19. First and foremost is the previous decision of  Judge  Beg,  which  the
    judge has clearly had well in  mind  throughout  his  decision.   Judge
    Beg's decision  is  thorough  and  clear.   The  adverse  findings  are
    damning, and it is beyond  any  doubt  that  she  had  found  that  the
    Respondent had discharged the burden upon her at  that  time.   As  the
    judge rightly says in paragraph  11  of  his  decision,  these  adverse
    findings constituted the starting point for his  assessment.   In  that
    same paragraph he correctly directs himself to the relevant  Devaseelan
    principles.  The existence of Judge Beg's decision was always going  to
    make the Appellant's case a significant uphill struggle.

20. Another obstacle in the Appellant's path is the fact that the issue  of
    whether the marriage was one of convenience is one  involving  a  fixed
    point in time, namely the contracting of  the  marriage  itself.   This
    much is  recognised  by  the  judge  in  paragraph  18.   Any  evidence
    indicating an on-going  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband would have required very real cogency in order  to  assist.  In
    the event, the judge was less than impressed with it.

21. Having considered the judge's decision as a whole it  is  clear  to  me
    that he had full regard to all of the evidence placed before him.  Some
    of this had already been assessed by Judge Beg, and he  quite  properly
    concluded that there was no basis whatsoever for him to go  behind  her
    findings in this regard.  In  respect  of  evidence  post-dating  Judge
    Beg's decision, he deals with it perfectly adequately at paragraphs 15,
    16, 20 and 24.  Therefore, he was not  restricting  himself  solely  to
    Judge Beg's findings, but was considering the evidence as a  whole,  as
    he was bound to do.

22. Reading the decision holistically, (and leaving aside  for  the  moment
    the burden of proof issue, to which I will turn,  below)  it  is  clear
    enough to me that either the judge was in  fact  applying  the  correct
    test for what constitutes a marriage of convenience  (the  "predominant
    purpose" test), or that if he were to have applied the correct test his
    ultimate conclusion would have been the same, namely that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience.

23. The decision of Judge  Beg  coupled  with  his  own  separate  findings
    pointed  him  in  one  direction  only:  the  predominant  purpose  for
    contracting the marriage was for the Appellant to obtain an immigration
    advantage.  That conclusion was open to him. Indeed, on  the  basis  of
    the previous decision and the judge's own findings, it is difficult  to
    see how he could have come to any other conclusion.

24. I turn now to ground 2.  I acknowledge Mr Briddock's point in  relation
    to paragraph 25: the judge has not expressly stated that the Respondent
    has discharged the legal burden of proof resting  upon  her  and  shown
    that the marriage was one of convenience only.  Having  said  that,  in
    paragraph 4 the judge has expressly set out a correct direction  as  to
    where the ultimate burden lay.  It would  be  wrong  of  me  to  simply
    discount  this  as  having  no  effect  on  what  approach  the   judge
    subsequently adopted.

25. In light of the considerable obstacles faced by the Appellant emanating
    from Judge Beg's decision, the Devaseelan principles, and  the  judge's
    own findings in respect of the new evidence, I conclude that the  judge
    was in effect following the correct approach and  concluding  that  the
    burden rested with the Respondent, and that she had  discharged  it  in
    this case.

26. Alternatively, and based upon the actual words  employed  in  paragraph
    25, I would conclude that the judge has, again in light of all  of  the
    evidence, found that the Appellant had failed to  provide  a  plausible
    rebuttal of the Respondent's initial case against her.  For  the  judge
    to have reached this conclusion would have been unsurprising given  the
    contents of Judge Beg's decision, the Devaseelan  principles,  and  his
    own findings on the new evidence.  If this were indeed  the  conclusion
    he reached, it would simply show that the Appellant had failed to rebut
    in any plausible way the Respondent's reasonable grounds  of  suspicion
    (together with the evidence adduced in support of that), and  therefore
    the Respondent would have discharged  the  legal  burden  upon  her  by
    default, as it were.  On either scenario, there is no material error of
    law here.

27. In light of the above, the Appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    fails and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any  material
errors of law.

The Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  therefore  fails,  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 3 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
