
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01480/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 28th January 2019                 |On 3 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Mahmood Mohamed
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Worrall, Deane and Bolton
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of South Africa born in 1969.   He  appeals
    with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Evans), who on the 21st November 2017 dismissed his  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The Appellant seeks confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of 'derivative rights'. He states that he  is  the
    primary carer of his British wife and her two British children. As such
    he asserts a right of residence with reference to Regulation 15A of the
    2006 Regulations. Insofar as is relevant this provides:

         '15A.-

      1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies  the
         criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4) (4A) or (5) of this regulation
         is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the  United  Kingdom
         for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

         ...

         (4A)     P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
             British citizen");

             (b) the relevant British citizen is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

             (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
             the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.

         ...

         (7)      P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person
         if

             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and

             (b) P-

                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                  person's care; or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                  care with one other person who is not an exempt person.

         (7A)     Where P is to be regarded as a primary  carer  of  another
         person by virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the criteria in paragraphs
         (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered  on  the  basis
         that both P and the person with whom care responsibility is  shared
         would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (7B)     Paragraph (7A) does not apply if the person with whom care
         responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom as a  result  of  this  regulation  prior  to  P
         assuming equal care responsibility.

         (8)      P will not be regarded  as  having  responsibility  for  a
         person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis of
         a financial contribution towards that person's care.

         (9)      ...'

 3. In his application the Appellant first relied on Regulation 15A(4A)  in
    that he is the primary carer for his wife, who is severely disabled. He
    also asserted that he is the primary carer for  his  two  stepchildren,
    who at the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision were aged  7  &  5:
    Regulation 15A (7).

 4. The Respondent refused to grant a residence card on  both  grounds  and
    the First-tier Tribunal, in its decision of  the  21st  November  2017,
    agreed.




    The Appellant's Stepchildren

 5. In his letter of the 30th January 2017 the Respondent pointed out  that
    the Appellant cannot hope to succeed under Regulation 15A (7) since  he
    is not a "direct  relative"  or  "legal  guardian"  of  either  of  the
    children concerned.

 6. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Counsel  representing  the  Appellant
    agreed that this was so. The Tribunal accordingly dismissed the  appeal
    on this ground.

 7. The Appellant does not seek to challenge that finding. He  nevertheless
    submits that the Tribunal erred in failing to make  findings,  or  draw
    conclusions therefrom, about the extent to which he is caring  for  his
    stepchildren.  This  was  relevant  not  just  to  the  application  of
    Regulation 15A(7), but to its wider consideration of whether or not his
    wife is dependant upon him.  I address this matter below.




    The Appellant's Wife

 8. It is accepted that the Appellant's  wife  is  British,  and  that  she
    suffers from a serious and debilitating  illness  called  polymyositis.
    It is described by her doctor as a "rare muscular disorder resulting in
    a  severe  physical  disability".  Since  her  diagnosis  in  2015  her
    condition has deteriorated.  She is  unable  to  work  and  is  now  in
    receipt of both the 'daily living' and  'mobility'  components  of  the
    Personal Independent Payment (PIP).  The  Appellant  does  all  of  the
    housework; he helps his wife with her personal care, with  washing  and
    dressing. He also looks after the children: he  gets  them  up  in  the
    morning, cooks breakfast for them and takes them to and from school.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied, on the basis  of  the  foregoing
    evidence, that the Appellant is the primary carer  for  his  wife.   He
    gives her substantial levels of care 'round the  clock'.  Without  such
    assistance she would not be able to care for herself.

10. Having satisfied itself that the tests in Regulation 15A(4A)(a) and (b)
    were met, the  Tribunal  directed  itself  to  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan in Ayinde and Thinjom (carers-Reg 15A-  Zambrano)
    [2015] UKUT  00560  (IAC)  in  respect  of  Regulation  15A(4A)(c).  In
    particular, to the ruling at paragraph (b)  of  the  headnote  to  that
    decision:

         The provisions of reg. 15A of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply when the effect of  removal
         of the carer of a British citizen renders the  British  citizen  no
         longer able to reside in the  United  Kingdom  or  in  another  EEA
         state.  This requires the carer to establish as  a  fact  that  the
         British citizen will be forced to leave the territory of the Union.



11. As to this third limb of the test, the First-tier Tribunal  found  that
    neither the Appellant or his wife had stated in terms that she would in
    fact have to leave the United Kingdom if he were  to  return  to  South
    Africa.  The reality was that this was  very  unlikely.   The  evidence
    indicated that she would not be able to receive treatment for her  rare
    condition in South  Africa,  or  in  India  (her  original  country  of
    nationality). At present she is receiving high levels  of  PIP  in  the
    United Kingdom and there was no evidence that  she  would  be  able  to
    receive anything comparable in India or South Africa.   She had  stated
    that she did not want to live in South  Africa.   She  could  get  care
    here.  Her children live here and they are British.  Having  considered
    all of these factors the Tribunal found that the Appellant  had  failed
    to demonstrate as a matter of fact that his wife would be compelled  to
    leave the United Kingdom if he were to leave.

12. The Appellant contends that the Judge took a restrictive  approach.  It
    was speculative to suggest that she would be  able  to  manage  on  the
    basis of benefits and associated support such as the NHS, when  on  his
    own findings it was clear that the care provided by the  Appellant  was
    "essential and irreplaceable". It is further submitted that  the  Judge
    failed to consider the welfare of the children in his  assessment,  who
    would also need to find an alternative carer should the Appellant leave
    the United Kingdom.  Reliance is placed on Chavez-Vilchez and Others  v
    Raad van Bestuur van de Sociale Verbekeringsbank  and  Others  (10  May
    2017) (Case C133/15) (Grand Chamber), [2017] 3 WLR 1326.

13. For the Respondent Mrs Aboni opposed the appeal  on  all  grounds.  She
    submitted that the arguments advanced were in essence  Article  8  ECHR
    submissions and that the proper forum for these was a paid human rights
    application.




    Findings and Conclusions

14. It is clear from the decision in Ayinde and Thinjom that the  task  for
    decision-makers in respect of Regulation 15A(4A)(c) is not whether  the
    family would face difficulties if  the  applicant  were  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom; nor is it whether such a departure  would  lead  to  an
    interference with  Article  8  rights.  Pursuant  to  the  decision  in
    Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 the question is simply one of fact:  will
    the British citizen be forced to leave the United Kingdom if his or her
    carer is not given a residence card?

15. In Ayinde and Thinjom Judge Jordan had regard not only to the  relevant
    ECJ authorities, but to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Damion
    Harrison (Jamaica)  &  AB  (Morocco)  v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736.
    Rejecting the argument that the test required a broad evaluation of the
    genuine  enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  free  movement  rights,  at
    paragraph 36 he said this:

         "...     Indeed, the argument advanced by Mr Drabble in  that  case
         was in essence the same argument as Mr Knafler advanced before  me.
         Damion Harrison (Jamaica) was a case in which the  appellants  were
         the subject of deportation proceedings and each had British citizen
         children.  In each case  it  was  found  as  a  fact  that  if  the
         appellant were to be removed from the United Kingdom,  their  Union
         citizen children would not be compelled to leave.   The  appellants
         submitted that if they were to  be  removed  this  would  adversely
         affect the quality of life of their British  citizen  children  and
         that Article 20 TFEU and the Zambrano principle would  be  engaged.
         In rejecting this submission Elias LJ, giving the judgement of  the
         Court said:

             57. There are four strands in Mr Drabble's submission that the
             scope  of  the  doctrine  might  arguably  extend  beyond  the
             situation of forced removal.  First, he submits  that  certain
             passages in the judgments can be read that way, and he  relies
             in particular on the way  in  which  the  Court  answered  the
             question in Zambrano ...see paragraph 45, set out in paragraph
             [24] above.  It is at least arguable, he says, that  depriving
             an EU citizen of the 'genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of
             the rights' attached to EU citizenship could embrace decisions
             which leave the right intact but  less  valuable  because  the
             enjoyment is diminished.  It may be enough that the  right  is
             impeded even though not lost.  Mr Drabble does not go  so  far
             as to say that this formulation of the principle by  the  CJEU
             carries the day; he merely claims that there  are  hints  that
             the court was recognising a  potentially  wider  jurisprudence
             and  that  the  language,  no  doubt  carefully   framed,   is
             consistent with the Court envisaging  a  possible  development
             along those lines.

             62. Finally, Mr Drabble prays in aid certain  observations  of
             Professor Gareth Davies  from  Amsterdam  University  who  has
             written a  paper  entitled  'The  family  rights  of  European
             children: expulsion of non-European parents'  which  discusses
             Zambrano in considerable detail.   It  includes  a  number  of
             passages supporting Mr Drabble's argument that the position in
             EU law is at least fluid, that the current state of the law is
             not entirely coherent, and  that  the  precise  scope  of  the
             Zambrano principle remains uncertain."

         37.      Having considered this passage, I can see  no  significant
         difference between the argument advanced to me and that made by the
         appellant's counsel in Damion Harrison.  It was roundly rejected by
         the Court of Appeal:

             63. ... [T]here is really no basis for asserting  that  it  is
             arguable in the light of the  authorities  that  the  Zambrano
             principle extends to cover anything short of a situation where
             the EU citizen is forced to leave the territory of the EU.  If
             the EU citizen, be it the child or wife, would not in practice
             be compelled to leave the country if the non-EU family  member
             were to be refused the right of residence, there is in my view
             nothing in  these  authorities  to  suggest  that  EU  law  is
             engaged.  Article 8 rights may then come into the  picture  to
             protect family life as the court  recognised  in  Dereci,  but
             that is an entirely distinct area of protection...

             66. Even if the non-EU national is not relied upon to  provide
             financial support, typically there will  be  strong  emotional
             and psychological ties within the family and  separation  will
             be  likely  significantly  to  rupture  those  ties,   thereby
             diminishing the enjoyment of life of the  family  members  who
             remain.  Yet it is plainly not the case, as Dereci makes clear
             and  Mr  Drabble  accepts,  that  this  consequence  would  be
             sufficient to engage EU  law.  Furthermore,  if  Mr  Drabble's
             submission were correct, it would jar with the description  of
             the  Zambrano  principle  as  applying  only  in   exceptional
             circumstances, as the Court in Dereci observed.  The principle
             would regularly be engaged.

             67. As to the submission that EU law  might  develop  in  that
             direction, I accept that it is a general principle of  EU  law
             that conduct which materially impedes the exercise  of  an  EU
             law right is in general forbidden by EU law in  precisely  the
             same way as deprivation of the right.  But in my  judgment  it
             is necessary to focus on the nature of the right in issue  and
             to decide  what  constitutes  an  impediment.   The  right  of
             residence is a right to reside in the territory of the EU.  It
             is not a right to any particular quality of  life  or  to  any
             particular standard  of  living.   Accordingly,  there  is  no
             impediment to exercising the  right  to  reside  if  residence
             remains possible as a matter of  substance,  albeit  that  the
             quality of life is diminished.  Of course, to the extent  that
             the quality or standard of life will be seriously impaired  by
             excluding the non-EU national, that is likely in  practice  to
             infringe  the  right  of  residence  itself  because  it  will
             effectively compel the EU citizen to  give  up  residence  and
             travel with the non-EU national.   But  in  such  a  case  the
             Zambrano principle would apply and  the  EU  citizen's  rights
             would have to be protected (save  for  the  possibility  of  a
             proportionate deprivation of  rights).   Accordingly,  to  the
             extent that the focus is on protecting the  substance  of  the
             right, that formulation  of  the  principle  already  provides
             protection from certain interferences with  the  enjoyment  of
             the right."

16. If the question is then, simply one of fact, it  is  difficult  to  see
    what quarrel the Appellant can  have  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings in this case.   The Tribunal considered the evidence and  gave
    a number of good reasons for finding, as  fact,  that  the  Appellant's
    wife would not leave the United Kingdom  (and  thereby  EU)  with  him.
    Those reasons were a) she was  dependent  upon  the  medical  care  she
    receives here b) she is in receipt of considerable state benefits  here
    which were not likely to be replicated elsewhere c) the care  that  her
    husband gives her could be provided by her local council/the NHS and d)
    her children are British and are living here.   To this might be  added
    the fact that the  lady  nowhere  asserted,  in  her  written  or  oral
    evidence, that she would in fact be forced to leave.

17. The arguments against these findings were, in essence,  arguments  that
    could very properly be raised  in  the  context  of  a  proportionality
    balancing exercise under Article 8.  This was not however an Article  8
    assessment. The Tribunal therefore had no need to consider the  quality
    of the care available to the Appellant's wife in his  absence:  it  may
    not be the same as the care he provides but if she would  not  -  could
    not - leave this country the enquiry ended there.

18. Mr Worrall made various well made submissions about the  children,  and
    in particular relied on Chavez-Vilchez to submit that the Tribunal  had
    erred in failing to take into account the fact that  the  children  too
    looked to the Appellant for their care. Again, these are  all  powerful
    arguments in the context of Article 8, but it is difficult to see their
    relevance in the context this Regulation 15A decision.   In Patel & Ors
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  2028  the
    Court of Appeal  specifically  considered  whether  Chavez-Vilchez  had
    materially extended the Zambrano principle:

         "72.     In my judgment, the decision in Chavez-Vilchez  represents
         no departure from the principle of EU law laid  down  in  Zambrano,
         although it does constitute a reminder that the principle  must  be
         applied with careful enquiry,  paying  attention  to  the  relevant
         criteria and considerations, and focussing not on  whether  the  EU
         citizen child (or  dependant)  can  remain  in  legal  theory,  but
         whether they can do so in practice. There is no alteration  in  the
         test of compulsion.

         74.      It  follows  in  my  view  that  Chavez-Vilchez  does  not
         represent any kind of sea-change to the fundamental approach to  be
         taken. It does not mean that English  reported  cases  implementing
         Zambrano but  pre-dating  Chavez-Vilchez  (such  as  Harrison,  and
         Sanneh) hold diminished authority,"

19. The clear finding of the Tribunal was  that  the  mother  and  children
    would not leave  the  United  Kingdom.  They  would  not  therefore  be
    'forced' to do so.  The family would undoubtedly  suffer  detriment  if
    the Appellant were to  be  removed  and  they  remain  here,  but  that
    detriment was not such that they would be forced to take leave of their
    home and lives here as a result.   Unlike the children in Zambrano this
    is a family unit who can remain in their own home and  receive  support
    from outside agencies.




    Decisions

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and it is upheld.

21. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          24th February 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 25th September 2018 by Upper Tribunal Judge
Frances

