
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: EA/01275/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 October 2017                             |On 8 November 2017            |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                mr ahmed raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Rainbow
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   On  18  September  2015  the
    respondent made a decision refusing to issue him with a residence  card
    as confirmation of a right of residence under EU law  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.
    His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Oliver, who, in
    a decision sent on 15 November 2016, dismissed it.  At paragraph 8  the
    judge stated:

         "8.  I am satisfied that the appellant and his uncle are related as
             claimed and that his uncle was and is a qualified person under
             the  regulations.   The   appellant   has   been   unable   to
             substantiate with documentary  evidence  his  claim  that  his
             uncle was supporting him individually when the  uncle  was  in
             Spain and he was living with the uncle's and his own  families
             in Pakistan.  What is more important, however, is that when he
             moved to the United Kingdom he became self-sufficient and  for
             a period of at least 22 months, from 2 March 2012 to the start
             of 2014, he received  no  funds  from  his  uncle.   In  these
             circumstances, while I accept that he has been living  in  the
             same household as his uncle and has been receiving small  sums
             from time to time, he has not shown prior dependency or  prior
             membership of his uncle's  household.   His  appeal  therefore
             fails (Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79)."

2.   The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  are  extremely  short.   The  only
    effective submissions made are

    (1)  that the judge failed to consider the evidence before him  stating
         that the appellant and his sponsor have been living together  since
         the sponsor arrived in the UK and that their  household  is  common
         and shared; and


    (2)  that:


             "the appellant was living in  the  same  common  household  in
             Pakistan prior to  coming  to  the  UK  and  the  sponsor  was
             financially supporting him [the appellant].  The appellant  is
             at present living in the same household as that of the sponsor
             since the sponsor arrived in the UK".

3.   At the hearing both parties requested an adjournment on the basis  that
    the Court of Appeal had now handed down judgment  in  the  Sala  [2016]
    UKUT 411 (IAC) case, reversing the UT reported decision  in  this  case
    which had held that in respect of extended family members there was  no
    right of appeal.  (In her Rule 24 response the respondent had sought to
    rely on the UT decision in Sala).  Both  submitted  that  it  would  be
    safest to adjourn because the  Court  of  Appeal  might  have  given/be
    giving further guidance on how judges should  deal  with  appeals  from
    extended family members (EFM's).  I refused their request.   There  has
    been no indication from  any  source  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    concerned  with  substantive  as  opposed  to   jurisdictional   issues
    surrounding EFMs and there is already Court of Appeal case law  on  the
    substantive requirements relating  to  EFMs.   I  would  observe  that,
    presciently if not fortuitously, neither the FtT Judge nor the UT Judge
    who granted permission sought to apply the UT decision in Sala  in  any
    event.

4.   I have no hesitation in concluding that  the  appellant's  grounds  are
    not made out.  Insofar as they appear to raise a disagreement with  the
    judge's findings of fact, they do no more than  reassert  the  position
    put forward by the appellant at the hearing that he had been  dependent
    on his uncle both prior to and since arrival in the UK.  The grounds do
    not seek to say that any particular item of  evidence  was  overlooked.
    Furthermore, it is abundantly clear that  both  when  applying  to  the
    respondent for a residence card and before the FtT Judge, the appellant
    singularly failed to substantiate his claim to prior dependency.

5.   Insofar as the grounds seek to raise a legal argument, the simple  fact
    of the matter is that in order to meet the requirements of regulation 8
    of the European Economic Area (EEA) Regulations 2006 an  applicant  has
    to establish both prior and present dependency  or  prior  and  present
    membership of the same household: see Dauhoo  (EEA  Regulations  -  reg
    8(2)) [2002] UKUT 79 (IAC).  In his application to the  respondent  the
    appellant failed to substantiate his application for a  residence  card
    under regulation 8.  It was correctly pointed out  that  the  appellant
    had not mentioned being dependent on his uncle when he was  interviewed
    in connection with his student visa on 7 February 2012 and had provided
    no documentary evidence of the  address  at  which  he  claimed  to  be
    residing with his uncle.

6.   Before the judge the  appellant  gave  oral  testimony  amplifying  his
    witness statement.  As recorded  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  4,  the
    appellant said he had tried but failed to provide documentary  evidence
    of his claims regarding dependency on and  membership  of  a  household
    with  his  uncle  "but  had  now  collated  and  submitted  it".    The
    appellant's uncle corroborated the appellant's claims,  giving  further
    details of his employment.  However, as the judge  correctly  appraised
    matters at paragraph 8, the appellant's  further  documentary  evidence
    did not establish  either  prior  dependency  on  his  uncle  or  prior
    membership  of  his  uncle's  household.   The  judge's  assessment  at
    paragraph 8 that "the appellant has been unable  to  substantiate  with
    documentary evidence his  claim  that  his  uncle  was  supporting  him
    individually when the uncle was in Spain and that he  was  living  with
    the uncle's and his own families in Pakistan" was based squarely on the
    state of the evidence considered as a whole.  Mr  Iqbal's  response  to
    this evident state of affairs was to argue that the judge  should  have
    been prepared to accept the evidence of the  appellant  and  his  uncle
    solely on the basis of their oral testimony.  However, as  the  UT  has
    emphasised on many occasions when it comes to proving an EEA residency,
    the respondent is entitled to require applicants to substantiate  their
    claims by documentary evidence and tribunal judges in turn are entitled
    to  count  against  appellants  a  failure  to  remedy  that  lack   of
    substantiation on appeal.  It was for the appellant to prove  his  case
    and it was entirely within the range of reasonable  responses  for  the
    judge to refuse the  appeal  for  lack  of  substantiation  by  way  of
    documentary evidence.   This  is  not  a  case  where  there  were  any
    insuperable  obstacles  to  obtaining  such  evidence  if  the  claimed
    dependency and membership of the same household did in fact exist.

7.   The appellant seeks to rely on the fact that at paragraph 8  the  judge
    appears to accept present dependency and present membership of the same
    household.  Two difficulties stand in the way of such reliance.  First,
    it is not clear that the judge accepted present dependency:  he  refers
    only to accepting that the appellant  "has  been  living  in  the  same
    household as his uncle and has been receiving small sums from  time  to
    time".  Second, even assuming that the judge meant  present  dependency
    and/or  present  membership  of  the  uncle's   household,   that   was
    insufficient to meet the requirements of regulation 8 which require (1)
    prior dependency or membership of the same household; and  (2)  present
    dependency or present membership of the same household.  So  the  judge
    properly concluded at paragraph 8.

8.   Mr Jarvis sought  to  submit  that  even  in  respect  of  the  judge's
    apparent acceptance of present dependency and/or present membership  of
    the same household that would not have sufficed to meet  the  "present"
    test as the case law required that such  present  dependency/membership
    of a household be "very recent".  He cited Bigia & Ors [2009] EWCA  Civ
    79 at 43.

9.   However, on the basis of the judge's findings, it  cannot  be  excluded
    that he was  prepared  to  accept  dependency/membership  of  the  same
    household since the uncle's arrival in the  UK  in  January  2014.   If
    correct, such a period (beginning of 2014 to the date of  the  hearing)
    would appear to constitute  "very  recent  dependency"  in  any  event.
    However, for the reasons given above, this conclusion does  not  assist
    the appellant in showing he met the requirements  of  Regulation  8  in
    full.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the decision of the FtT Judge  is
    unaffected by legal error and accordingly it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 7 November 2017
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal








