

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01064/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 09 April 2019                          |On 11 April 2019                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                  HODO [A]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr M. Afzal of Global Migration Solutions UK
LTD
For the respondent:          Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  09  January
    2018 to refuse to  issue  a  residence  card  recognising  a  right  of
    residence as a dependent direct relative of  an  EEA  national  in  the
    ascending line.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision  promulgated  on  01  August  2018.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant produced sufficient evidence to show  that
    she was dependent on the  EEA  national  for  her  essential  needs  as
    claimed.

3.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

       i) The judge failed  to  take  into  account  or  make  findings  on
          relevant matters including (i) additional family  income  in  the
          form of work and child tax credits; (ii)  whether  the  appellant
          was a member of the EEA sponsor's household given that she was 67
          years old, did not speak English, was unlikely to be working  and
          entered the  UK  with  a  valid  family  permit  as  a  dependent
          relative; (iii) if she was a member of the household, whether  it
          was likely that she was dependent on her son in law and  daughter
          for her essential needs despite  apparent  discrepancies  in  the
          evidence as to how much money he provided to her.

      ii) The judge failed to ensure that the discrepancies were put to the
          witnesses to provide an explanation if this was a matter that she
          was going to place weight on.

Decision and reasons

4.    Having considered the grounds of appeal and the  submissions  made  by
    both parties I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved
    the making of an error of law and must be set aside.

5.    It is axiomatic that  a  judge  must  give  reasons  for  his  or  her
    decision. It is not necessary for a judge to deal with every aspect  of
    a case if sufficient reasons are given for  the  parties,  particularly
    the losing party, to understand the basis of the decision in respect of
    the key elements that need to be  determined:  see  MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

6.    The judge's reasoning was contained in  four  paragraphs  of  a  brief
    decision involving text of less  than  two  pages.  Brevity  is  not  a
    problem unless the reasoning is insufficient  to  the  extent  that  it
    breaches the duty to give adequate reasons.

7.    The judge focussed on the  lack  of  direct  documentary  evidence  of
    dependency without making any clear findings on the credibility of  the
    witnesses [2]. The judge noted that there was one letter from  the  NHS
    that showed that the appellant was likely to live at the  same  address
    in 2017 but made no clear finding as to whether she was likely to be  a
    member of the EEA sponsor's household at the date of  the  hearing.  If
    she was a member of the  household  it  would  be  a  relevant  to  the
    assessment of whether she was still dependent on the  EEA  sponsor  for
    her essential needs.

8.    The  appellant  was  granted  entry  on  a  family  permit.  An  Entry
    Clearance Officer must have been satisfied that  the  appellant  was  a
    dependent of an EEA national to issue  the  family  permit.  The  judge
    failed to take this relevant information into  account.  The  appellant
    said that she lived with her daughter and son in law since her  arrival
    in the UK. The appellant was a 67-year-old Somali woman does not  speak
    English and is highly unlikely  to  be  in  work.  The  judge  did  not
    consider whether, in the circumstances, it  was  reasonable  to  expect
    there to be any documentary evidence of money transfers between the EEA
    sponsor and the appellant given that the sponsor plausibly stated  that
    he earns most of his income in cash from his work as a taxi driver.

9.    The judge did not make any clear findings as to what weight  she  gave
    to the evidence of the witnesses, which included the appellant, her son
    in law and her daughter. It  was  open  to  her  to  consider  apparent
    discrepancies between  the  amounts  the  appellant  claimed  that  she
    received from her son in law and the amount he stated. However, because
    of the brevity of the decision  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  judge
    ensured that the discrepancies that she was concerned about were put to
    the witnesses to clarify or explain. The discrepancy in the appellant's
    oral evidence should have been obvious  before  her  son  in  law  gave
    evidence because it conflicted with the evidence  given  by  all  three
    witnesses in their witness statements. It is unclear from the  decision
    whether the evidence given by  the  appellant's  son  in  law  and  her
    daughter were broadly consistent or whether the judge found them to  be
    credible witnesses.

10.   Although the judge mentioned that the EEA sponsor was  in  receipt  of
    additional government support  because  he  is  on  a  low  income,  no
    findings were made as to what impact this additional support might have
    on his  ability  to  support  the  appellant.  Clearly  the  judge  was
    concerned that the sponsor might not be able to afford to  support  the
    appellant given his low income, but there was no analysis of  what  the
    appellant's essential living needs might be if  she  lives  within  the
    family household. The additional cost of supporting one other person in
    an existing household it likely to be modest given that it  would  only
    amount to the cost  of  food  and  other  relatively  minor  costs  for
    clothing and personal items.

11.   Having considered the decision in detail, I conclude that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal reasons did not deal with several  key  elements  of  the
    evidence and were sufficiently lacking to amount to an error of law.

12.   I considered whether it would be possible to remake  the  decision  at
    the hearing before the Upper Tribunal. However, it seems clear that the
    appellant's case relies largely on the evidence of the witnesses  given
    that they accept that there is little direct  documentary  evidence  of
    money transfers. There is a reasonable explanation for this, but it  is
    still necessary to make proper findings relating to the credibility  of
    the witnesses.

13.   If it is accepted that the appellant lives with her daughter  and  son
    in law it is more likely than not that they would be providing for  her
    essential needs to the extent necessary to establish a continued  right
    of residence as a  dependent  family  member  in  the  ascending  line.
    However, a clear finding will  need  to  be  made  as  to  whether  the
    appellant is likely to be living with her daughter and her husband.

14.   Unfortunately, no interpreter was available at the hearing for  me  to
    speak to the witnesses to assess their evidence. I  considered  whether
    it might be possible to determine the appeal fairly by  hearing  solely
    from the appellant's son in law, who appeared to be fairly confident in
    English. However, given the discrepancies in the  appellant's  evidence
    noted by the First-tier Tribunal judge  it  seemed  apparent  that  any
    judicial decision maker would need to hear from the appellant  as  well
    to  make  a  proper  assessment.  Following  a  discussion  about   the
    difficulties of travelling back to London  for  a  further  hearing,  I
    reluctantly decided that the fairest and most  effective  way  to  deal
    with the matter would be to remit the appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in Birmingham where a fresh hearing can take  place  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 09 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








