
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01730/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2017                           |On 06 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                               ARSHAD MAHMOOD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Arrif of Arden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R
    J Walker, promulgated on 10 January 2017.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  1  August  1976.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in February 2005 pursuant to entry clearance
    as a visitor issued in November 2004; prior to his entry having he  had
    been working in the United Arab  Emirates.   He  met  and  subsequently
    married Ms Sooraiya Moosun, originally a citizen of Mauritius but now a
    British citizen.  Ms Moosun was born on 21 January 1955.   On  29  July
    2010 the Appellant made an application for leave to remain as a spouse.
     This was refused on 5 October 2010 and the decision  was  subsequently
    maintained by the Respondent on 14 November 2010, and again on 19  July
    2011.  Thereafter, the Appellant  made  a  succession  of  applications
    seeking to regularise  his  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  variously
    pursuant  to  EEA  Regulations  and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   These
    applications are summarised at paragraphs 2-9 of the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is unnecessary for me to set  out  the  entire
    history of those applications but  I  do  note  that  there  have  been
    applications to remain on the basis of Article 8 made in  July  2012  -
    refused in July 2013 with no right of appeal; again, in September 2014,
    refused in December 2014 with no right of appeal; and in February 2015,
    refused on 2 April 2015 with no right of appeal.

3.   Most recently the Appellant made an application on 6 July  2015  for  a
    Residence Card confirming  a  derivative  right  of  residence  as  the
    primary carer of a British citizen.  The application was refused by the
    Respondent on 7 October 2015: it is this decision that is  the  subject
    of the proceedings before the IAC.

4.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application because it  was  not
    accepted that evidence had been  produced  to  show  that  he  was  the
    primary carer of his spouse, and also the Respondent was not  satisfied
    that the Appellant's spouse would be unable to reside  in  the  UK  (or
    another EEA State) if the Appellant  were  required  to  leave  because
    other sources of care  would  be  available  to  her.   The  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision issued  on  7  October  2015  makes  reference  to
    regulations 15A(4A)(c), 15A(7)(b)(i) and 18A(1)(b) of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

5.   The Appellant appealed to  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.  His
    appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker.

6.   There was evidence before Judge Walker in respect  of  the  Appellant's
    partner's  medical  circumstances.   The  Judge   accepted   that   the
    Appellant's partner was "suffering from the various  conditions  listed
    and as a result is in need of care and which the Appellant is providing
    for her on a daily basis" (paragraph 30).  The Judge concluded that the
    Appellant had demonstrated that he was  his  wife's  sole  carer  (also
    paragraph 30).  The was consequently satisfied in respect of the  first
    two requirements of regulation 15A(4A) - he was satisfied both that the
    Appellant was the primary carer and that his wife was a British citizen
    residing in the UK (paragraph  31).   The  Judge  then  posed  the  key
    question in the appeal in these  terms:  "The  important  issue  to  be
    decided is whether the Appellant's wife would be unable  to  reside  in
    the UK or in another EEA state if the Appellant was required to  leave"
    (paragraph 32).  The Judge's phrasing in this regard  is  a  clear  and
    adequate reflection of the wording of the Regulations.

7.   The Judge, having posed this  question,  went  on  to  consider  it  at
    paragraphs 33 and 34 and came to a conclusion adverse to the Appellant:



         "33. There is documentation from  Hampshire  County  Council  Adult
             Services Department and which includes their assessment of the
             Appellant's needs dated 16 July 2015.  This confirms that  Mrs
             Moosun is eligible for care services to be arranged and  which
             would involve daytime visits.  However, adult services do  not
             provide night time assistance with  carers.   Any  night  time
             assistance could only be provided as respite in  a  care  home
             environment.


         34.  Whilst I accept that Mrs Moosun would far prefer that her care
             be provided by her husband it is clear that  alternative  care
             is available to her through the local authority.  This care is
             available on a  daytime  basis  with  visits  from  carers  or
             alternatively 24-hour care 7 days a week  in  a  respite  care
             home.  As such care is available then it cannot be  argued  by
             the Appellant and Mrs Moosun  that  she  would  be  unable  to
             reside in the UK if the Appellant was required to leave".


8.   The Judge went on to conclude the Decision in the  following  terms  at
    paragraph 35:


         "I do accept that the Appellant appears to be doing a sterling  job
         in caring for his wife and that this is preferred by  all  involved
         rather than care being provided by the state.   Nevertheless,  such
         state care is available and Mrs Moosun would be able to  remain  in
         the UK in the event of the UK being required to leave".


    (It seems that there is a slip in that final clause and it  should,  of
    course, read "in the event of the Appellant being required to leave the
    UK".)


9.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  on  25  July  2017.   Judge   Doyle
    considered that it was arguable that the Judge had not explained why he
    had preferred the evidence from  the  Hampshire  County  Council  to  a
    psychiatric report provided in support of the Appellant's case.

10.   The  grounds  of  challenge  in  this  regard  are  articulated   with
    particular reference to paragraph 35 of the report  dated  12  December
    2016 of Dr M H Husni, a consultant in general adult  psychiatry  (pages
    15-26 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).
    Paragraph 35 of the report is in these terms: "In case of her husband's
    removal her mental and physical state will  deteriorate  very  rapidly.
    She will become more depressed and hopeless.  She will not be  able  to
    take her medication regularly".

11.  The grounds argue that the Judge failed  to  consider  that  Ms  Moosun
    suffered from mental health problems and would be  compelled  to  leave
    the UK if the Appellant were to leave.

12.  In considering this line of challenge it is appropriate and useful,  in
    my judgment, to consider the particular  passage  relied  upon  in  the
    context of the  psychiatric  report  overall.   I  do  not  propose  to
    rehearse the aspects of  the  psychiatric  report  that  refer  to  the
    Appellant's medical history and current treatments, but to focus on the
    section with the heading 'Impact of forcing her to live in a care  home
    or to live in Pakistan' (paragraphs 31 onwards). Paragraph 31 rehearses
    the  Appellant's  comments  and  observations  as  to   the   practical
    difficulties of living in Pakistan, it being  said  that  there  is  no
    affordable housing and no provision of  social  housing;  reference  is
    also made there to the Appellant's concerns about his ability  to  meet
    the cost of medical treatment in Pakistan.  Paragraph 32  states:  "Mrs
    Moosun stated that she would not be able to accompany  her  husband  to
    live in Pakistan.  She does not speak Urdu, she does  not  know  anyone
    there and she cannot afford the cost of her medication as she is on  15
    medications".  Paragraphs 33 and 34 highlight the level  of  dependency
    of Ms Moosun on the Appellant  by  reference  to  his  assistance  with
    activities of daily living and it is then  opined  that  the  level  of
    dependency is "clearly above the normal ties of dependency of a husband
    and wife" on the basis that the  Appellant  was  clearly  assuming  the
    roles of a carer, providing both emotional and practical  support,  and
    that his wife completely relied upon him.  It is said  that  Ms  Moosun
    "feels safe and dignified with her husband".  Paragraphs 37-40  of  the
    report, under the heading 'Healthcare state in Pakistan' refer  to  the
    limited availability of medical services in Pakistan, and in particular
    that  foreign  patients  are  not  entitled  to  free   medical   care,
    consultations, tests and medication.

13.  The report of Dr Husni itself must be seen in the  overall  context  of
    the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  In this regard I have discussed with the representatives today  certain
    passages in the witness statement of the Appellant  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a witness statement signed on  3  January  2017  the
    Appellant set out some  of  the  practical  difficulties  of  his  wife
    relocating to Pakistan with him in a similar fashion to those rehearsed
    in the psychiatric report.  At paragraph 9 he refers to the  fact  that
    she has never visited Pakistan and does not speak  Urdu  and  does  not
    have family or friends in Pakistan, her brothers and sisters all  being
    in the UK.  At paragraph 10 the Appellant then says this:


         "I confirm that my wife cannot relocate to Pakistan as she requires
         medical  treatment  which  is  not  available  free  of  charge  in
         Pakistan.  My wife needs to be in the UK to continue her treatment.
          I would like to add that the private treatment in Pakistan is very
         expensive I refer to the cost assessment of  private  treatment  in
         Pakistan".


    Thereafter, at paragraph 11 reference is made to the financial  welfare
    benefits that the Appellant's partner is receiving in the UK  and  that
    they  would  not  be  available  to   her   were   she   to   relocate.
    Notwithstanding the  very  clear  reference  at  paragraph  10  to  the
    inability of the  Appellant's  partner  to  relocate,  in  contrast  at
    paragraph 13 the Appellant then states that  if  he  is  to  return  to
    Pakistan "my wife will be  forced  to  return  with  me  since  she  is
    disabled and her poor health".


15.  There is a clear tension and ambiguity in exactly  what  the  Appellant
    was putting before the First-tier Tribunal: whether in the event of his
    own return to Pakistan his wife would be compelled to leave  with  him,
    or whether the situation was in fact that she could not (or would  not)
    relocate to Pakistan and therefore the Appellant's removal would result
    in the separation of the couple. It  seems  to  me  that  this  was  to
    underscore the difficult nature of the choice, or election, that  would
    confront the Appellant and his partner in the event  of  his  departure
    from the UK. Dr Husni's evidence, relied upon in the challenge  herein,
    was more to the effect that Ms Moosun would not leave  the  UK,  rather
    than that she would be  compelled  to  do  so,  albeit  that  that  the
    separation from the Appellant would impact upon her  emotional  health.
    This might be of relevance in an Article 8 proportionality  evaluation,
    but does not establish a case under the Regulations.

16.  The  Appellant's  Skeleton  Argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appropriately and correctly identified the very high threshold in cases
    of this sort: the language of "would be unable to reside in the  UK  or
    the EEA" used in the Regulations essentially means that the test is one
    of nothing  less  than  compulsion,  e.g.  see  paragraph  2.6  of  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument which seems to be an adequate  reflection
    of the jurisprudence in this area in such cases as DH (Jamaica)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1736 and MA and SM [2013] UKUT 380.  What  is  argued  in  the
    Skeleton Argument before the First-tier Tribunal in this  regard  seems
    to come down  to  what  is  said  at  paragraphs  2.7  and  2.8  -  the
    unavailability of night care support through Social Services  would  in
    effect compel the Appellant's partner to leave the UK.  In my  judgment
    the premise of that  argument  is  very  clearly  met  by  the  Judge's
    observations and findings at paragraph 34.  I note in this regard  that
    there is no express challenge to the finding at paragraph 34 that there
    would indeed be available 24-hour care seven days a week in  a  respite
    care home were the Appellant's partner not to have the support  of  the
    Appellant.

17.  I  cannot  detect  anything  in  the  materials  that  articulates  the
    Appellant's case as perhaps it is now articulated in the  challenge  to
    the Upper Tribunal - to the effect that the mental health circumstances
    of the Appellant's partner are so severe that she would be compelled to
    leave the UK not to lose the emotional support of  the  Appellant.   In
    those circumstances it seems to me  that  the  Judge  was  correct,  in
    effect, to identify that the Appellant and her partner were faced  with
    a very difficult choice, but nonetheless that it was a  choice  with  a
    preference for one outcome rather than  another,  and  not  a  case  of
    compulsion.

18.  In the circumstances I do not accept that the Appellant has  identified
    a material error of law in the approach of Judge Walker.   Accordingly,
    the decision of Judge Walker must stand.

19.  Much of what I have said indicates that the Appellant's case  has  been
    most clearly articulated upon lines of  'proportionality'  rather  than
    'compulsion' - indeed much of the evidence and the circumstances of the
    case have the flavour of an Article 8 appeal.  Of course, the  Tribunal
    had no jurisdiction in respect of Article  8.   I  have  already  noted
    above that the Appellant has made a number of  applications  previously
    under the head of Article 8, all of which  have  resulted  in  refusals
    with no right of appeal.  It is not clear to me what evidence may  have
    been filed in support of any of those applications, and  in  particular
    it is not clear to me what the mental health and indeed physical health
    of the Appellant's partner may have been at the time of the most recent
    Article 8 application.  That said, it remains the case that  there  has
    been no recent  adjudication  by  the  Respondent  on  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 circumstances, and no consideration by the  Tribunal  at  any
    stage.

20.  It is not for me to advise either party as to how best to proceed,  but
    it may well be that in light of this decision  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner will wish to give consideration to making a further application
    under Article 8. Alternatively, and in  any  event,  the  Secretary  of
    State may wish to review the circumstances  in  light  of  the  various
    evidences that have been filed in this appeal before making any removal
    decision in respect of the Appellant.  These are not matters for me  to
    express any particular view on at this stage:  I  merely  observe  that
    there may be other options for  the  parties  to  consider  before  the
    Appellant is ultimately required,  if  at  all,  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

21.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no errors of law  and
    stands. The appeal remains dismissed.

22.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 5 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

