







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/01427/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd September 2017                |   On 12th October 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                              MR ABID NOOR AZIZ
                        (NO AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood of Whitefields solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, Mr Abid Noor Aziz date of birth 13 September 1977, is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  No anonymity direction was  made  previously  and
    none  was  applied  for  before   me.   Having   considered   all   the
    circumstances, I do not consider it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simmonds promulgated on 14th December 2016, whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse him a residence card as the spouse of  a  European
    Union citizen, who is exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  It  was
    accepted that the appellant had gone through  a  ceremony  of  marriage
    with an EEA national and that the EEA national  was  exercising  treaty
    rights. The judge found that the appellant had  failed  to  prove  that
    this was a genuine marriage and  concluded  therefore  that  it  was  a
    marriage of convenience. On that basis the judge dismissed the  appeal.



 3. By a decision of 31st May 2017 Tribunal Judge Adio  granted  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Thus the appeal  came  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision.

 4. There was no representative for the respondent at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Simmonds. The appellant  was  present  along  with  a  number  of
    potential witnesses but only the appellant  and  the  EEA  spouse  gave
    evidence.  The grounds of appeal at paragraph 5 alleged that the  judge
    has failed to give the reasons why there was no representative for  the
    Home Office at the hearing. I fail to see how the fact that  the  judge
    has not given reasons for the failure of  the  respondent  to  field  a
    representative  in  the  court  impacts  upon  the  decision   in   the
    circumstances.

 5. The grounds of appeal also raise the issues that the  judge  has  asked
    questions and as a result found the  appellant's  responses  incredibly
    vague. The judge is entitled to ask questions to clarify  issues  which
    are central to the appeal. The evidence by the appellant and his spouse
    was that they conversed in English. The judge found the English of  the
    sponsor wholly inadequate. Again given that  it  was  an  issue  as  to
    whether or not the parties could genuinely conduct a relationship,  the
    judge would have been entitled to look at  the  extent  to  which  they
    could converse.

 6. Issue is also  taken  that  there  were  witnesses  available  but  the
    witnesses were not called. It is not for the judge  to  decide  how  an
    appellant's representative should  present  the  case.  The  judge  has
    pointed out discrepancies in the witness statement  as  the  judge  was
    entitled to do. The representative was  present  and  if  the  evidence
    needed  to  be  bolstered  by  further  witnesses  it   was   for   the
    representative to call them.

 7. However that having been said in paragraph 6 of the decision the  judge
    states that the burden of proving  that  this  is  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience is on the appellant. The  judge  applied  the  standard  of
    proof of the balance of probabilities.

 8. The case of Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 places the burden  of  proof
    in marriage of convenience cases on the  respondent.  As  confirmed  in
    Rosa and Agho v SSHD 2015 EWCA Civ 1198 the evidential burden may shift
    in the case but as stated by Lord Justice Underhill at  in Agho

    13... What it comes down to is that as a matter of principle the spouse
    establishes a prima facie case that he or she is a family member of  an
    EEA national by providing the marriage  certificate  and  the  spouse's
    passport; that the legal burden is on the Secretary of  State  to  show
    that any marriage thus proved is a  marriage  of  convenience  and  the
    burden is not discharged merely by showing 'reasonable  suspicion'.  Of
    course in the  usual  way  the  evidential  burden  may  shift  to  the
    applicant by proof of  facts  which  justify  the  inference  that  the
    marriage is not genuine, and the facts giving rise to the inference may
    include a failure to answer a request with  documentary  proof  of  the
    genuineness of the  marriage  where  grounds  of  suspicion  have  been
    raised. Although, as I say, the point was not argued  before  us,  that
    approach seems to me to be correct...

 9. Clearly in stating that the burden of proof is on  the  appellant,  the
    judge has approached the burden of proof wholly  wrong.  The  judge  in
    examining the facts of the case commences by making  an  assessment  of
    those factors which support the appellant's account. The judge does  go
    on to look at evidence arising from the interview to  consider  whether
    the respondent has  answered  the  case  presented  by  the  appellant.
    However it is clear at that point that the judge  is  considering  that
    the burden rests upon the  appellant  to  prove  that  this  is  not  a
    marriage of convenience. That with  the  respect  is  clearly  not  the
    approach to be taken in accordance with the case law identified.

10. I take account of the fact that an assessment has to be made whether or
    not the approach of the judge constitutes a material error  of  law  or
    whether if the judge had directed herself properly the judge would have
    reached the same conclusion. Having considered the approach whilst  the
    judge has considered both  factors  in  favour  of  the  appellant  and
    factors against, it was submitted by  the  respondent's  representative
    that even if the judge had  not  correctly  directed  herself,  she  in
    considering the issues applied the correct  test  and  accordingly  the
    misdirection by the judge made no material difference.  However  having
    looked at the approach of the judge I find that  the  approach  by  the
    judge placed the burden on the appellant and that was wholly wrong. The
    approach of the judge in dealing with those factors that supported  the
    appellant's account clearly represented that the judge was placing  the
    burden upon the appellant throughout.

11. Having considered the approach of the judge I  find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the approach that the judge has taken  to  the
    case. The appropriate course is for the case to be heard afresh in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set the decision aside. The matter has to  be  heard  afresh  in  the
    First-Tier Tribunal.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure.



