
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01263/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, London |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 January 2019                       |On 11 February 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                         CHRISTELLE TEUBOU MAKOUDJOU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Christelle Teubou Makoudjou, was born on 19 January 1988
    and is a female citizen of Cameroon.  She appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Greasley) against a decision of the Secretary of  State
    to refuse her a permanent residence card as confirmation that  she  was
    the former family member of an EEA national  (Regulation  15(1)(f))  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal, in  a
    decision promulgated on 26 September 2018, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant attended in person at the Royal  Courts  of  Justice.   I
    explained carefully to the appellant  that  she  should  inform  me  if
    either I or Mr Wilding said anything which she did not  understand.   I
    made every effort to explain the nature  of  the  proceedings  and  the
    issues to the appellant who appeared to understand.

 3. Divorce proceedings were initiated in January 2017.   It  is  necessary
    for the appellant if  she  is  to  qualify  for  a  residence  card  to
    discharge the burden of  proving  that  her  ex-husband  had  exercised
    Treaty Rights for the period of 5 years prior to the initiation of  the
    divorce proceedings.  At [10], Judge Greasley wrote:

         "However, I find the appeal must be  dismissed  on  the  basis  the
         appellant has been unable to provide credible and reliable evidence
         demonstrating that her former husband was exercising Treaty  Rights
         for a continuous 5 year period going back to 2013.   The  appellant
         asked me to accept that  the  appellant's  husband  was  a  student
         between 2012-2013 but there is no supporting documentation provided
         from any source in relation to this pivotal issue."

 4. I agree with Mr Wilding, who appeared for the Secretary of State,  that
    Judge  Greasley  has  correctly  identified  the  difficulty   in   the
    appellant's application which she has failed to  overcome.   There  was
    evidence of the exercise of Treaty Rights by  the  ex-husband  for  the
    period 2015 onwards but not before that date.  The  appellant  told  me
    that she had married her former husband in 2012 when he was a  student.
    The marriage had been difficult and she had been the victim  of  abuse.
    She explained that she was unable to provide evidence relating  to  her
    former husband because they were "not together anymore".  She said that
    she had called him many times but he had refused to help.

 5. I have much sympathy for the appellant but I am unable to identify  any
    error of law in the judge's decision.  The appellant acknowledges  that
    there was "no supporting documentation" relating  to  the  exercise  of
    Treaty Rights by the former husband in  the  period  2012-2013.   Faced
    with that lack of evidence, Judge Greasley had no option but to dismiss
    the appeal.  In granting permission, Deputy Judge Doyle referred to the
    cases of Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 and Gauswami [2018] UKUT  275.
    Neither I nor Mr Wilding were able to discover the relevance  of  those
    decisions to the issues in the instant appeal.

 6. For the reasons I have stated, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 4 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 4 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane















