
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/01261/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 March 2018                           |On 05 April 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mr Sarfaraj Musabhai Bhochaka
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Thornhill, Thornhills Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)   has
    permission to challenge the decision of the First-tier Tribunal sent on
    25 May 2017 allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter  the
    claimant) against the decision of the SSHD  refusing  him  a  residence
    card on the basis of a retained right of residence.

2.   The sole ground of appeal is that the judge wrongly concluded that  the
    claimant met the requirement of Regulation 10(6) of the EEA Regulations
    because there was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  of  him  being  in
    employment beyond April 2015.

3.   It is unnecessary for me to go into any detail as regards  this  appeal
    because in the light of further documentation submitted by the claimant
    at the hearing before me, Mr Harrison conceded the SSHD's grounds could
    not succeed.  The judge had decided the appeal on the papers and so the
    SSHD was not sighted as to the full documentation that was  before  the
    judge.  Having reviewed the file, it is  clear  that  there  was  solid
    documentary  evidence  of  the  claimant's  continued  employment  with
    Stateside Foods Ltd up to April 2017.   Since  the  judge  decided  the
    appeal in May 2017 it is clearly more than probable,  in  view  of  the
    claimant's employment history, that he was exercising treaty rights  at
    the date of hearing.  (That has now been  confirmed  in  any  event  by
    further documentary evidence, produced  by  Mr  Thornhill  before  me).
    Accordingly, I conclude that the FtT Judge did not err in law  and  his
    decision to allow the appeal must stand.

4.   No anonymity direction is made.






Signed:                                 Date: 30 March 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal






