


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/01306/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 March 2019                         | On 19 March 2019               |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                            KORLEX BOATENG MENSAH

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appeared in person, not legally represented
For the Respondents:   Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Kenya. He entered the United Kingdom  in
    March 1998 and on 19 September 2010 he married a Dutch national. He was
    granted a residence card  as  her  spouse,  which  was  valid  from  18
    September 2012 to 18 September 2017.

2.   A petition for divorce was filed in May 2017 and a decree absolute  was
    granted by the Family Court on 13 October 2017

3.   On 19 December 2017 the Appellant applied for a residence card  on  the
    basis that he had a retained right of residence but his application was
    refused on 23 January 2018. The sole ground of  refusal  was  that  the
    Appellant's application had not been accompanied by a copy of  his  ex-
    wife's passport or identity document.  The Appellant  appealed  against
    this decision but in a decision,  promulgated  on  21  September  2018,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kainth dismissed his appeal.   The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever
    granted him leave to appeal on 18 October 2018.

4.   On 2 January 2019 I found that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kainth  had
    made an error of law for the reasons given in my decision of that  date
    and reserved the re-hearing to myself.





THE RE-HEARING

5.   I also made a number of directions at the error of  law  hearing  on  2
    January 2019.  The Appellant complied with these directions and  on  14
    January 2019 his solicitors filed and served  a  copy  of  the  divorce
    petition he filed at the Family Court in Bury St.  Edmunds  on  1  June
    2017.

6.   The Respondent did not comply with  the  directions  addressed  to  him
    and, on 7 March 2019, I sent further  directions,  repeating  the  ones
    made previously. The Respondent has not provided any HMRC  records  but
    in an email, dated 13 March 2019, the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    stated  that  she  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife  was
    exercising her Treaty rights at the salient times.

7.   She went on to stated that this in effect removed the  only  impediment
    to the appeal being allowed in the Appellant's favour. This is correct.



8.   Regulation 10 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 states that:

     (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
         (a)  he ceased to be a family member  of  a  qualified  person...on
    the termination of the              marriage...of that person;
         (b)  he was residing in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
    these Regulations at the        date of the termination;
         (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
         (d)  either-
              (i) prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings  for  the
    termination of the               marriage...the  marriage...had  lasted
    for   at   least   three    years    and    the    parties    to    the
    marriage...had resided in the United Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year
    during its             duration;
     (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person -
         (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA  national,
    be a worker..."

9.   There is no additional requirement that the passport or  identity  card
    of the EEA national to whom the Applicant was previously married should
    accompany the application.

10.   Regulation  21(5)  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 does state that:

     "where an application for documentation under his part  is  made  by  a
    person who is not an EEA national on the basis that the  person  is  or
    was the family member of an  EEA  national...the  application  must  be
    accompanied or joined by a valid national identity card or passport  in
    the name of that EEA national".

11.   However,  Regulation  21(5)  does  not  apply  to   applications   for
    documentation made under Part 1 of the Regulations and the  Appellant's
    application was made under Part 1. .

12.  The sole basis upon which the Appellant's application was  refused  was
    that he had not provided his ex-wife's identity document  and  for  the
    reasons given above the Respondent was wrong in law to assert  that  he
    had to provide such a document.

13.  In the refusal letter, the Respondent did  go  on  to  state  that  the
    Appellant's application had not received any further consideration  and
    this was why I made  directions  for  the  Respondent  to  produce  the
    Appellant's ex-wife's HMRC records. However, the Respondent now accepts
    that the Appellant's ex-wife was  exercising  a  Treaty  right  at  the
    relevant times and he does not assert that the Appellant did  not  meet
    any of the other requirements for being granted  a  residence  card  as
    someone who retained a right of residence on divorce.

14.  As a consequence, the Appellant meets the  necessary  requirements  for
    being granted such a residence card.

Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

 Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 14 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


