
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01223/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 September 2017                  |On 22 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                          Pearl Abena Alberta Viala

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Adams of Counsel, instructed by BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana who was born on 2 June 1976.   She
    married a national of Belgium, of Ghanaian origin, on  2  August  2014.
    The marriage took place by proxy in Ghana while both the Appellant  and
    her husband were in the United Kingdom.

 2. She made an application  on  8  July  2015  for  a  residence  card  as
    recognition of her marriage and her right to remain as the spouse of an
    EEA national.

 3. On 20 January  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the
    application following interviews with the Appellant and her husband  on
    19 January 2016, as a consequence of  which  the  Respondent  concluded
    that the marriage was one of convenience and  therefore  the  Appellant
    was not the spouse of an EEA national with regard to  Regulation  2  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 nor a family member  within  the
    meaning of Regulation 7.

 4. The Appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I A Lewis for hearing on  9  September
    2016.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  16  November  2016  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  His reasons for so doing are set out  at  [4]  -
    [6]:

         "4.  It is a feature  of  this  case  that  the  marriage  ceremony
             between the Appellant and Mr Buah - whether of convenience or
             not - was a customary marriage conducted by proxy  in  Ghana.
             As was readily accepted by Ms Narh at the hearing,  there  was
             no evidence filed in support of either the application or  the
             appeal as to the recognition of the marriage in Belgium.

         5.    Accordingly  although  the  Respondent  had  relied  upon  an
             allegation of 'marriage of convenience', it was common  ground
             before me given the marriage is  a  proxy  marriage,  that  in
             light of the decisions in  Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  EU  law)
             [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) and TA and Others  (Kareem  explained)
             Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) the Appellant is not able in any
             event to establish that she is a 'family  member'  within  the
             meaning of Regulation 7.

         6.   Necessarily the appeal based  on  Regulation  7,  as  being  a
             spouse, must fail and is duly dismissed".

 5. The judge went on to find that in light of the Upper Tribunal  decision
    in Sala (EFMs Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) that  it  was  not
    open to him to determine any Article 8 issues arising, in light of  the
    fact that if the Appellant were to be treated  as  an  extended  family
    member, there was no jurisdiction to consider  any  grounds  of  appeal
    based on Regulation 8(5).

 6. An application for permission to  appeal  was  made.   The  grounds  in
    essence assert that the judge erred materially in  law  in  failing  to
    consider the case of Awuku v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] EWCA  Civ  178  which  was  declaratory  and  therefore  applies
    retrospectively to the decision of the judge promulgated on 16 November
    2016.

 7. The grounds further assert that the judge erred in failing to determine
    whether or not the appeal was a marriage  of  convenience,  bearing  in
    mind that the burden of proof lies upon the  Respondent  following  the
    decision in Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Grubb in a  decision
    dated 28 July 2017 in the following terms

         "2.  In concluding the 'proxy marriage' of the  Appellant  was  not
             shown to be valid, the judge applied the case  of  Kareem  (op
             cit).  That case concluded that the validity of  the  marriage
             had to be  determined  by  reference  to  the  EEA  national's
             country of nationality (Belgium).  The  Court  of  Appeal  has
             subsequently overruled Kareem in Awuku v  Secretary  of  State
             [2017] EWCA Civ 178: validity is to be determined by reference
             to the lex loci celebrationis (Ghana).  That was an  error  of
             law by the judge although he understandably applied the law as
             it was thought to be at the time of his decision.   The  judge
             made no finding on the alternative point relied  upon  by  the
             Respondent, namely that the marriage was one  of  convenience.
             His error was material".

 9. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice on 11 August 2017 which  provides
    as follows at 4:

         "The Respondent accepts that on the face of the determination there
         does appear to be a clear error in law but materiality will  depend
         on what, if any, documents were produced showing how  the  marriage
         was celebrated in Ghana."

    Hearing

10. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Mr  Adams  of
    Counsel, instructed by BWF Solicitors and the Respondent by Mr  Tarlow.
    Neither party had seen the Rule 24 response and  I  therefore  provided
    them with copies.

11. Having read the Rule 24 response, Mr Tarlow indicated that he would not
    rely upon this.  He accepted that there was a material error of law and
    that an analysis of the facts needed to be carried out  and  the  judge
    had failed to do this, particularly in relation to the issue of whether
    the marriage was one of convenience.

12. Having accepted that there were material errors of law in that the  law
    relating to proxy marriages  had  materially  changed;  and  the  judge
    failed to make any findings in relation to whether the marriage between
    the Appellant and her EEA national spouse is  one  of  convenience,  he
    submitted that the appropriate course would be for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted back to a different First-tier Tribunal Judge for  a  de  novo
    consideration.  Mr Adams acceded to this proposed course of action.

     Decision

13.  I find in light of the grounds of appeal, the grant  of  permission  to
appeal and the    helpful concession on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  by  Mr
Tarlow, that the decision of     the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained
material errors of law.

14.  Firstly, whilst the previous position in  terms  of  the  jurisprudence
relating to proxy      marriages was that as set  out  in  the  decision  in
Kareem (op cit), which provided that    the validity of the marriage had  to
be assessed in relation to the nationality of the     member  state  of  the
party, it is now clear from  the  subsequent  decision  of  the  Court    of
Appeal in Awuku (op cit) that this is not correct and the assessment has  to
be   considered from the perspective of the  host  member  state,  i.e.  the
United Kingdom.

15.  Secondly, given the judge's finding in relation  to  the  first  issue,
which is now vitiated  by  material  error  of  law,  he  did  not  find  it
necessary  to  go  on  to  consider  whether   there  was  a   marriage   of
convenience. That matter remains outstanding  for       consideration  based
on the evidence at a remitted de novo hearing.

     Notice of Decision

16.  I therefore find a material error of law in the decision of First  tier
Tribunal Judge    Lewis and I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo  before
the First-tier Tribunal.

     I make the following directions:

                           ________________

                               DIRECTIONS

                           ________________

 1) the appeal is to be listed for two hours with a Twi interpreter;

 2) none of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal are  preserved;



 3) it would assist the First-tier Tribunal in respect of its consideration
    of the appeal if the Home Office were to  set  out  their  position  in
    relation to proxy marriages that take place in Ghana; and

 4) that position to be served in  writing  on  the  Tribunal  and  on  the
    Appellant's representatives ten working days prior to  the  listing  of
    the next hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 21 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

