
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/01497/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reason  Promulgated     |
|On 24 October 2017                 |On 31 October 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                          SAMUSIDEEN TAYO ADEKUNKLE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms T White (counsel) instructed by Farani Javid Taylor,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 9 February 2017,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born  on  12  September  1974  and  is  a  national  of
Nigeria. On 23 January 2016 the Secretary of State refused  the  Appellant's
application for a residence card confirming a permanent right to  reside  in
the  UK  under  Regulations  10(5)   and   15(1)(f)   of   the   Immigration
(EEA)Regulations 2006.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Hawden-Beal  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22  August  2017
Designated Judge Woodcraft gave permission to appeal stating

      The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against refusal to issue  a
      residence card finding that the  appellant  had  not  retained  rights
      under regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations  because  the  appellant
      could not show the relevant  five-year  period  for  the  exercise  of
      treaty rights, see paragraph 11 of the determination. The  grounds  of
      onward appeal argue that the Judge misdirected herself in finding  the
      five-year period had to be counted back from the date  of  divorce  as
      opposed to  any  five-year  period  during  the  marriage  (which  the
      appellant could establish).


      Arguably the Judge has erred in determining which five-year period  is
      the relevant one to take note  of.  The  issue  turned  on  whether  a
      retained right is always preserved, Idezuna [2011] UKUT 474 appears to
      answer the point.


      All grounds may be argued.

The Hearing

5. Mrs White, counsel for the appellant, moved the  appeal.  She  relied  on
the skeleton argument that she had prepared and told me that at [11] of  the
decision the Judge's finds  that  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising
treaty rights of movement from 2009 until 2014, & that amounts to a  finding
that the appellant acquired the right of permanent residence.  She  told  me
that the Judge made a material error of law because  the  Judge  looked  for
evidence that the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising  treaty  rights  of
movement at the date of divorce, in October 2016. She told me  that  because
a permanent right of residence had been established by 2014 it continued  to
exist and was not extinguished by divorce.

6. Miss Isherwood, for the respondent, candidly conceded that  [11]  of  the
decision created difficulty for her and told me  that  she  had  no  further
submission to make. The rule 24 note for the respondent indicates  that  the
respondent does not oppose the appeal and asks for the decision  to  be  set
aside and a fresh decision be substituted

Analysis

7. In Idezuna [2011] UKUT 474 it was held that

      (1) Typically, the focus in EEA appeals involving family members is on
      either or both (i)  the  nature  of  the  relationship  with  the  EEA
      national/Union citizen; and (ii)  the  question  of  whether  the  EEA
      national/Union citizen has been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK
      over the  relevant  period.  What  constitutes  the  relevant  period,
      however, may  be  a  matter  requiring  particular  consideration  and
      sometimes a family member may  have  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
      residence on the basis of historical facts. In the present  case,  for
      example,  once  the  appellant  had  established  that  his  wife  was
      exercising Treaty rights for five continuous years since the  date  of
      marriage (and before he was divorced), then (subject to (d) below)  he
      was from that date someone who had  a  right  of  permanent  residence
      which could not be broken by absence from the UK unless in  excess  of
      two years.

      (2) Continuous residence in the UK of the  applicant/appellant  family
      member is an essential requirement for  proving  permanent  residence:
      see regulation 15(1)(b) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 and Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC).

      (3) Whilst often it may not be in dispute that the applicant/appellant
      family member has been in the UK during the relevant period,  that  is
      not something that can be taken  for  granted  and  it  may  sometimes
      become necessary on appeal for the tribunal judge to make a finding on
      the matter based on the evidence. If it has not previously been raised
      by the respondent,  however,  procedural  fairness  dictates  that  an
      appellant must be afforded a  proper  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
      issue.

      (4) When assessing whether the applicant/appellant family  member  has
      resided in the UK continuously for  the  purposes  of  qualifying  for
      permanent residence, it must be recalled that regulation 3(2)  of  the
      2006 Regulations provides that continuity of residence is not affected
      by (a) periods of absence from the United Kingdom which do not  exceed
      six months in total in any year;  (b)  periods  of  absence  from  the
      United Kingdom on military service; or (c) any one  absence  from  the
      United Kingdom not exceeding twelve months  for  an  important  reason
      such as pregnancy, childbirth, serious illness,  study  or  vocational
      training or an overseas posting (Article 16(3) of the Directive is  to
      similar effect).

      (5) Once a right of permanent residence has been acquired, it  can  be
      lost only through the absence from the host Member State 'for a period
      exceeding  two  consecutive  years'  (regulation  15(2)  of  the  2006
      Regulations; Article 16(4) of the Directive).

8. At [11] of the decision the Judge found that the appellant's ex-wife  was
exercising treaty rights of movement between 2009 and 2014, but  found  that
that evidence did not help  the  appellant  because  his  marriage  was  not
dissolved by divorce until October 2016. The Judge says  that  the  relevant
period is October 2011 to October 2016,  and  found  against  the  appellant
because there is no evidence of the  appellant's  ex-wife's  activities  for
the final years of marriage between 2014 and 2016.

9. Quite correctly the appeal is  not  opposed.  It  is  accepted  that  the
Judge's finding that the relevant period is five years to  October  2016  is
wrong. That finding is a material error of law. I therefore set the  Judge's
decision (promulgated on 9 February 2017) aside.

10. There is sufficient material before me to enable  me  to  substitute  my
own  decision.  The  Judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's  ex-wife   was
exercising  treaty  rights  from  2009  to  2014  is  not  challenged.   The
respondent accepts that the appellant entered the UK on 20 August 2005 as  a
student. Leave to  remain  was  extended  until  30  November  2009.  On  24
February 2010 the appellant applied for a residence card. A  residence  card
was issued on 30 August 2010 and was valid  until  13  August  2015.  On  11
August 2015 the appellant submitted an application for permanent  residence.
The appellant's marriage broke down, and decree absolute was granted  on  26
October 2016.

11. Under regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006  regulations  the  non-EEA  family
member of an EEA national who has resided  in  the  UK  for  five  years  in
accordance with the regulations acquired a permanent right of residence.  On
the facts as the Judge found them to be the appellant's ex-wife, who  is  an
EEA national, exercised treaty rights  of  movement  continuously  for  five
years from 2009 to 2014. During that same period the  appellant  lived  with
the EEA national as her spouse. It was at  that  point  that  the  appellant
acquired the right to permanent residence.

12. The application that the appellant made was for documentary evidence  to
certify the right of residence already acquired. Idenzuna is  authority  for
the need to consider when the five-year period  actually  runs  rather  than
focusing on the date of divorce or  the  date  of  application  and  working
backwards.

13. Under regulation 15(2) the right of permanent residence is lost only  by
absence from the UK for more than two consecutive years. The  appellant  has
not been absent from the UK. The effect of  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
appellant's ex-wife exercising treaty rights for five  continuous  years  to
2014 means that the appellant is entitled to the document  that  he  applied
for because by 2014 he had established a permanent right of residence.

14. No challenge is taken to the Judge's finding that  the  appellant's  ex-
wife exercised treaty rights for  five  continuous  years  between  2009  in
2014. I am therefore able to substitute my own decision.

15. Because the appellant acquired a permanent right of residence  in  2014,
the appellant is entitled to a residence card as confirmation of  his  right
to reside permanently in the UK. On the facts as the  Judge  found  them  to
be, the appellant retained the right of residence after divorce.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9  February  2017
is tainted by material errors of law. It is set aside

17. I substitute my own decision.

18. The appeal against the respondent's decision dated 23  January  2016  is
allowed under the immigration EEA regulations 2006.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 27 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




