
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01088/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 September 2019                |On: 25 September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 Kennedy [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E F Ogbonna instructed by Dorcas Funmi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Nigeria born on  8  April  1986,  appealed
    against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue him  with  an  EEA
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") as an extended  family  member
    (cousin) of [AE], an Austrian national exercising treaty rights in  the
    UK.

 2. The appellant entered the UK after being  issued  with  an  EEA  family
    permit as the extended family member of [AE] on 29 September  2015.  He
    was subsequently refused a residence card as Mr [E]'s  extended  family
    member on two occasions, on 6 October 2016 and 3  March  2017,  and  he
    then made a third application on the same basis on 16 March 2017.

 3. The appellant's application was refused on 29  September  2017  on  the
    grounds that the respondent did not accept that he  remained  dependent
    upon Mr [AE] and that he did not, therefore, satisfy  the  requirements
    of Regulation 8(2). The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant
    currently resided with the EEA sponsor and did not accept that  he  was
    financially dependent upon him.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese on 2 May 2019. The judge accepted
    that the appellant resided at the relevant property but did not  accept
    that he was financially dependent upon Mr [E].  He dismissed the appeal
    on all grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had failed to make a finding  on
    whether the appellant was a  member  of  the  sponsor's  household  and
    failed properly to assess the evidence in relation to the  question  of
    dependency.

 6. Permission was granted on 9 August 2019.

 7. In a Rule 24 Notice dated 9 September  2019  the  respondent  confirmed
    that the appellant's application for permission was not opposed.

 8. At the hearing Mr Ogbonna asked that the  matter  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier tribunal, whereas Mr Clarke was content for the matter to be
    re-made by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the evidence which  had
    been before the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  demonstrate  that  the
    appellant was a member of the sponsor's household.

 9. It is not in dispute that Judge Abebrese had erred in law by failing to
    make a finding on whether the appellant was a member of  the  sponsor's
    household, given that membership of an EEA national's household was  an
    alternative, under Regulation 8(2)(b)(ii), to demonstrating  dependency
    upon the EEA national. The basis upon which  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal is therefore entirely unclear and  his  decision  simply  cannot
    stand and must be set aside.

10. It seems to me that this is a matter that has to go back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard again.  An  assessment  of  the  question  of
    membership of the EEA sponsor's household requires there to be oral and
    documentary evidence together with full and  proper  findings  on  that
    evidence, and whilst membership of the same  household  and  dependency
    are  alternatives  under  Regulation  8(2)(b)(ii),  the   matters   are
    necessarily interlinked and thus require an assessment of the  evidence
    as a whole. Accordingly, the most appropriate course would be  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

11. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Abebrese.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  23 September 2019
