
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01182/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2018                                |On 17 April 2018           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                mr asad afzal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G. Sarkar, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") from the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") promulgated on 3 April 2017  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision by the SSHD to refuse to issue him with
    a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom as the unmarried partner of an EEA national  exercising  treaty
    rights here. The FtT did not make an anonymity  order,  and  I  do  not
    consider that such an order is warranted for these proceedings  in  the
    UT.



Relevant Background

 2. The application was refused because the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was in a durable relationship with his  sponsor,  or
    that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights as a worker.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. Judge Feeney dismissed the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  she  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear an appeal by a person claiming to be  an  extended
    family member, following Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016]  UKUT  411
    (IAC).

Discussion

 4. The law has been clarified since the appeal was heard in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  In Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the Court of Appeal held
    that Sala was wrongly decided, and that the appellant had  a  right  of
    appeal to the FtT against the decision to refuse to issue  him  with  a
    residence card as an extended family member under Regulation 8.

 5. The law always speaks, and so Judge Feeney was wrong in  retrospect  to
    hold that she had no jurisdiction, although at  the  time  she  had  no
    choice but to follow the decision of the UT which was binding  on  her.
    The upshot is that the appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing in
    the FtT, and the representatives  are  in  agreement  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the FtT for a de novo hearing.

 6. In his application for permission to appeal, the  appellant  relied  on
    the fact that he was now a direct family member of the sponsor, as they
    had got married. So the issues at the fresh hearing will be (a) whether
    the appellant is  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  (direct  or
    extended); and (b) whether  the  EEA  national  sponsor  is  exercising
    treaty rights.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the FtT contained an error of law, such that it must be
    set aside in its entirety and remade.

Directions

 8. This appeal is remitted to the FtT  at  Taylor  House  for  a  de  novo
    hearing (Judge Feeney incompatible).

 9. The agreed time estimate is two hours

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date 14 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

