
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01449/2016
                                                               EA/01456/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 26 February 2018                           |On 16th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                 annabel [n]
                                    [o n]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E L Anyene, Counsel, instructed by JDS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria.  The first appellant was  born
    on 4 March 1975 and the second appellant, her son was born on 8 January
    2005.  They lodged notices of appeal against the respondent's decisions
    dated 6  January  2016  to  refuse  their  applications  for  permanent
    residence cards as the extended  family  members  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising community treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The basis of
    the application appears to have been  that  they  having  been  granted
    temporary residence cards although they were no longer living with  the
    EEA national they were  nonetheless  entitled  to  permanent  residence
    because the reason why they ceased living with the EEA national was  as
    a result of domestic violence.

 2. The appeals were heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly but in  a
    decision on the papers made at Bradford on 15 June 2017 (which decision
    was promulgated on 20 June 2017) Judge Kelly in a very  short  decision
    rejected the appeals "for want of jurisdiction"; he did so adopting the
    reasoning of the Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: right of appeal)  [2016]
    UKUT 00411 in which this Tribunal had held that there was no  right  of
    appeal in cases where an applicant was challenging a decision  refusing
    to grant a residence card.

 3. This decision has subsequently been overturned by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  1755  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    concluded that the decision in Sala was incorrect and that there  is  a
    statutory right of appeal in such circumstances.  It follows  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision in this case contains a  material  error
    of law and that the decision must now be re-made.

 4. In normal circumstances, the appropriate course would be to  remit  the
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration but in  this
    case, for reasons which I will now give it is not necessary  to  do  so
    but I can remake the decision myself.

 5. Since the decision of the First-tier Tribunal the  first  appellant  Ms
    [N] was convicted after a trial at the  Inner  London  Crown  Court  of
    dishonestly making false representations, which she knew to  be  false,
    for which she was sentenced to concurrent  terms  of  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment.  I have been provided with copies of both the  indictment
    and the sentencing remarks of the judge.  The offences of which she was
    convicted were that she had "dishonestly made a false  representation",
    in both cases that "she represented that she was  a  homeless  wife  or
    partner of Mr Charles [D] a European Economic Area national entitled to
    accommodation or assistance under Part VII of  the  Housing  Act  1996,
    which she knew to be false  in  a  material  particular,  in  that  her
    partner/husband was not in fact a European Economic Area national,  and
    therefore  they  were  not  entitled"  to   either   accommodation   or
    assistance.

 6. As noted, the appellant was convicted of these  offences,  and  in  the
    course of his sentencing remarks, Judge Wright stated as follows:

         "My findings are as follows.

         Firstly, you came to the UK some time before your son was  born  in
         November 2005.

         2,   You have never had any legitimate status to remain in the UK.

         3,   The relationship you claim to have with  Charles  [D]  an  EEA
             national never happened.  You were  never  in  a  relationship
             with an EEA national at any time.

         4,   Your EEA residence permit, which was issued on 18 January 2011
             which expired on 18 January 2016 was issued on the basis of  a
             false representation made by you.

         5,   There has never been any basis on which that residence  permit
             will be renewed, because you have never been in a relationship
             with an EEA national.

         6,   The man, Charles [D] was  always  your  husband  [MN],  as  he
             admitted on 26 April 2017.

         7,   Your husband, or ex-husband, with whom you  have  been  living
             for most of the time you have been in the UK, has  also  never
             had any status to remain in the UK.

         8,    Both  you  and  your  husband  have   made   repeated   false
             applications for legitimate status to remain in the UK.

         9,   Your son, [ON] [the second appellant], may be able to make  an
             application to remain in the UK because  his  application  can
             only be considered on the basis of the known facts  about  his
             parents ... and their lack of legitimate status to live in the
             UK since his birth.

         10,  You live with your husband, or your ex-husband and  you  share
             care of [ON] between you ...".

 7. Having sought instructions and seen a  copy  of  the  indictment,  from
    which it is clear that the  judge's  findings  was  specifically  those
    which he was entitled to make on the indictment and which followed  the
    verdicts of the jury, on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Anyene  very
    properly accepts that there is no  basis  upon  which  the  appellants'
    appeals against  the  refusal  of  a  permanent  residence  card  could
    possibly succeed.  Clearly, in light of the finding made after a  trial
    (and to the criminal standard of proof) that the  first  appellant  had
    never been entitled to a residence card,  she  could  not  possibly  be
    entitled to a permanent residence card, and neither could her son.   In
    these circumstances, although I have to set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal as containing a material error of law (because as a
    matter of procedure the judge was wrong to find as he did that  he  had
    no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal),  I  am  able  to  remake  the
    decision myself, dismissing the appeal for the reasons I have stated.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly as containing  a
material error of law (that he lacked jurisdiction to entertain the  appeal)
and remake the decision as follows:

The appellants' appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge  Craig                                        Date:  14
    March 2018
