

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01099/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 December 2016                       |On 15 December 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                  AWAIS ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
          Department  ('SSHD')   against  a  decision  of   the   First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') dated 8 April  2016,  in  which  it  allowed  the
          appeal of Mr Ali ('the  claimant')  against  the  SSHD's  decision
          dated 17 September 2015 to refuse his application for a  residence
          card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  UK  as  the
          durable  partner  of  an  EEA  national  under   the   Immigration
          (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) ('the  2006
          Regulations').


       2. In her decision the SSHD was not satisfied that  the  relationship
          was a durable one or that the appellant's partner was a  qualified
          person exercising Treaty rights.

FTT decision

       3. The FTT heard oral evidence from the  claimant  and  his  partner,
          and concluded that the relationship is not one of convenience  and
          the partner is a qualified person.  The FTT then  found  that  the
          claimant is  an  extended  family  member  ('EFM')  and  that  his
          application should succeed.  The FTT allowed the appeal.

Issues arising

       4. The SSHD was granted permission on the basis that the  FTT  should
          not have allowed the appeal outright.  Regulation  17(4)  of  2006
          Regulations provides discretion to the SSHD to issue  a  residence
          card to an EFM.  In the claimant's  case  the  SSHD  has  not  yet
          considered the exercise of such discretion  because  she  did  not
          have the full facts available.


       5.  At  the  hearing  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  no
          jurisdiction to consider the appeal following  Sala  (EFMs:  Right
          of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  The headnote states: "There  is
          no  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
          Secretary of State not to grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a  person
          claiming to be an Extended Family Member."

       6. The claimant applied for a residence card as the  EFM  of  an  EEA
          national with whom he claimed to have  a  "durable  relationship".
          As such, for the purposes of any appeal against the  decision,  he
          was an EFM under reg 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  I accept  that
          the FTT did not have jurisdiction to consider the appeal.


       7. I explained the position to the claimant who was in attendance  at
          the hearing before me and indicated that he may wish  to  consider
          making a  new  application  that  refers  to  the  FTT's  positive
          factual findings regarding the genuineness  of  his  relationship.
          In this case there  have  been  comprehensive  clear  findings  of
          fact.  Although the FTT did not have jurisdiction  to  make  those
          findings, the reality of the situation is that a Judge  has  heard
          evidence from the  claimant  and  his  partner  and  accepted  the
          genuineness of their relationship.


       8. In these circumstances the most proportionate course  is  for  the
          appellant  to  make  a  new  application  in  which  he  can  draw
          attention  to  the  FTT's  findings  and  any  relevant   updating
          evidence.


Disposal

       9. The appellant has no right of appeal. The FTT had no jurisdiction
          to hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.


      10. I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and substitute a
          decision that there was not a valid appeal before the FTT.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
14 December 2016


