
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01494/2016

                                                        EA/04077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2018                          |On 19 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               Mrs Haysinth Ranaweerage don - first Appellant
               mr malan Rajapakse Arachchige- second appellant
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Solomon, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka  who  appealed  the
    Respondent's decision refusing to issue a Residence Card on  the  basis
    that she had  failed  to  provide  evidence  that  the  Sponsor  was  a
    qualified person. The  second  Appellant,  the  husband  of  the  first
    Appellant is also a citizen of Sri Lanka who similarly  was  refused  a
    Residence  Card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006. The Appellants appealed  the  Respondent's  decisions
    and following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 3 March 2017,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davy dismissed the Appellants' appeals
    relying on the authority of Sala (EFMs: Right of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
    00411 (IAC). Albeit that this was the outcome of the appeal hearing the
    Judge did find both Appellants credible witnesses.

 2. On 9 November 2017 in Khan v SSHD and Anor [2017] EWCA  Civ  1755,  the
    Court of Appeal held that Sala was wrongly decided and that a  decision
    to refuse admission or a Residence Card to an extended family member is
    an "EEA decision" within  the  meaning  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) and therefore  attracts  a
    right of appeal.

 3. Mr Tarlow's initial position was a material error of law  is  contained
    within Judge Davy's decision and that the appeal should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 4. Mr Solomon relied on the authority of Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 340 (IAC) and in particular (iii) of the  head  note  which
    states:

         "iii) Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

    He invited me to allow the appeal on this limited basis. Mr Tarlow  did
    not  strongly  object  indicating  that  he  was  "ambivalent"  to  the
    submission.

 5. I accept the submissions put forward by Mr Solomon.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The facts found within Judge Davy's  decision
are preserved and the appeal  is  allowed  on  the  limited  basis  detailed
above.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 16 March 2018.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

