
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01888/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2020                      |On 19 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                              OPPONG CHRISTIAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Simak of counsel, instructed by SLA Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.   The Appellant is a national of Ghana. He entered into a proxy  marriage
    with a Dutch national in Ghana on 7 December 2018.


2.   On 11 March 2019 the Appellant applied for a  residence  card,  as  the
    family member of an EEA national, but his application was refused on  3
    April 2019.


3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Hanlon dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    September 2019.  The Appellant also appealed against this decision  and
    on 9 December 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville refused  to  grant
    him permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. However, Upper Tribunal
    Judge Stephen Smith did grant him permission to appeal  on  13  January
    2020.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING


4.    Counsel  for  the  Appellant  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  and
    submitted some case law to support her  submissions.  In  response  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer accepted that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hanlon should have followed the decision  in  Awuku  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178.   He  also  accepted
    that those standing as proxies for a couple do not have to  be  related
    to them.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION


5.   In her refusal letter, the Respondent accepted that,  whilst  marriages
    which take place by proxy in the United Kingdom are not  lawful,  if  a
    proxy marriage took place in another country that type of marriage  was
    lawful, if marriage by proxy is recognised in law in that state and the
    marriage was performed and registered according  to  the  law  of  that
    state. She also accepted that identities of the Appellant and his Dutch
    partner.


6.   However, the Respondent relied on the case of  NA  (Customary  marriage
    and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that "the onus of proving either a customary marriage or
    dissolution rests on the party making the assertion.   It  is  normally
    for the appellant to prove that  a  marriage  is  valid  ".  The  Upper
    Tribunal relied on an expert report by a Ghanaian barrister  practising
    in London and in paragraph 11 of its decision it accepted her  evidence
    that "a valid customary  marriage  could  only  be  validly  contracted
    between two Ghanaian citizens".


7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon also  accepted  that  this  was  the
    case and, as the Appellant's partner had become a Dutch citizen  on  or
    before 24 September 2018, he found that she had  not  been  a  Ghanaian
    citizen when they underwent a proxy marriage on  7 December 2018.


8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon failed to  take  into  account  that
    there was higher authority on this issue, which can be found in Awuku v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  178.  This
    case concerned a  Ghanaian  national  who  had  entered  into  a  proxy
    marriage with a German national and the Court of Appeal  accepted  that
    their marriage was lawful under Ghanaian law.


9.   In the case of McCabe v McCabe [1994] 1 FLR 10 McCabe v  McCabe  [1994]
    1 FLR 410; [1994] 1 FCR 257, the Family Division was also held that the
    proxy marriage of an Irish national to a Ghanaian  national  was  valid
    despite the Irish husband not being of Ghanaian nationality or origin.


10.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon  erred
    in law in paragraph 13 of his decision when he found that "in  Ghana  a
    valid customary marriage can only be contracted  between  two  Ghanaian
    citizens".


11.  In paragraph 14 of his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Hanlon
    also found that in order to establish that his marriage was  registered
    in accordance with the Customary Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)
    Law 1985, the Appellant had to provide a statutory declaration made  by
    the couple's parents or those acting in loco parentis.   The  Appellant
    did not assert that the Declaration had  been  made  by  a  parent  but
    relied on the fact that there was a UKBA  document  Customary  Marriage
    and Divorce/Proxy Marriages contracted in Ghana  which  confirmed  that
    there was no requirement in Ghanaian law for the proxies to be  related
    to the couple being married. Counsel had not been able to  locate  this
    document but the Home Office Presenting Officer confirmed that  it  did
    exist and that he had produced a copy of it when appearing before Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin in appeal number IA/23315/2012. He also  accepted
    that the proxies did not have to be related to those they were standing
    in for and did not have to be acting in loco parentis.


12.  In addition, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon  failed  to  take  into
    account the letter from the Ghanaian High Commission, dated 12 February
    2019, which confirmed that the Appellant's marriage was  contracted  in
    accordance with the Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Law
    1985 and that the signature of the Second Deputy Judicial Secretary  of
    the Judicial Services of Ghana on the statutory  declaration  had  been
    confirmed by the Second Deputy Judicial  Secretary  and  the  Assistant
    Director of the Legal & Consular Bureau  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign
    Affairs and Regional Integration.


13.  For all of these reasons I also find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hanlon erred in law when he found that the  proxy  marriage  had  not
    been lawfully registered.


14.  The refusal letter asserted that the Ghana COI Report of  11  May  2012
    illustrated problems that occur with forged and  fraudulently  obtained
    official documents in Ghana  but  did  not  assert  that  the  marriage
    certificate of statutory declaration being relied upon were  forged  or
    fraudulently obtained. The Home Office Presenting Officer did not  seek
    to rely on any such assertion.


15.  As a consequence, I find that there were  material  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon's decision.


DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon's decision is set aside.


(3)  The appeal is retained in the Upper Tribunal and remade.


RESUMED HEARING


1.   For the reasons given above I find that the Appellant is married  to  a
    Dutch national as claimed. Therefore, he is a family member of  an  EEA
    national for the purposes of Regulation 7 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016  Regulations")  and  is
    entitled to an extended right of residence in the United Kingdom  under
    Regulation 14 if he can show that his wife is a qualified person.


2.   The Appellant submitted that his wife was a  qualified  person  as  she
    was a worker for the purposes of Regulation 5 of the 2016  Regulations.
    I granted him permission to rely on further evidence submitted for  the
    resumed hearing to show that this was the case.  These included  a  run
    of payslips  which  confirmed  that  she  worked  for  Ashley  Cleaning
    Services Ltd at the time of the refusal to grant him a residence  card.
    This was also confirmed by bank statements showing deposits from Ashley
    Cleaning Services Ltd.


3.   Counsel also explained that the Appellant's wife was at work in  Hatton
    Cross and had not realised that the Tribunal may  consider  her  status
    after finding that there  had  been  an  error  of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon's decision. The Home Office Presenting  Officer
    did not challenge this assertion.


4.   In the  decision  under  challenge  it  was  also  the  case  that  the
    Respondent  did  not  assert  that  the  Appellant's  partner  was  not
    exercising a Treaty right in the United Kingdom. She had been  provided
    with the Appellant's  partner's  national  insurance  number  and  also
    details of her employer, the date on which she started  her  employment
    and the amount that she earned each month.  The Appellant's application
    form also confirmed that he had submitted pay slips and bank statements
    to prove that she was working, as claimed.


5.   There were copies of these documents in the Bundle sent to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 17 June 2019.  Further bank statements and  pay  slips
    were also handed in at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.   I  gave
    the Home Office Presenting Officer copies of  these  documents  and  he
    said that he was content to accept that the Appellant's wife was  still
    working, as claimed, and was therefore exercising a  Treaty  right  and
    that the Appellant was entitled to a residence card.


6.   On the basis of the concession  made  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer and all of the documents before me  I  find  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant's partner is  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as claimed.


7.   Taking this  and  my  other  findings  above,  I  also  find  that  the
    Appellant has established that he is entitled to a  residence  card  as
    the partner of an EEA national exercising a Treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom.


Decision


1.   The Appellant's appeal against the decision, dated  3  April  2019,  is
    allowed.


Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 12 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


