
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01244/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2018                           |On 2 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                           Ayobami Muyiwa Adewunmi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, instructed by Queen's Park Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ayobami Muyiwa Adewunmi, was born on  11  November  1980
    and is a male citizen of Nigeria.  He appeals against the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 15 November 2016 which refused his application for
    a residence card on the basis that he  was  a  family  member  who  had
    retained right of residence on divorce.  The First-tier Tribunal (in  a
    decision promulgated on 24  April  2018)  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Jafar, who appeared for the appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    explained that  the  judge  had  made  a  number  of  errors  with  his
    calculation of the figures shown on the appellant's  wife's  pay  slips
    and which the judge discusses at [17].  Likewise, the judge appears  to
    have become confused regarding the address of  the  appellant  and  his
    former wife [19-21] and  failed  to  deliver  a  fair  hearing  to  the
    appellant by raising during the course of the  hearing  for  the  first
    time issues concerning the pay slip evidence and also the address.  The
    judge's concerns regarding the pay slips and the  address  led  him  to
    conclude that the appellant was not "a reliable witness or  given  both
    his unreliability and the features noted in  the  pay  slips  that  the
    documents he has produced can be accepted as genuine pay slips  for  Ms
    Ka [the appellant's former wife] or reliable evidence of her  continued
    exercise of treaty rights" [22].  Mr Jafar  submitted  that  the  judge
    should have adjourned the hearing to enable the  appellant  to  address
    the concerns of the Tribunal.

 3. The other ground of appeal concerns the judgment of the Court of Appeal
    in Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088.  The First-tier Tribunal  [14]  had
    wrongly concluded that the appellant had to show that his  EEA  sponsor
    was a qualified person at the date of divorce; following Baigazieva  it
    was necessary to show that a former spouse had been a qualified  person
    to the point of the initiation of divorce proceedings rather than their
    conclusion.

 4. The difficulty for the appellant is that the  grant  of  permission  in
    this instance has been limited.  Granting permission  on  18  September
    2018, Judge Andrew wrote [3]:

         "I am satisfied that there is an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
         decision  in  that  the  judge  considered  whether  or   not   the
         appellant's former partner was employed as at the date  of  divorce
         rather than at the date of initiation of the  divorce  proceedings.
         However I do not find the judge's refusal to adjourn  and  make  an
         AMOS direction is an arguable error of law.  This should have  been
         considered prior to the judge  being  asked  to  make  findings  in
         relation to the wage slips and should have been an obvious point to
         the appellant's representatives."

 5. I am satisfied that the correct covering letter has been  sent  out  to
    the appellant by the  Upper  Tribunal  with  this  (partial)  grant  of
    permission.  That covering letter is in the  form  IA68  and  reads  as
    follows:

         'You may apply to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal on  a
         point of law arising from the First-tier Tribunal's decision on any
         ground on which permission has been refused.'

 6. Mr Jafar submitted that it was not surprising that the  solicitors  had
    overlooked the fact that there was a partial  grant  of  permission  in
    this instance and that the Tribunal should, in any  event,  proceed  to
    deal with all grounds of appeal as pleaded.  I disagree.  The  covering
    letter IA68 made it entirely clear to the  appellant's  representatives
    that it was  open  to  the  appellant  to  renew  his  application  for
    permission directly to the Upper Tribunal in respect of the  ground  of
    appeal on which permission had been refused.  The appellant  chose  not
    to do that and is now out of time.  Further, Judge  Andrew's  grant  is
    unequivocal; any reading of it should have prompting  consideration  of
    the need to renew the application for permission to the Upper Tribunal.
     I am well aware that permission is often granted even  in  respect  of
    grounds of appeal which may stand little chance of  succeeding  but  it
    was wrong for the appellant's representative simply to assume that that
    because they had been notified of the right to renew the application by
    the Upper Tribunal, they would be able to pursue at the Upper  Tribunal
    initial hearing  grounds  on  which  the  appellant  had  been  refused
    permission.  I find that the "Amos direction" ground is not  before  me
    because Judge Andrew  has  unequivocally  refused  permission  on  that
    ground and the application has not been renewed.

 7. As regards the remaining ground for which permission has been  granted,
    the appellant is in some difficulty.  As Mr Avery submitted, the  judge
    has made a comprehensive finding that  the  appellant's  evidence  both
    oral and documentary is unreliable.  In the light of that  finding,  it
    does not matter whether one  takes  the  point  of  initiation  of  the
    divorce proceedings or the decree absolute  at  the  relevant  time  at
    which the appellant needed to show that his former wife was  exercising
    treaty rights; the comprehensive finding that the appellant's  evidence
    was not credible must defeat the appeal.  I acknowledge that this  does
    beg the question as to why Judge Andrew granted permission  given  that
    her refusal of permission on the remaining ground effectively  rendered
    this  appeal  a  dead  letter  from  the  outset.   However,   in   the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
