
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01478/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2018                            |On 05th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  james [o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sowerby of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin promulgated on 4th May 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on [ ] 1968.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in February 2010,  pursuant  to  entry  clearance  as  a
    student.  He was granted leave to enter until January  2013,  but  this
    was revoked on November 2012 because his Sponsor's licence had  ceased.
    The Appellant then applied for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  UK
    ancestry, but this too was refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed in
    August 2013.

 3. In both January and June  2014  and  once  again  in  March  2015,  the
    Appellant applied  for  a  derivative  residence  card  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  Those applications were refused.  In both  September  and
    October 2014, he applied for leave to remain on the grounds of  Article
    8 family/private life.  Those applications were refused.

 4. Most recently the Appellant made an application on  30th  October  2015
    for a residence card confirming a derivative right of residence as  the
    primary carer of a British citizen, his 73-year-old mother, who suffers
    from alcoholism and related illnesses. This application was  made  with
    reference to the ECJ case of Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09).  The  application
    was refused by the Respondent on 25th January 2016; it is this decision
    that is the subject of the proceedings before the IAC.

 5. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on two bases.  First
    it was not accepted that evidence had been produced  showing  that  the
    Appellant was the primary carer of his mother.   Secondly  it  had  not
    been shown that the Appellant's mother would be unable to reside in the
    UK (or another EEA State) if he were required to leave,  because  other
    sources of care would be available to her.  The notice  of  immigration
    decision issued on 25th January 2016  makes  reference  to  Regulations
    15A(4A)(b), 15A(7)(b) and 18A of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 6. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's refusal to the Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber.  His appeal was dismissed for the reasons  set  out  in
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin.

 7. The FtTJ in coming to his decision noted the medical evidence  produced
    in respect of the Appellant's  mother's  circumstances.   At  [22]  the
    judge said the following:

         "There is also  no  doubt  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
         appellant's mother who is aged 73 is in need of full-time  care  as
         set out in the medical evidence and  various  reports  particularly
         relating to her addiction to alcohol."

    This finding has not been challenged by the Respondent.

 8. He followed this up in [22] saying the following:

         "I also have a wealth of documentary evidence before me that  shows
         that the appellant is  his  mother's  primary  full-time  carer  as
         defined in Regulation 15A(7).  This is  confirmed  by  the  witness
         statements of the appellant's sister and brother who have  set  out
         their reasons why they are unable to either take over or  share  in
         the care of their mother.  Some of this is confirmed in the medical
         evidence that  these  other  children  have  effectively  distanced
         themselves from their mother.  There are also letters (some are set
         out above) from medical and social services sources that  refer  to
         the appellant as having primary responsibility for the care of  his
         mother."

 9. At [23] the FtTJ found that whilst Brent Adult Social Services had some
    role to play, it was clear that the Appellant's  commitment  to  caring
    for his mother and the emotional and practical support he gave her  was
    what she felt most comfortable with, rather than the experience she had
    previously with carers from  social  services.  Drawing  these  matters
    together, the judge made a finding that the Appellant had shown that he
    is his mother's full-time primary carer for the purposes of  Reg.15.EEA
    Regs 2006.

10. Having made that finding, the judge then went on to  consider  the  key
    question in this appeal, that is would the Appellant's mother be unable
    to reside in the UK if the Appellant was required to leave?

11. The judge set out his consideration of this issue at [25] and came to a
    conclusion adverse to the Appellant.  In doing so he noted that  whilst
    the Appellant's mother made it clear in a written  statement  that  she
    would not wish to continue living if the Appellant left her, there  was
    no doubt that social services would have a statutory obligation to step
    in and undertake her care.  The judge accepted that as the  Appellant's
    mother is in  need  of  full-time  care,  which  cannot  reasonably  be
    provided by any other family member in the UK, the likelihood was  that
    the Appellant's mother would be placed in a residential  care  home  at
    public expense.  He noted that this was not  her  wish,  but  concluded
    that it could not be shown that the Appellant's mother would be  unable
    to reside in the UK if the Appellant were required to leave.

Onward Appeal

12.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's   decision.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The renewed application for permission is dated 12th December 2017  and
    draws heavily upon the case of  Chavez-Vilchez  and  Others  (C-133/15)
    which was decided by the CJEU on 10th May 2017.

13. The grounds asserted that whilst it was accepted that this case was not
    before the FtT because it had not at that time  been  heard,  it  could
    nevertheless impact on the outcome of the current case.   It  was  said
    that the judge, having accepted that  the  Appellant  was  the  primary
    carer of his mother, ought to have gone on  in  the  light  of  Chavez-
    Vilchez to consider what was in the best interests of  the  Appellant's
    mother.  He ought to have considered whether,  despite  the  fact  that
    social services  would  be  under  a  duty  to  provide  care  for  the
    Appellant's mother, would she nevertheless be compelled to leave the UK
    given the level of emotional and physical dependency that  she  has  on
    her son?

14. Permission was granted in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that in determining whether the appellant's  mother
         would be "unable" to reside in the UK or another EEA State  if  the
         appellant was  required  to  leave,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
         adopted an overly narrow approach and failed to take into  account:
         (i) whether the mother would in fact consent to being placed  in  a
         residential care  home;  (ii)  her  risk  of  suicide  without  the
         appellant, given her past history  and  present  circumstances  (as
         summarised at [4] to [12])."

15. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the FtT discloses such error of law that it requires to  be  set  aside
    and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

16. Before me Mr Sowerby appeared for the Appellant and Ms Fijiwala for the
    Respondent.  At the outset of the proceedings Ms Fijiwala handed up the
    Court of Appeal decision in Nilay Patel  and  Others  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    2028.  Mr Sowerby in his submissions acknowledged that Patel  clarified
    much of the argument which had been set out in the  grounds  and  which
    had relied upon Chavez-Vilchez.

17. Nevertheless, he said he would rely on [72]  of  Patel  in  which  Lord
    Justice Irwin says the following:

         "In my judgment,  the  decision  in  Chavez-Vilchez  represents  no
         departure from the principle of  EU  law  laid  down  in  Zambrano,
         although it does constitute a reminder that the principle  must  be
         applied with careful enquiry,  paying  attention  to  the  relevant
         criteria and considerations, and focusing not  on  whether  the  EU
         citizen child (or  dependant)  can  remain  in  legal  theory,  but
         whether they can do so in practice.  There is no alteration in  the
         test of compulsion."

18. Mr Sowerby's followed this by saying that the FtTJ's clear finding  was
    that the Appellant is the primary carer of his mother. The judge  ought
    then to have undertaken a careful enquiry on  whether  the  Appellant's
    mother could remain in the UK for all practical  purposes  without  her
    son.  Those enquiries should have focused on the  Appellant's  mother's
    statement in which she declared that if her son  left  she  would  have
    "nothing to live for" and would commit suicide.  He submitted that  the
    FtTJ could not be said to have  given  adequate  reasons  demonstrating
    that he had made a careful enough enquiry bearing in mind  the  suicide
    element involved.

19. Mr Sowerby acknowledged that there was no up-to-date  medical  evidence
    available and submitted therefore that the appropriate course would  be
    for me to set aside the FtT's decision and  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order that the Appellant's mother's medical  and
    social  history  could  be  properly  assessed,  given  the  level   of
    dependency that she has on her son.

20. Ms Fijiwala on behalf of the Respondent defended  the  FtT's  decision.
    She said firstly that the FtTJ had referred to all the  evidence  which
    had been placed before him.  This included a large  amount  of  medical
    evidence  outlining  the  various  medical  problems  from  which   the
    Appellant's mother suffers, and which points to her requiring full-time
    care.

21. The FtTJ also acknowledged the evidence concerning  suicidal  ideation.
    She submitted that it was clear that the judge took this evidence  into
    account when reaching his conclusions.  She referred to Patel, which in
    turn had referred to a decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Ayinde  and
    Thinjom (Carers - Reg 15A - Zambrano) [2015]  UKUT  00560  (IAC).   She
    submitted that following the principles set  out  in  those  cases,  if
    state provision in terms of medical or social services care is  both  a
    right of a dependant adult and is in fact available, then the class  of
    dependant adults who can demonstrate  "compulsion"  to  follow  a  non-
    British carer abroad may be limited.  She submitted that  the  decision
    of the FtTJ disclosed no error of law.  The FtTJ was perfectly  correct
    to refer to the statutory  duty  of  social  services  which  would  be
    available to the Appellant's mother in addition to her NHS care.  There
    was no transparent evidence provided by the  Appellant  to  demonstrate
    that his mother would be unable to reside in the UK within the terms of
    Regulation 15, should he be required to leave.

22. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

23. I start my consideration by dealing with the  challenge  raised  by  Mr
    Sowerby that the FtTJ has not given a fully nuanced assessment  of  the
    details surrounding the Appellant's case, and in  particular  that  the
    FtTJ had not paid sufficient attention to the idea that the Appellant's
    mother has threatened suicide and is aggressive in drink.  In  addition
    he said that insufficient attention had been  paid  to  the  fact  that
    social services have neglected her.

24. In considering Mr Sowerby's line of challenge  I  find  that  the  FtTJ
    dealt fully with, and took account of, the evidence  before  him.  Much
    was made of the suicidal ideation from which the Appellant's mother  is
    described as suffering.  I note in particular that the Appellant in his
    witness statement said that his mother had attempted to "commit suicide
    on many occasions" endangering the lives of others in the  process.   I
    cannot see clear independent corroboration of  this  assertion  in  the
    evidence.  Certainly there are copies of medical reports that refer  to
    the Appellant's mother's alcohol misuse. Her mental state  is  referred
    to in particular in reports from the Freedom Recovery Centre dated 16th
    July 2013 and from Turning Point (Central and North  West  London  NHS)
    dated 30th June 2014.  The former mentions  that,  "Issues  of  suicide
    ideation, bereavement and rejection were  also  identified  during  her
    assessment."  The latter states, "Client denies  suicidal  ideation  at
    the moment but says thoughts of suicide crossed her mind from  time  to
    time.  Son recalls incident last year when client attempted to jump  in
    front of a train.  Client cannot recall the incident."  I  cannot  find
    reports that elaborate this issue  in  more  detail,  describe  ongoing
    follow-up, or that are more up to date.

25. I  accept  that  there  was  before  the  FtTJ  a  statement  from  the
    Appellant's mother in which she claimed that if her  son  was  removed,
    she would have nothing to live for.   The  judge  refers  to  it  [25].
    However it is clear that as the judge found, the issue before  him  was
    not whether the Appellant's mother's preference would be  to  have  her
    son look after her, but whether she would be unable to reside in the UK
    if the Appellant were required to leave.  The FtTJ was  satisfied  that
    the statutory authorities would be able to provide adequate support.

26. The second broad challenge raised by Mr Sowerby was made on  the  basis
    that the FtTJ had not paid sufficient attention to the fact that, it is
    said, social services neglected to care properly  for  the  Appellant's
    mother and that the Appellant provides a greater level of care for her.
      I  find  in  fact  that  the  judge  did  recognise  the  Appellant's
    contribution.  He records the following at [23]:

         "Whilst clearly Brent Adult Social Services have had some  role  to
         play  as  shown  in  the  correspondence  I  strongly  suspect  (as
         confirmed by  the  appellant)  that  they  are  relieved  that  the
         appellant is playing this role for his mother rather  than  calling
         upon their over-stretched services."

    Nonetheless he has concluded at [25]:

         "... through a combination  of  the  NHS  and  public  care  system
         available to her in the UK it cannot be shown that the  appellant's
         mother would be unable to reside in the UK  if  the  appellant  was
         required to leave."

27. I find that this is  a  conclusion  that  was  open  to  him  to  make.
    Therefore it follows that I find force in Ms Fijiwala's argument  where
    she said, drawing upon Patel with reference to Ayinde and Thinjom, that
    the FtTJ was correct to state that Brent Social Services would be under
    a statutory obligation to manage the Appellant's mother's social  care,
    such care and NHS  treatment  being  available  to  her  as  a  British
    citizen.

28. I find that the challenge that the Appellant's  mother's  physical  and
    emotional dependence upon the Appellant is so great that she  would  be
    compelled to leave the UK with her son, is not made out.  The  evidence
    put forward does not demonstrate this.

29. It follows therefore that for the foregoing reasons  I  find  that  the
    FtTJ properly considered all the evidence which was before him, reached
    conclusions that he was entitled to reach on  that  evidence  and  that
    accordingly the decision promulgated on 4th May 2017 discloses no error
    of law.  The decision therefore stands and this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
