
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/01569/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th November 2017                    |On 30th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Rebwar Delza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Tettey of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge T Jones) allowing the Respondent's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's  refusal  to  grant  him  a  permanent
    resident card under the EEA Regulations 2006.

 2. For the sake of clarity and ease of reference, I shall hereafter  refer
    to the Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and to  Rebwar  Delza  as
    "the Appellant", reflecting their respective positions before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  (born  10th  November  1985).   He
    entered the UK in February 2004, claiming asylum on entry.  That  claim
    was refused but the Appellant remained illegally in the United Kingdom.



 4. On 10th January 2009 he applied for a residence card as the partner  of
    an EEA national, Ms Jagielska,  a  Polish  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.

 5. In July 2009 the Appellant and Ms Jagielska married and accordingly  on
    6th August 2010, the Appellant was issued with a residence  card  valid
    for five years.

 6. On 16th September 2013 the Appellant and Ms Jagielska divorced.  On 1st
    August 2015 prior to the expiry of the residence card dated 6th  August
    2010, the Appellant applied  for  a  permanent  residence  card.   That
    application forms the basis of the present appeal.

 7. The application was refused by the Respondent originally on two counts:

       . The Appellant had not shown his  ex-spouse  was  exercising  treaty
         rights at the date of his divorce from her on 16th September 2013.

       . The Appellant had not demonstrated that he had  resided  under  the
         Regulations for a continuous five year period.

 8. So far as count 1 is concerned, prior to the hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the Respondent confirmed that  this  was  no  longer  in
    issue.  Therefore the only issue before the First-tier Tribunal was the
    remaining one, namely whether the Appellant had  demonstrated  that  he
    had resided within the EEA Regulation for a continuous five-year period
    under the terms of Regulation 6(2) of those Regulations.

The FtT Hearing

 9. The Appellant attended the hearing before the FTT  and  relied  upon  a
    witness statement together with other documentary evidence noted by the
    judge at [4].

10. So far as the Appellant's evidence was concerned  the  judge  noted  at
    [7]:

         "The Appellant was cross-examined at the hearing.  A  note  of  the
         same can be seen  in  the  Record  of  Proceedings.   This  largely
         revolved around the periods upon which the  Appellant  claimed  Job
         Seekers Allowance on two occasions; 9th July  2013  to  8th  August
         2013 and 29th March 2014 to 8th May 2014.  The Appellant  explained
         that he had sought help from the Job Centre at these times, on  the
         second occasion he felt embarrassed that there were people  working
         in the Job Centre who were actually disabled.  He is not.  He  felt
         it was wrong that he was getting benefits and he decided he  really
         had to try harder to get work, seek friends work from friends (sic)
         and from what other source he could get it, rather than claim money
         from the State."

11. He then stated at [9]:

         "In re-examination, it was highlighted by the Appellant  that  when
         one has regards to the supplementary bundle, at  pages  12  to  16,
         there is ample evidence of emails being received by the  Appellant,
         and sent by him, in the period May to  September  of  2014  seeking
         work. The Appellant was open and he said that he did not  have  any
         such similar emails extract for the period of May to June of  2015,
         but he had approached agencies, spoke to friends  and  was  looking
         for work before starting up his own employment with a  hairdressing
         salon in July of 2015. He might also say, and did so, that  he  was
         preparing to open the salon and busy gathering help and  advice  as
         to how he should do this at the time."

12. The judge then noted under a heading entitled "My Conclusions" that the
    burden of proof was with the Appellant to the usual civil standard of a
    balance of probabilities.  He said that he found that the Appellant had
    discharged the relevant burden and continued at [18]:

         "I make such finding because, applying the appropriate standard,  I
         found the Appellant to be a credible witness, who was not prone  to
         exaggeration; and indeed has clarified his evidence on one point as
         the hearing progressed without embellishment, or  in  circumstances
         which could make  his  account  inconsistent.   There  is  evidence
         before me, which I am prepared to accept  against  the  appropriate
         standard, that the Appellant has been seeking employment though  he
         was not registered with the Department for Work and Pensions for  a
         short period as  noted  above  in  2015  before  starting  his  own
         business within two months.  There is  ample  documentary  evidence
         within the supplemental bundle at pages 12 to 14 in respect of  the
         2014 period, when he was seeking employment when not registered  in
         this regard, which I accept as being credible."

    He allowed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

13. The Respondent sought permission to appeal.  The relevant part  of  the
    grant of permission is as follows.

         "The grounds assert that the judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
         because  it  was  necessary  for  there  to  have  been  a   former
         registration of job seeking to enable the Appellant to come  within
         Regulation 6(2).  It is  argued  that  the  issue  was  not  merely
         whether the judge found the Appellant to be a credible witness.  It
         is said that because the Appellant's accepted evidence was that  he
         had not registered with the Department for Work and Pensions,  then
         the formal registration of job  seeking  appeared  to  be  lacking.
         This raises an arguable ground of appeal."

14. Thus the matter comes before me to decide if the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal contains such error of law requiring it to be  set  aside
    and remade.

UT Error of Law Hearing

15. Before me Mr Tettey appeared for the Appellant and  Mrs  Pettersen  for
    the Respondent.  Mrs Pettersen in her submissions followed the lines of
    the grounds seeking permission.   She  outlined  that  at  the  hearing
    before the FtT two relevant periods of unemployment for  the  Appellant
    had been identified,  in  2014  and  2015  respectively.   She  focused
    particularly on the latter period, during which the  Appellant  in  his
    own evidence confirmed that he did not register with the Department for
    Work and Pensions.   She  submitted  that  as  the  Appellant  had  not
    formalised his job seeking with the relevant employment agency he could
    not bring himself within Regulation 6(2) of the EEA  Regulations.   The
    question is not whether the Appellant was a  credible  witness  in  his
    assertion that he was seeking employment at the  relevant  period,  the
    issue was simply whether or not he had registered as a  jobseeker  with
    the relevant employment office.  That is the requirement set out by the
    Regulations and, if the Appellant does not fulfil the Regulations, then
    he cannot show that he has been continuously employed for the  relevant
    five-year period in order to qualify for a  permanent  residence  card.
    None of the evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    challenged.  She submitted in these circumstances the  decision  should
    be set aside and remade dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

16. Mr Tettey on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the critical  issue
    was that there was evidence that the Appellant was  looking  for  work.
    The judge accepted  that  evidence  as  being  credible  evidence.   He
    submitted that it was a question of fairness.  The periods in  question
    were short periods  and  it  would  therefore  be  disproportionate  to
    overturn the FtT's decision.  The Appellant had now set up a  business,
    evidence for which was submitted by Mr Tettey.  In these  circumstances
    the decision should be allowed to stand.

Consideration

17. I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the  FtT  contains  legal  error
    requiring it to be set aside and remade.  I now  give  my  reasons  for
    this finding.

18. There was one issue before the FtT  which  in  terms  is  a  relatively
    straightforward  matter  concerning  Regulation   6(2)   of   the   EEA
    Regulations.

19. An  applicant  for  a  permanent  residence  card  is  subject  to  the
    provisions of Regulation 6(2), the relevant part of which provides  the
    following:

          "A person who is no longer working must continue to be treated  as
         a worker provided that the person-

             (a)  ...

             (b)  is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
             been employed in the United Kingdom for at least one year,
             provided the person-

                  (i)  has registered as a jobseeker with the relevant
                  employment office; and

                  (ii) satisfies conditions A and B"

20. The evidence before the FtT showed that there were several  periods  of
    unemployment identified within  the  five-year  period  commencing  6th
    August 2010.   The Appellant claimed  Jobseeker's  Allowance  from  9th
    July 2013 to 8th August 2013 and again from 29th March 2014 to 8th  May
    2014. However during two subsequent periods, the first in 2014 and  the
    second in 2015, he did not register as a jobseeker.

21. The judge  considered  the  Appellant  to  be  credible  and  therefore
    accepted that the Appellant had  been  seeking  employment  during  the
    periods when he was not registered with the  Department  for  Work  and
    Pensions.   So  far  as  the  2014  period  of   unemployment   without
    registration was concerned, he supported this conclusion  by  referring
    to "ample documentary evidence within the supplemental bundle at  pages
    12 to 14 in respect of the 2014 period, when he was seeking  employment
    when not registered in this regard..."

22. This is not the case however so far as the second period is  concerned.
    The judge was prepared to accept the Appellant's word on the point that
    he was looking for employment.  That however is not what the Regulation
    requires.  The Regulation plainly states that what is required in order
    to fulfil compliance  with  (b)(i)  of  Regulation  6(2)  is  that  the
    Appellant "has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant  employment
    office."

23. Whatever may have been the cause of the Appellant  not  doing  so,  the
    plain fact is that he did not register  with  the  relevant  employment
    office during periods of unemployment both  in  2014  and  2015.   That
    means that he is outwith the Regulation and therefore on  the  evidence
    before the FtT, was unable to show that he came within Regulation 6(2).



24. In allowing the appeal in these circumstances it follows that  the  FtT
    erred in its decision making and that the decision  must  therefore  be
    set aside for legal error.  I find on the evidence before me, which  is
    unchallenged, that I am in a position to remake the decision.  I do  so
    stating that the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    allowed.  I remake the FtT's  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  of
    Rebwar Delza against the Secretary of State's refusal to  grant  him  a
    permanent residence card.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Rebwar  Delza
is hereby set aside.  The appeal of Rebwar Delza against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision to refuse a permanent residence card is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     29 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there is no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     29 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts










