
                                    [pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER  Appeal No. EA/01446/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision Promulgated            |
|On: 2 August 2021               |On 20 August 2021               |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                                Jakin Shpani
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTION

The Tribunal issued a preliminary decision dated  27  July  2021  indicating
that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a  procedural
error as set out in the grounds of appeal and that the preliminary  view  of
the Tribunal was that a finding of error of law, set aside and  remittal  to
the First-tier Tribunal was the correct disposal of the appeal.

That preliminary decision stated as follows:

"The appellant's appeal was decided on the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal
O'Brien in a decision dated  6  October  2020.  The  judge  found  that  the
appellant had not provided  grounds  of  appeal  and  dismissed  the  appeal
without any substantive consideration.

 1. The appellant appealed the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 25 November  2020.
    The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and was granted permission
    on 19 March 2021.

 2. The correspondence on the Tribunal file contains a copy of a fax  cover
    sheet dated 3 February 2020 showing a fax sent by the appellant to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with  4  attachments  including  "Refusal  Letter",
    "Appeal Form" and "Grounds of Appeal". That suggests that the appellant
    did provide substantive grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as
    he asserts in his grounds of appeal.

 3. Further, the correspondence on the Tribunal file contains emails  dated
    26 February 2020 and 27 March 2020 form the appellant to the First-tier
    Tribunal in response to a request for the grounds. The emails  set  out
    that the grounds were sent with the original appeal and indicated  that
    they were, in any event, being provided  again.  Both  emails  show  an
    attachment entitled "Grounds of Appeal" with the same reference  number
    as the "Grounds of Appeal" shown as being  sent  on  3  February  2020.
    These documents also suggest strongly that the  appellant  did  provide
    substantive grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, both in  time
    with the appeal form on 3 February 2020 and on two further occasions.

 4. Further, the appeal bundle dated 12 August 2020 prepared by the  First-
    tier Tribunal for the appellant's appeal includes  appeal  form  IAFT-5
    dated 3 February 2020 and substantive grounds of  appeal  comprising  6
    pages.  The fact of this bundle having been prepared by 12 August  2020
    suggests strongly, as asserted by  the  appellant  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, that he did provide substantive grounds of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  finding
    otherwise.

 5. In  light  of  those  documents,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  reached  a
    preliminary view that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses
    a procedural error because a mistake was made as to substantive grounds
    not having been provided and procedural  unfairness  arising  from  the
    appeal being dismissed without substantive  consideration  and  without
    the hearing which had been requested by the appellant.

 6. The Upper Tribunal is also of the view that this  procedural  error  is
    such that an error of law should be found, the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal set aside and  the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for substantive consideration.

 7. Any party opposed to this disposal is directed to inform  the  Tribunal
    in writing (giving reasons), not later than midday on  Friday  30  July
    2021.  If there is no response, the Tribunal will take that  as  deemed
    consent to the disposal set out above and  the  hearing  listed  for  2
    August 2021 will be vacated."

 3. The respondent indicated on 29 July 2021 that she was in agreement with
    the preliminary decision.

 4. I therefore allow the appeal  where  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained an error of law in the  terms  set  out  above.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. It will  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.



DECISION

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside.

 6. The appeal will be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: S Pitt                      Date:  2 August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

