
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/01140/2017
     ea/01141/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 1st October 2018                    |On 26th October 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                       1) miss CHINEMEREM SANDRA UZOMA
                      2) mISS GINIKACHI KERRI-ANN UZOMA
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - abuja
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Aquere (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham, promulgated on 7th March 2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 13th February 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are two sibling sisters.  The first Appellant  was  born
    on 20th August 2000, and the second Appellant was born on 20th February
    1998.  Both are citizens of Nigeria.  Both made applications for family
    permits under Regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 to join their uncle, who is the Sponsor, by  the  name
    of Obed Okpala Ugokwesaese, an EEA national residing in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that they are the nieces of  an
    EEA national, who had previously applied for entry  clearance,  but  at
    the time the ECO was not satisfied that  the  Appellants  had  provided
    sufficient evidence of their relationship.  On this occasion there  was
    evidence of money transfers,  which  showed  regular  payments  by  the
    Sponsor to the Appellants.  However, the ECO remained unsatisfied  that
    the Appellants' essential needs in Nigeria, such as the  rent  and  the
    food, were being met by the Sponsor in the  UK.   The  Appellants  had,
    after all, lived with their grandmother, and therefore the ECO was  not
    satisfied that the Appellants were totally dependent  on  the  Sponsor,
    and had no other family members in Nigeria able to give them  financial
    and emotional support.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, having reviewed the evidence on  this  particular  occasion,
    noted how the Appellants' mother had  passed  away,  and  there  was  a
    medical certificate, confirming the cause of the  death,  as  being  on
    15th December 2014, to which there was no challenge,  with  respect  to
    the reliability of the documents  submitted.   Accordingly,  the  judge
    found that the Appellants' mother had died in  2014.   The  judge  then
    looked at the evidence in  relation  to  the  money  transfers  to  the
    Appellants in Nigeria.  She went on to conclude that,  "I  also  accept
    therefore that the Sponsor has played a part in financially  supporting
    the Appellants in Nigeria since their mother's death" (paragraph 15).

 5. The judge, however, immediately went on to then consider  "whether  the
    Appellant's are dependent upon the Sponsor for their essential  needs."
    She observed that,

         "The Sponsor was asked in cross-examination as to  the  whereabouts
         of the Appellant's father.  The Sponsor said that the girls' father
         had never been in their lives, his sister became  pregnant  out  of
         marriage when she was still at school, the Sponsor said he did  not
         know the whereabouts of the father" (paragraph 16).

 6. The Sponsor also maintained at the hearing that he  believed  that  the
    Appellant's father was in Dubai.  He went on to give evidence  that  he
    had visited his nieces  in  Nigeria  in  2016  and  he  handed  in  two
    photographs to this effect (paragraph 17).  The Sponsor  had  seen  the
    Appellants living with their grandmother.  It was recorded by the judge
    that, "he stated neither girl  was  studying  or  working  in  Nigeria"
    (paragraph 17).

 7. Against this background, the judge went on to say that  although  there
    was evidence of "a level of financial support for the Appellants, there
    is no evidence  that  he  pays  for  their  essential  needs  as  their
    essential needs have not been detailed" (paragraph 18).  Moreover,  the
    fact that  the  mother's  death  certificate  shows  the  name  of  the
    Appellant's father, was something which, the judge concluded  "suggests
    that their mother was in a relationship with their father".

 8. Accordingly,  her  conclusion  was  that,  "I  have  not  accepted  the
    Sponsor's evidence on this point and cannot  discount  the  possibility
    that he plays a part in the Appellant's lives and contributes to  their
    financial support" (paragraph  18).   In  short,  it  was  the  judge's
    conclusion that there was "nothing exceptional in these  appeals"  such
    as would lead the judge to the conclusion that there  was  "an  ongoing
    relationship of dependency between the parties".  The judge's view  was
    that "the girls are not doing anything in Nigeria, they  have  finished
    their education and given their ages they could  reasonably  expect  to
    find employment in Nigeria" (paragraph 19).

 9. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application, are repetitive and  essentially  make  only
    one point  one  paragraph  after  another,  namely,  that  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 15 that she had accepted that  "the  Sponsor  has
    played a part in financially supporting the Appellants in Nigeria since
    their mother's death", meant that the conclusion  that  they  were  not
    dependent upon him was irrational.  This is because  case  law  in  the
    form of Lim (EEA - dependency) [2013] UKUT 00437, makes  it  clear  (at
    paragraph 24) that,

         "Even though it seems clear that  not  all  of  the  sums  sent  in
         remittances...is for the Claimant (some is intended to have support
         her mother and the 10 year old grandchild), for dependency to arise
         it is not  necessary  that  a  person  be  wholly  or  even  mainly
         dependent.  If a person requires  material  support  for  essential
         needs in part, that is sufficient" (paragraph 24).

11. This is an additional aspect raised  in  the  grounds  of  application,
    together with the reference to paragraph 15 of the judge's decision.

12. On 22nd June 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal  on
    the basis that whilst the judge gave reasons, it was arguable that  the
    judge did not appreciate the  dependency  in  EU  law  is  a  factorial
    question only and the judge may have fallen  into  arguable  error  for
    reasons given in the grounds.



Submissions

13. In the submissions before me, Mr Aquere, appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that  if  one  has  regard  to  what  is  said  at
    paragraph 15 of the determination, namely, that the judge accepted that
    "the Sponsor has played a part in financially supporting the Appellants
    in Nigeria since their mother's death", then it must follow that  there
    was a level of dependency, for the purposes of EEA law, such as to have
    allowed the Appellants to succeed in  their  appeal.   He  relied  upon
    paragraph 24 of Lim which he read out for  the  Tribunal's  assistance.
    Mr Aquere further submitted that there were  receipts  of  payments  to
    which the judge did not  draw  specific  attention,  which  would  have
    confirmed the level of dependency, in a  way  that  met  with  the  EEA
    requirements.  A failure to do so was a material error of law.

14. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that the findings made  by  the  judge
    were comprehensive, and were open to her, and the position in  EEA  law
    had not been misunderstood.  The judge had accepted that there was some
    financial support provided.  However, the actual circumstances of these
    Appellant sisters, were such that the judge was not satisfied that  the
    Sponsor was a person upon whom the Appellants were dependent,  because,
    as the judge said, they have failed to show that the Sponsor "pays  for
    their essential needs" (at paragraph 18).

15. In fact, at the end of paragraph 17, the judge made it quite clear that
    the Sponsor's evidence was that, "he stated neither girl  was  studying
    or working in Nigeria" (paragraph 17).  If that was the case, then  the
    fact that there were receipts for payment of fees must raise a question
    mark about the reliability of such documentation, especially given that
    there had been a previous application where such evidence had not  been
    properly provided, leading to an  immediate  refusal  for  that  reason
    alone.  Other receipts, demonstrating the  Sponsor  provided  financial
    support, would equally be seen in the same light, and  the  plain  fact
    was that the Appellants failed to show that their essential needs  were
    being met by the sponsoring uncle in the UK.

16. In reply, Mr Aquere, in his careful submissions before me, stated  that
    the starting point had to be paragraph 15 where  the  judge  recognised
    that "the Sponsor has played  a  part  in  financially  supporting  the
    Appellants' uncle."  There then arose a question as to what the support
    was for.  The support was for food and clothing.  This  is  the  matter
    expressly addressed by the ECO in the refusal letter.  The ECO was  not
    satisfied.  It was wrong for the ECO not to be satisfied.  Furthermore,
    the support was  for  purposes  of  health.   The  fact  was  that  the
    sponsoring uncle had sent monies directly to the  Appellants,  and  the
    Appellants had used these monies to pay  for  medical  bills,  and  the
    support was evidence in this  manner.   For  the  judge  to  state  (at
    paragraph 18)  that  the  Appellants  had  to  demonstrate  how  "their
    essential needs" were being met, was the wrong test under EU law.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  This is a case where  the  judge,  as  a  factual  matter,
    simply  recognises  that,  contrary  to  a  previous  entry   clearance
    application made  by  the  Appellants,  on  this  occasion,  there  was
    evidence that "the Sponsor has played a part in financially  supporting
    the Appellants in Nigeria since their mother's death" (paragraph 15).

18. Second, however, over and above that, the judge had  then  also  to  be
    satisfied that the support that was being provided  by  the  sponsoring
    uncle was one which was "material support for essential  needs".   Here
    the judge was not satisfied.  The judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellants were dependent in any way upon the sponsoring  uncle.   This
    was for two reasons.  First, he was not satisfied that the  Appellants'
    father, who the Sponsor said lived in Dubai, and who had been named  in
    the death certificate of the mother, was not a person who was  actually
    providing for their essential needs (paragraph 16).   Second,  she  was
    not satisfied that the receipts in relation  to  financial  remittances
    were what they purported to be.  I note that there is, for  example,  a
    receipt of 75,000 Naira for the "final step  accompanying  application"
    and it is for a  Class  4  Joint  Admissions  and  Matriculation  Board
    Examination.  However, the Sponsor's own  evidence  was  that  "neither
    girl was studying or working in Nigeria" (paragraph 17).  If  one  then
    also looks at the medical evidence,  such  as  the  receipt  dated  8th
    September 2016, from the then medical laboratories, it is unclear  what
    this is for.

19. Mr Aquere has submitted that it does not matter.  What matters is  that
    monies are sent by the sponsoring uncle and that these monies are  then
    drawn upon  by  the  Appellants  to  purchase  their  essential  needs.
    However, the judge's observation, which was well-made in  this  regard,
    was that "their essential needs have not been detailed" (paragraph 18).
     It is, for example, not clear what health needs the  Appellants  have,
    if any.  It was said that payments were being made for their education,
    but the Sponsor himself stated  that  "neither  girl  was  studying  or
    working in Nigeria".

20. Accordingly, the judge was entitled to come  to  the  conclusion  that,
    insofar as the question of "material support for  essential  needs"  is
    concerned, the Appellants were unable to demonstrate that this test had
    been met under EU law.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd September 2018
