
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01278/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 December 2017                   |On 18 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                            william kwesi appiah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Durojaiye, instructed by Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 24 March  2017  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Monson.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 19 July 1981.  On 21 April
    2015 he made an application for an EEA residence card  recognising  his
    status as the spouse of a French  national  exercising  treaty  rights.
    The application was refused by the respondent  on  15  September  2015.
    The respondent found that the appellant's proxy marriage  conducted  in
    Ghana was not recognised as valid in France and so fell foul of  Kareem
    (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 0024 (IAC).  The respondent also
    did not find that the appellant could succeed under Regulation 8(5)  on
    the basis of being in a durable relationship with an EEA national.

 3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Monson on 16 March 2017  and
    he heard evidence from the appellant and his  EEA  partner,  Ms  Akoto.
    The judge found at [15] that:

         "Having reviewed the totality of the evidence, both documentary and
         oral,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  in   a   durable
         relationship with Ms Akoto, and that they have been living together
         in a relationship akin to marriage for at least 2 years."

 4. However, the judge agreed with the respondent regarding the application
    of Kareem as the customary marriage by proxy had not been shown to have
    been recognised in French law.

 5. The judge also indicated at [17] that even if the appellant  was  found
    to be in a relationship akin to marriage for two years and therefore in
    a durable relationship for the purposes of Regulation 8(5) an appeal on
    that basis could not be allowed as there was no jurisdiction  following
    the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  therefore  refused  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 7. Before me, the parties were  in  agreement  that  as  of  the  date  of
    promulgation of the decision on 24 March 2017 the case of Awuku (Ghana)
    v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1303 had been  promulgated,  overturning  Kareem
    and indicating that there is no requirement for a proxy  marriage  such
    as this to be shown to be acceptable as valid in the EEA country of the
    sponsor.  It was considered for the respondent  that  this  meant  that
    this part of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  to  be  set
    aside for material error  of  law.   It  remained  the  case  that  the
    respondent wished to dispute the validity of the proxy marriage because
    of some of the documents provided.

 8. Further, the parties were also in agreement that the case of  Sala  has
    been superseded by Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755  which  found  that
    appeal rights did arise for  potential  extended  family  members.  The
    parties agreed that this gave rise to another  material  error  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The parties  also  submitted  that  given  the  incorrect  approach  to
    jurisdiction on the durable relationship point,  the  error  concerning
    the application of Kareem and the outstanding  dispute  concerning  the
    applicant's proxy marriage, the decision should be set aside and remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

10. For all of these reasons, I found that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law such that it  had  to  be
    set aside to be remade and that the appropriate forum for the  remaking
    was the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 16 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

