
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02856/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 11th January 2019                |On: 4th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                  UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                                    [D T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed through Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 28 March 2018 refusing to  issue  him  with  a
    document certifying permanent residence under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), it was  found,
    at a hearing on 13 November 2018, that the First-tier Tribunal had made
    errors of law in its decision. The decision was accordingly set aside.

 2. The appellant is a national of Portugal, born on 6 August 2011  in  the
    UK to a Portuguese father and a Nigerian mother. He applied on 13 March
    2018 for a document certifying permanent residence in the UK under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the   EEA
    Regulations"), relying on the evidence of his father  having  exercised
    treaty rights for five years.

 3. In his application form the appellant stated that the  sponsor's  place
    and country of  birth  was  Portugal  and  that  he  was  submitting  a
    certified copy of his sponsor's identity card because his  sponsor  was
    not in the country. The sponsor's declaration was  not  signed  by  the
    sponsor, as it was said that he was travelling. A copy of the sponsor's
    Portuguese identity card was produced, certified as a true copy by  the
    notary of the Registry Office of Baixa Da Banheira.

 4. The appellant's application was considered under regulation 19  of  the
    EEA Regulations 2016 and was refused on 28 March 2018.  The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant was the son of [FT], but noted  that  there
    was no valid identification  to  show  his  sponsor's  nationality  and
    considered that he had therefore not provided adequate evidence to show
    that he qualified for a right to reside as the family member of his EEA
    sponsor.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision.  He  requested  that  the
    appeal be determined on the papers without an oral hearing and produced
    a skeleton argument making the following legal arguments.

 6. Firstly, there was no requirement for  the  appellant  to  provide  his
    father's identity documents as part of the application to  qualify  for
    permanent residence under regulation 19(1) and (2) of the  Regulations.
    Secondly, the appellant did provide the valid identity of  his  father,
    which was all that was required under the Home  Office  Guidance  "Free
    Movement Rights: direct family members of European Economic Area  (EEA)
    nationals", Version 5.0 of 21  April  2017  at  page  8.  Thirdly,  the
    respondent should have considered their existing  records  which  would
    reveal the EEA national's identity as seen in  2010,  as  confirmed  in
    Barnett and others (EEA Regulations: rights and  documentation)  [2012]
    UKUT  00142.  Fourthly,  with  regard  to  regulation  42,  there  were
    circumstances outside the appellant's control which prevented him  from
    providing his father's original documents,  which  the  respondent  had
    failed to consider.

 7. In a decision promulgated on 5 July  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Carroll relied upon the Home Office guidance, version 6.0, of 21  April
    2017: "Processes and procedures for EEA documentation applications"  at
    page 159 of the appellant's appeal bundle. Page  37  of  that  guidance
    stated that passports and identity documents must be originals  and  at
    page 35 stated that alternative evidence of  identity  and  nationality
    could be accepted in circumstances beyond  the  person's  control.  The
    judge did not accept that such circumstances arose in  the  appellant's
    case as there was no evidence of contact between the appellant's mother
    and father or of any efforts made  to  obtain  the  sponsor's  original
    identity card. The judge  found,  therefore,  that  the  provisions  of
    regulation 19 had not been met and dismissed the appeal.

 8. The appellant sought, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. Following an error of law hearing on 13 November  2018,
    errors of law in the judge's decision were found and the  decision  was
    set aside on the following basis:

    "10. Whilst the appellant, in his skeleton argument before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, raised four distinct arguments, it seems that the  judge
    engaged in only one of those arguments, the last one. In regard to  the
    findings she made on that last argument, her findings were particularly
    limited and, in considering regulation 42 and the requirement for there
    to be circumstances beyond the person's control,  she  did  not  engage
    with the assertion that such circumstances existed as a result  of  the
    appellant being a minor.

    11.  Accordingly, the judge's decision fails to engage in much  of  the
    arguments made before her and is simply unsustainable. I set aside  the
    judge's decision in its entirety.

    12.  As indicated at the hearing, if I was  not  able  to  re-make  the
    decision on the papers before me, I would have the appeal listed for  a
    resumed hearing. I have decided that a resumed hearing is  required  to
    clarify various points."

 9. Directions were made for the resumed  hearing,  for  the  appellant  to
    provide further details and evidence of the application  said  to  have
    been made by the sponsor in 2010 and the documents submitted in support
    of that application, and for the respondent to provide details  of  the
    regulations and guidance relied upon  in  requiring  the  appellant  to
    produce the originals of  the  EEA  national  sponsor's  identification
    documents and to confirm whether any  issue  was  taken  with  the  EEA
    national's status within the EEA Regulations.

10. The appeal then came before us on 11 January 2019, by  which  time  the
    appellant had filed  further  evidence,  namely  evidence  of  the  EEA
    national sponsor exercising treaty rights in 2010 and  a  copy  of  the
    sponsor's Portuguese citizen card, which it was said had been  sent  in
    original form to the Home  Office  in  2010.  The  respondent  had  not
    responded  to  the  directions,  which  we  considered  to  be   highly
    unsatisfactory. Mr Kotas produced a skeleton argument at  the  hearing,
    together with the Home Office guidance "Processes  and  procedures  for
    EEA documentation applications" Version 7.0 of 24 July 2018.

11. We asked Mr Kotas for confirmation that the only issue in this case was
    the validity of  the  documentation  required  to  show  the  sponsor's
    nationality and that  there  was  no  issue  with  the  sponsor  having
    exercised treaty rights for five years during the appellant's residence
    in the UK. Mr Kotas confirmed that that was the case.

12. Mr Karim submitted that Regulation 19 talked about  the  applicant  and
    that there was no  requirement  therein  for  the  sponsor  to  produce
    original documentation. However, even if there was such a  requirement,
    the Home Office guidance made it clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    could  accept  copies  of  the  documentation  if  the  originals   had
    previously been seen. In the appellant's case, the  sponsor's  original
    document had been provided to the respondent in  2010.  The  respondent
    had not responded to the Tribunal's directions to state otherwise.  The
    appellant was entitled to permanent residence.

13. Mr Kotas submitted that the case of Barnett had no  application  as  it
    related to the 2006 Regulations, whereas  those  regulations  had  been
    revoked under the EEA Regulations 2016. He submitted that it  could  be
    said that the wording of Regulation 19 was not  as  unambiguous  as  Mr
    Karim was submitting and it could be said that the appellant's position
    was parasitic upon that of his father, so that it  was  a  prerequisite
    for his father's identification  document  to  be  produced.  Mr  Kotas
    relied on the 24 July 2018  Home  Office  guidance  at  page  37  which
    required original documents to be produced and page 34  which  required
    acceptable  evidence  of  identity  of  the   EEA   national   sponsor.
    Alternative documentation could be accepted only in limited exceptional
    circumstances, whereas the  explanation  provided  in  the  appellant's
    case, that his father was abroad, was not sufficient.

14. Mr Karim, in response, reiterated his  submission  that  regulation  19
    provided  no  obligation  on  the   applicant   to   produce   original
    documentation.  There was no risk to  the  respondent  in  accepting  a
    copy, as the original document had been seen previously. There were  in
    any event exceptional circumstances, as the appellant was a minor whose
    father was travelling.

15. The appellant's mother explained to us that she had had no contact with
    her son's father since he had provided the photocopied  documents.  She
    had no contact details for him and neither had his sister.

16. In response to our enquiries, Mr Kotas confirmed  that  the  respondent
    accepted that the Secretary of State had seen  the  sponsor's  original
    Portuguese identity card in 2010, that the sponsor was the  appellant's
    father, that the sponsor was an EEA national and  no  issue  was  taken
    with the sponsor's five years of exercising treaty  rights  whilst  the
    appellant was in the UK.

Legislative Framework

17. In so far as they are relevant,  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  state  as
    follows:

    "Issue of a document certifying permanent  residence  and  a  permanent
    residence card

    19.- (1) The Secretary of State must, as soon as possible, issue an EEA
         national with a right of permanent residence  under  regulation  15
         with a document certifying permanent residence on  application  and
         the production of-

             (a)  a valid national identity card or passport issued  by  an
             EEA State; and

             (b)  proof that the EEA national  has  a  right  of  permanent
             residence.

         (2)  The Secretary of State must issue a person who is not  an  EEA
         national who has a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
         with a permanent residence card no later than six months  after  an
         application is received and the production of-

             (a)  a valid passport; and

             (b)   proof  that  the  person  has  a  right   of   permanent
             residence."

    ...


    "Alternative evidence of identity and nationality


    42.-  (1)  Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  where  a  provision  of  these
         Regulations requires a person to hold or produce a  valid  national
         identity card issued by an EEA  State  or  a  valid  passport,  the
         Secretary of State may accept alternative evidence of identity  and
         nationality where the person is unable to  obtain  or  produce  the
         required document due to circumstances beyond the person's control.



         (2)  This regulation does not apply to regulation 11. "

Consideration and discussion

18. Whilst the ground given in the respondent's decision for  refusing  the
    appellant's application was "we  have  determined  that  you  have  not
    provided adequate evidence to show that you  qualify  for  a  right  to
    reside as the family member of your EEA sponsor", the only reason given
    was the absence of  the  sponsor's  identity  document  confirming  his
    nationality. There was otherwise no issue taken in  the  decision  with
    the appellant's entitlement to permanent residence.

19. That was precisely the issue arising in the case of Barnett, where  the
    Upper Tribunal stated the following:

    "25. The requirement of proof may, indeed, entail proving the  identity
    of the EEA national.  However, by the time one comes to an  application
    under regulation 18, it is likely  that  the  issue  of  identity  will
    already have been satisfactorily resolved for the Secretary of  State's
    purposes. Indeed, it is common ground in the present appeals  that  the
    respondents' earlier successful applications  were  accompanied  by  Mr
    Bialachowski's passport.  As a general matter, the Secretary  of  State
    cannot lawfully insist under regulation 18 on an applicant's  producing
    the EEA national's passport or other identity document, unless the same
    is genuinely required in order to prove the right which  the  applicant
    is asserting, in order to be granted the permanent residence card."

20. Accordingly the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Barnett  found  there  to  be  no
    requirement in regulations 17 and 18 for  the  production  of  the  EEA
    national sponsor's passport or identity document.

21. Although the appellant's case falls within the 2016 Regulations and not
    the 2006 Regulations as in Barnett, it seems  to  us,  contrary  to  Mr
    Kotas' submission, that the Upper Tribunal's observations and  findings
    nevertheless apply to the equivalent provision in regulation 19 of  the
    2016 Regulations. Mr Kotas rightly pointed out that  regulation  19  of
    the 2016 Regulations, unlike regulation 18  of  the  2006  Regulations,
    specifically requires production of documentation, but we agree with Mr
    Karim that there is nothing in  the  wording  of  Regulation  19(1)  to
    suggest that it is the identification documents  of  the  EEA  national
    sponsor which have to be produced. Regulation 19(1)(a)  indicates  that
    it is the valid national identity card of  the  EEA  applicant  himself
    which is required. Regulation 19(1)(b)  requires  proof  that  the  EEA
    national has a right of permanent residence,  but  we  cannot  see  how
    there is any dispute in that regard given that Mr  Kotas  unequivocally
    confirmed that the sponsor's original EEA identification  document  had
    been seen and accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  when  he  made  an
    application in 2010, that it was accepted that he was an EEA  national,
    that it was accepted that the sponsor was the  appellant's  father  and
    that it was accepted that the sponsor had exercised treaty  rights  for
    five years during the appellant's residence in the UK.  Accordingly  we
    agree with Mr Karim that there is nothing in the EEA  Regulations  2016
    specifically requiring the production of  the  EEA  national  sponsor's
    identity documentation, particularly in the circumstances of this case.

22.  Nevertheless,  the  Home  Office   guidance   does   include   certain
    requirements  and  Mr  Kotas  relied  upon  the  most  recent  guidance
    "Processes and procedures for EEA documentation  applications"  Version
    7.0 of 24 July 2018 in that regard. He referred to page 34 which states
    that "If the EEA national is applying as the family member  of  another
    EEA national, they must also submit acceptable evidence of identity for
    that EEA national". He also relied upon pages 6 to 8 and 35  to  37  in
    regard to  the  requirement  to  provide  original  documents  and  the
    circumstances in  which  alternative  evidence  of  identity  would  be
    accepted.

23. We note, as Mr Kotas submitted, that the requirement at page 34 is  for
    there to be "acceptable evidence  of  identity"  of  the  EEA  national
    sponsor. "Acceptable evidence of  identity"  is  said  to  be  a  valid
    national identity card or passport. The appellant has provided evidence
    of his father's Portuguese nationality in the form of a certified  copy
    of his Portuguese identity card,  which,  as  Mr  Karim  submitted,  is
    evidence of a valid EEA national ID card. We see  no  reason  why  that
    evidence should not satisfy the requirements  in  the  guidance  as  to
    evidence of the sponsor's identity and nationality when  the  sponsor's
    original  Portuguese  identity  card  was  seen  and  accepted  by  the
    respondent previously in 2010 and when the respondent  accepts  in  any
    event, as confirmed by Mr Kotas, that the sponsor is an EEA national.

24. However, and in so far as the  guidance,  at  page  37,  requires  that
    passports and identity documents must be originals, we take note of the
    "alternative evidence"  exception  at  page  35  of  the  guidance  and
    regulation 42 of the 2016 Regulations, permitting alternative  evidence
    of identity and nationality where there are "exceptional  reasons"  why
    such documentation cannot be  produced  due  to  "circumstances  beyond
    their control". We find, again, no reason why the certified copy of the
    sponsor's Portuguese identity card should not  have  been  accepted  as
    alternative evidence.  Whilst  we  have  some  reservations  about  the
    appellant's mother's evidence that she has lost all  contact  with  the
    sponsor and has no way of contacting him either directly or through his
    family members, we consider that the appellant, as a minor, has  little
    or no control himself over the situation. We  also  consider  that,  in
    circumstances where the  respondent takes no issue with the  fact  that
    the sponsor is an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights in  the
    UK for five years at a time when the appellant resided here,  that  the
    respondent  accepts  the  sponsor's  EEA  nationality  and   that   the
    respondent accepts that the sponsor is the appellant's father, there is
    little to be gained by the appellant by lying about  his  inability  to
    contact his father.

25. We also  accept  Mr  Karim's  submission  that  the  risk  attached  to
    accepting photocopied documents, as referred  to  at  page  35  of  the
    guidance, is mitigated in this case by the  fact  that  the  respondent
    accepted the sponsor's  EEA  nationality  and  had  seen  his  original
    identity card in 2010. Accordingly,  in  the  particular  and  peculiar
    circumstances of this case,  it  seems  to  us  that  the  "alternative
    evidence of identity"  provisions  in  the  Home  Office  guidance  and
    Regulation 42 are met.

26. For all of these reasons we find that the appellant is able to meet the
    requirements of regulation 19 of the 2016 Regulations so as to  entitle
    him to a document certifying permanent residence in the UK.

DECISION

27. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of  law.  We  re-
    make the decision by allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.




Signed[pic]                                  Date: 14 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
