
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
EA/02121/2017

                                                  EA/02124/2017

                                                  EA/02128/2017

                                                   EA/02131/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 November 2018                       |On 20 December 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                      Sajida parveen (FIRST APPELLANT)
                     Muneeb MUHAMMAD (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        Maria IRAM (THIRD APPELLANT)
                      Muneeza Urooj (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms C Nicholas, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge, who in March 2018 heard and dismissed
    the appellants' appeals against a decision of 9 February 2017  refusing
    to grant residence cards to them as family members of Mr Amin a British
    citizen, to whom  I  will  I  refer  hereafter  as  the  sponsor.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept that he was  a  qualified  person  in
    Italy, that his family had resided here with him or  that  their  joint
    residence in Italy was genuine and it was considered that if  they  had
    resided in Italy it was a means of circumventing the Immigration  Rules
    as all four appellants had previously been refused entry to the  United
    Kingdom under the Rules.

2.   The judge noted the amount of time that they had  been  in  Italy,  and
    noted the fact that the sponsor had set up  a  business  in  Italy  but
    considered it to be notable that there was a lack of documents to  show
    that the company was ever trading, there were no accounts  of  previous
    and subsequent years, no business receipts and no evidence of tax being
    paid.  The children spent some  months  in  Italy,  but  there  was  no
    evidence that either of them had attended school and the judge did  not
    accept the explanation as to why that was the case.  So  he  concluded,
    noting the fact that they had obtained residence cards in  Italy  on  3
    May 2016, that they had very soon come to the United Kingdom thereafter
    and that this was a blatant attempt  to  avoid  the  Immigration  Rules
    applying to non-EEA nationals.  He did not accept that their  residence
    in Italy was genuine and considered the purpose of going to  Italy  was
    to circumvent the Immigration Rules, noting also that the  sponsor  had
    retained a home in the United Kingdom and  found  that  they  were  not
    integrated into Italy.

3.   The appellants sought and  were  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  a
    number of bases.  The  grant  of  permission  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had misdirected himself  in  finding  that  the
    sponsor was not a qualified  person  when  living  in  Italy  when  the
    appellants were granted residence cards there, on the basis  that  they
    were family members of the sponsor who was  found  to  be  a  qualified
    person and that might have infected the decision on other grounds  when
    considering the oral evidence.  There was an earlier adjourned  hearing
    before me when, what were thought to be residence cards, were found not
    to be residence cards in fact, but we now have  the  originals  and  an
    explanation as to why it was that they were not produced previously and
    I have seen those and accept that they are genuine documents.  They are
    residence cards provided by the Italian authorities to the  appellants.



4.   It is relevant to note the two documents that have been  put  in.   One
    is the Home Office guidance for people entering the United  Kingdom  as
    the holder of an Article 10 residence card and this says in  the  first
    section that an Article 10 residence card is a document which is issued
    under EU law to  non-EEA  family  members  of  EEA  nationals  who  are
    exercising free movement rights in another Member State  than  that  of
    their nationality.  For example a non-EEA spouse of a  French  national
    who is living and working in Italy may be issued  with  an  Article  10
    residence card by the Italian authorities.  It sets  out  the  kind  of
    wording that the document should contain, what you are  allowed  to  do
    with a residence card, a valid genuine Article 10 residence card allows
    the non-EEA national family member of an EEA national to travel to  the
    UK without the requirement to obtain an EEA family permit and  I  think
    there is no suggestion that the evidence,  which  was  required  to  be
    brought in addition to the residence cards was not provided.

5.   The other document is the judgment of the CJEU (at the  time  the  ECJ)
    in Akrich in 2003.  I will not go into any detail in reading  out  what
    is said there but it is particularly pertinent to note the third ruling
    of the court in answer to the questions which had been referred  to  by
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in October 2003:  "Where  the  marriage
    between a national of a Member State and a  national  of  a  Non-Member
    state is genuine the fact that the spouse has installed  themselves  in
    another Member State in order on their return to the Member  State,  of
    which the former is  a  national,  to  obtain  the  benefit  of  rights
    confirmed by Community law, is not relevant to an assessment  of  their
    legal situation by the competent authorities of the  latter  State.   I
    need to look at the decision  of  the  judge  in  the  context  of  the
    guidance and the fact of the residence cards and the  judgment  of  the
    ECJ.

6.   In my view it is clear that the judge erred in law in  this  case,  not
    so much in relation to the factual findings but in the sense that those
    findings are to a large extent irrelevant.  If, as is  the  case  here,
    the appellants have residence cards issued by the  Italian  authorities
    that is on the basis of recognition that  the  sponsor  was  exercising
    Community rights in Italy.  Akrich says that it does  not  matter  that
    this was in a sense a device.  Having those cards they have come to the
    United Kingdom, they satisfy the  requirements  in  Akrich,  they  also
    satisfy the requirements of the Home Office policy for people  entering
    the United Kingdom as holders of an Article 10 residence card  and  the
    consequence therefore is it seems to me there is no point in  having  a
    further hearing in this case.  The appellants, in my view, satisfy  the
    requirements of the law with regard to residence  cards  and  therefore
    the decision refusing the residence cards is unlawful  and  the  appeal
    against the refusal to issue residence cards is allowed.

Notice of Decision

7.    The appeal  against  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  is  therefore
    allowed.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 7 December 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
