
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ea/02990/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and reasons Promulgated |
|On: 9 February 2018                       |On: 6 March 2018                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                       Miss Eva Maria NOLASCO BEJARAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J White, Legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of the Dominican Republic, born on 10 November
    1972 appealed against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  2  March
    2016, refusing to issue him with a EEA family residence permit pursuant
    to  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006
    (hereinafter" the 2006 regulations").



 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mr R. G. Walters  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in a decision dated 2 June 2017 stating that in  line  with  the
    decision of Sala (EFM's: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), that
    he has no jurisdiction to hear the appeal which the appellant seeks  to
    pursue.



 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever who
    stated that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred when he found  that  he
    had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal following the decision  in  Sala
    and this case is no longer the position in law and that it is  arguable
    that the appeal should have been considered by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on its merits.



 4. At the hearing it was agreed by both parties  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law when  the  Judge  found  that  he  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal when in fact he did. It was agreed that
    since the First-tier Tribunal had made no findings of fact, the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de  novo  and
    findings of fact made.



 5. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge apart from First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R.  G.
    Walters for hearing of the appeal de novo.


                                              This 28th day of February 2018
Signed by

..........................................
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana




