
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02631/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 October 2016                         |On 18 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          mrs Christiana Abi Arrey
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Lourdes, Counsel, instructed by Universal
                    Immigration Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge (the judge), dated 12 February 2016, in  which  he
    dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's refusal to issue her with
    a residence card under the Immigration (Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).  That  refusal  is  dated  11
    November 2015.

 2. It arose from an application made on 11 May 2015 in which the Appellant
    sought a residence card on the basis that she was a family member of an
    EEA national.  The EEA national in question is Mr T, who is  a  citizen
    of France.  It was said that the couple undertook a proxy  marriage  in
    the Appellant's country of origin, Cameroon.  That proxy  marriage  was
    said to have occurred on 27 December 2013.   It  was  said  that  Mr  T
    attended the ceremony but the Appellant did not due to family  problems
    in Cameroon.

 3. The Respondent's decision letter made reference to Cameroonian law  and
    concluded that the evidence provided did not comply with  the  relevant
    legislation of that country.  In addition it was said that copies of Mr
    T's passport indicated that he had not been in the country at the  time
    the claimed proxy marriage occurred.  In the alternative the Respondent
    addressed the issue as to whether the Appellant's relationship with  Mr
    T constituted a durable  relationship  under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the
    Regulations.

The judge's decision

 4. The appeal was determined by the judge on the papers in line  with  the
    Appellant's  own  request,  and  there  being  no  objection   by   the
    Respondent.  The judge  noted  that  neither  he,  nor  it  seemed  the
    Respondent, had been  provided  with  the  originals  of  the  marriage
    certificate or Mr T's  passport.   The  judge  concluded  that  in  the
    absence of the original passport he, like the Respondent,  was  placing
    little evidential weight upon the stamps contained therein.  The  judge
    did note that the stamps he had  seen  in  the  copy  of  the  passport
    indicated that Mr T would, on the face of the document,  have  been  in
    Cameroon at the time of the claimed proxy marriage.  The  dates  stated
    by the Respondent in the refusal letter could not be located.

 5. At paragraph 11 of his decision the judge goes on to conclude  that  in
    any event on the evidence before him he could not see that the relevant
    Cameroonian law had been complied with in this case.  He was unable  to
    identify who the proxy for the Appellant was.  The  judge  went  on  to
    consider the issue of the durable relationship and concluded  that  the
    evidence was insufficient to show that  one  existed.   The  judge  did
    accept that Mr T was a worker and therefore exercising treaty rights in
    the United Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that there was documentary evidence before
    the judge to show that the marriage was valid under Cameroonian law and
    recognised (in the words of the grounds) in France.  The grounds assert
    that the judge was wrong in his treatment of the passport evidence  and
    that in light of the production of the marriage  certificate  from  the
    Cameroonian authorities the judge should have found that  the  marriage
    was valid and that the Appellant was a family member of Mr T.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Acting Resident Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Zucker on 2 September 2016.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Lourdes submitted that the original passport of Mr  T  had  in  fact
    been sent to the Secretary of State with the application,  although  he
    acknowledged that there was no  documentary  evidence  to  support  his
    assertion.   He  provided  me  with  the  original  of   the   marriage
    certificate issued in Cameroon.  This appeared to be the same  document
    as that contained at page 28 of the Appellant's bundle, although  there
    is a difference in the location of a stamp apparently from  the  French
    authorities.  After some uncertainty  Mr  Lourdes  indicated  that  the
    Appellant's representative at the ceremony was one Okongo  Mbi  Samuel,
    who  was  either  the  head  of  the  Appellant's   family   or   their
    representative.   Mr  Lourdes  submitted  that  the   requirements   of
    Cameroonian law had been complied with.

 9. In respect of the issue which I raised as  to  the  validity  of  proxy
    marriages under  French  law,  Mr  Lourdes  pointed  me  to  the  stamp
    appearing at page 29 of the Appellant's bundle and located at  the  top
    left hand corner of the certificate on page 28.  He submitted that this
    showed that French law recognised proxy marriages.  He made  the  point
    that the issue of validity under French law  had  not  been  raised  in
    either the refusal letter or indeed by the judge himself.

10. Ms Ahmad submitted that there was no evidence to show that the original
    passport had been provided and it had not been made clear to the  judge
    who the Appellant's proxy was.  She further submitted that in light  of
    the cases of Kareem and TA there was no evidence before  the  judge  to
    show that proxy marriages were in fact  recognised  under  French  law.
    The judge was bound to apply the law in respect of proxy marriages  and
    so whilst he did not raise the point himself, any errors  he  may  have
    made in respect of the passport and the absence of an Appellant's proxy
    were immaterial to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   Mr  Lourdes'  reply
    reiterated the point that the issue of French law had not  been  raised
    previously.  He did accept that the durable relationship issue had been
    determined against  the  Appellant  by  the  judge  and  had  not  been
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.  It was not now a live issue.

11. Both representatives were agreed that if I found there to  be  material
    errors of law and I set aside the judge's decision I should remake  the
    decision on  the  evidence  before  me,  which  included  the  original
    Appellant's bundle, a new bundle and the information contained  in  the
    Respondent's bundle.  I indicated to the representatives that if I were
    to be remaking the  decision  I  would  be  considering  the  issue  of
    validity under French law given that is precisely what case law says  I
    must do.

Decision on error of law

12. I conclude that whilst the judge  has  erred  in  law,  these  are  not
    ultimately material to the outcome of the appeal.  My reasons for  this
    conclusion are as follows.

13. First, I do not accept that the original passport was in fact submitted
    to the Secretary of State with  the  application,  as  asserted  by  Mr
    Lourdes.  Having looked at the application form for myself it is  clear
    that the box relating to the provision of an original passport had been
    left blank.  Notwithstanding that, there was a certified copy of Mr T's
    passport in evidence before the judge and the relevant stamps  in  that
    passport are as stated in paragraph 9 of the judge's decision.   In  my
    view, notwithstanding the absence of the original passport,  the  judge
    was wrong to have in effect attributed no weight at all to the passport
    evidence.  There is no suggestion by the Respondent at any  stage  that
    the passport was a forgery or had been tampered with, and the dates set
    out in paragraph 9 did correspond with the claimed  attendance  at  the
    marriage  ceremony  in  Cameroon  in  2013,  as   the   judge   himself
    acknowledged.  In this respect the judge erred.

14. Second, although I have sympathy with the judge in the sense  that  the
    evidence was not  clearly  presented  to  him,  having  looked  at  the
    marriage certificate for myself, which is in both French  and  English,
    it is apparent that there was a representative present at the  ceremony
    acting on behalf of  the  Appellant;  in  other  words  a  proxy.   The
    individual (Okongo Mbi Samuel) was likely to  have  been  of  a  status
    required by the relevant provisions of Cameroonian law.  In this regard
    the judge has perhaps overlooked an aspect of the documentary  evidence
    before him.

15. Third, it is right that the issue of the recognition of proxy marriages
    under French law had not been raised by the Respondent in her  refusal,
    nor by the judge in his decision.  Notwithstanding that, there had been
    no concession as to the legal position by the Respondent.  The  law  on
    this issue was, as at the date  of  the  judge's  decision,  clear:  an
    Appellant has to show not only that the proxy marriage is valid in  the
    country in which it is undertaken,  but  also  under  the  law  of  the
    country of the nationality of the EEA national, in  this  case  France.
    The only evidence that was before the judge was, I find, a stamp on the
    top left hand corner of the marriage certificate (see page  28  of  the
    Appellant's original bundle).  That stamp is in French and has not been
    translated.  Even if one were to ignore that fact and translate it,  as
    far as I can see it says nothing more than the fact that  it  had  been
    seen by the French Consul in the Cameroonian capital in December  2014.
    There is no evidence from the French authorities or by  way  of  expert
    evidence that proxy marriages undertaken in Cameroon or indeed anywhere
    else are recognised under French law.  There was no evidence before the
    judge that marriages undertaken in the particular circumstances of this
    Appellant are recognised under French  law.   A  bare  stamp  from  the
    French Consulate in Cameroon cannot in my view amount to the  requisite
    evidence in respect of validity under French law.   Therefore,  despite
    the fact the issue was not raised by the Respondent or by the judge the
    complete absence of evidence on the part of the Appellant was fatal  to
    the success of her appeal in any event.  Thus the errors  committed  by
    the judge were immaterial.

16. Fourth, in any event if indeed the errors of law were  material  and  I
    were to set aside the decision of the judge, I would  be  remaking  the
    decision for myself on the basis of the evidence  now  before  me.   No
    further evidence as to the recognition of proxy marriages under  French
    law has been adduced by the Appellant.  There has been  no  application
    to adjourn for any such evidence to be produced and even if I  were  to
    be satisfied that the marriage was in compliance with Cameroonian law I
    am not satisfied that  proxy  marriages  either  generally  or  in  the
    particular circumstances of the Appellant are recognised  under  French
    law.  The appeal would  fail  in  any  event.   The  issue  of  durable
    relationship has been determined against the Appellant is no  longer  a
    live issue.  Therefore  even  on  the  alternative  basis  I  would  be
    dismissing the appeal.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  any
material errors of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 17 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


