
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02915/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 2 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              Syed Asim Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior HOPO of the Specialist Appeals
Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth  is  1  July
    1985.  He made an application for a residence card as confirmation of a
    right of residence as the family member of a  British  citizen  who  is
    previously working in another member state under Regulation  9  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  (the   "EEA
    Regulations").  His application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    on 28 February 2017.  The Appellant appealed against the decision.  His
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  N  J  Bennett  in  a
    decision that was promulgated on 7 June 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 11 May 2018.  The Appellant was granted  permission  to
    appeal against that  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth of 1 August 2018.  Thus, the matter came before me  on  24
    September to decide whether the Judge NJ Bennett had erred.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor on 5 February  2013.   Before
    the expiry of his leave he made an application for leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.  This was refused on 27 August 2013. On  18  July
    2016, he made an application for a residence card as a dependant on his
    father, a British citizen (the "Sponsor"). The Respondent  refused  his
    application.


The decision of the FtT

3.   The judge heard evidence from  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.   The
    judge found that it was probable that the Sponsor moved to  Ireland  in
    or about February 2015 and that he lived there  until  June  2016.   He
    found that the Sponsor had a job there for part of this time  and  that
    the Appellant probably lived with the Sponsor in Ireland between  March
    2015 and June 2016.  He took into account  the  evidence  which  showed
    that the Sponsor had opened a bank account into which  his  salary  was
    paid until October 2015.  It was the Sponsor's evidence  that  he  then
    became self-employed registering a business as a Koran  teacher  on  27
    January 2016 and the judge found varying amounts  were  paid  into  his
    bank account which would relate to the  business  between  12  February
    2016 and 13 May 2016.

4.       The judge went on to consider  whether  residence  in  Ireland  was
    genuine.  He engaged  with  the  submission  made  by  the  Appellant's
    representative at the hearing, Mrs Ali  based  on  O  v  Minister  Vorr
    Immigratis C-456/12 and the opinion of the Advocate  General.   It  was
    argued that the centre of the Sponsor and the Appellant's  lives  moved
    to Ireland between May 2015 and  June  2016.   After  setting  out  the
    ruling of the Advocate General at paragraph  53,  the  judge  made  the
    following findings at paragraphs 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60:

         "54. O therefore establishes that the residence must be genuine and
             does not advance matters further.  In my view, residence for a
             period of about 16 months cannot be said to be residence for a
             particularly long period and, depending  on  the  explanation,
             may be an indication that the residence was not  genuine.   In
             my view, there are a number  of  other  factors  which,  taken
             together,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that   the   Appellant's
             residence in Ireland with the Sponsor was probably not genuine
             and  that  the  purpose  of  the  residence  was  probably  to
             circumvent the Immigration Rules.


         55.  First, the Sponsor and the Appellant moved  to  Ireland  after
             the Appellant had made  three  unsuccessful  applications  for
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom in  circumstances  where
             he all too clearly had no wish to  return  to  Pakistan.   RB1
             shows that the application made in  2013  was  made  with  the
             assistance of solicitors,  Malik  Law  Chambers.   It  is  not
             therefore unreasonable to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  was
             probably advised about the very  stringent  requirements  that
             must be met by an adult child seeking leave  to  remain  under
             the  Immigration  Rules.   This  consideration  does  not,  of
             itself, establish that the residence in Ireland  was  probably
             not genuine because it is also consistent with  the  Appellant
             and the Sponsor deciding that, having  failed  in  the  United
             Kingdom, they had no option but to move to Ireland permanently
             but it is the  background  against  which  the  move  must  be
             viewed.


         56.  Second, the Sponsor's plans about the move were vague and  the
             evidence was not consistent.  The Sponsor told  me  that  they
             moved to Ireland so that they could establish a  business  but
             he was unable to tell me what type of business  they  proposed
             to open.  The Sponsor also told me that they  were  unable  to
             establish a business because they subsequently discovered that
             the Appellant was unable to work in  Ireland,  even  after  he
             obtained his Irish residence card  (AB57).   This  explanation
             lacks credibility.  I am unable to see any such restriction on
             the Appellant's residence card.  I was  not  referred  to  any
             provision of Irish law which prevents a  family  member  of  a
             Union citizen from engaging in business.   The  Appellant  did
             not mention any plan to open a business  or  any  difficulties
             with  his  residence  card  but  told  me  that  he   obtained
             employment for a week with a takeaway  restaurant,  which  was
             not satisfactory because it was too far  from  his  home,  and
             that he was unable to obtain other suitable employment.


         57.  Third, the Appellant and the Sponsor say that they returned to
             the United Kingdom partly because of the Sponsor's health  but
             the evidence about this did not fit with this explanation when
             it was explored in detail.  The evidence was that the  Sponsor
             was given a stent  in  2008,  that  the  Sponsor  had  another
             operation in 2012, when he was  found  to  be  unsuitable  for
             another stent, and that the Sponsor retired early in 2015  for
             health reasons.  There is no medical evidence showing that the
             Sponsor's health deteriorated while he was in Ireland or  that
             anything  occurred  while  he  was  there  which  necessitated
             medical treatment immediately after he  returned  here.   They
             both said that the Sponsor did not have any treatment from any
             medical practitioner in Ireland.  It is difficult to see  why,
             if the Sponsor was in poor  health  in  Ireland,  the  Sponsor
             would have  rented  a  house  about  three  months  before  he
             returned here from which it was difficult to  use  the  health
             facilities.


         58.  Fourth, they also say that they returned here because  of  the
             Appellant's brother's problems with his back but, once  again,
             the evidence about this did not  fit  with  this  explanation.
             The evidence was that his brother had an operation in 2012 and
             that his brother gradually improved  after  this  so  that  he
             could walk and drive.  The Appellant originally said that  his
             brother gradually got better after the operation and that  his
             brother suddenly  started  to  suffer  from  chronic  pain  in
             February  2017,  which   resulted   in   his   brother   being
             hospitalised for three and a half months.  He only  said  that
             his brother's condition was worsening when they came  back  in
             2016 after being asked whether  his  brother's  condition  was
             worsening when they came back.  As this was plainly a  leading
             question, I place little weight on this  reply.   It  is  also
             very difficult to understand why they returned to Bradford  if
             they came back because of  the  Appellant's  brother's  health
             because the Appellant's brother lived in Hounslow at the time.
              There  is  no  medical  evidence  to  support  the  Sponsor's
             explanation that he was well enough to travel between Bradford
             and Hounslow but not well enough to travel between Ireland and
             Hounslow.  There is also no medical evidence showing that  the
             Appellant's brother's health deteriorated significantly  while
             the Appellant and the Sponsor lived in Ireland.


         59.  Fifth, the Sponsor's intention to settle in Ireland is  called
             into serious question by the fact that he never told his GP in
             England that he had moved to Ireland and by the fact  that  he
             continued to receive medication from England while he  was  in
             Ireland.   There  is  also  very  little  evidence  that  they
             integrated themselves into the community in Ireland beyond the
             work that the Sponsor did as an employed person and as a self-
             employed person.


         60.  In such circumstances, I am not satisfied that I was  probably
             given a truthful account of why the Appellant and the  Sponsor
             moved to Ireland or why they returned to this country.   I  am
             also  not  satisfied  that  their  residence  in  Ireland  was
             probably genuine residence.  There is no  evidence  that  they
             moved to Ireland knowing that it would be far easier  for  the
             Appellant to settle here under the EEA Regulations than  under
             the Immigration Rules but I am driven to the  conclusion  that
             they had probably discovered this before they moved because  I
             cannot conceive of any other sensible  reason  for  what  they
             did.  I am therefore satisfied that  they  probably  moved  to
             Ireland to  enable  the  Appellant  to  apply  under  the  EEA
             Regulations and thereby circumvent the immigration law and the
             Immigration Rules."


The grounds of appeal

5.   The grounds of appeal claim that the judge did not give weight  to  the
    evidence provided by the Appellant and his Sponsor.  It is asserted  in
    the grounds that the Sponsor returned back to the UK "solely due to the
    fact that his other son was critically ill who later died.   The  judge
    wrongly assumed that the Sponsor returned  back  due  to  his  own  ill
    health.  Therefore, the appeal ought to be reconsidered".  I  gave  the
    Appellant the opportunity to comment further on the grounds.  He stated
    that there was no-one to take care of his brother in the  UK  and  that
    his back pain started again in 2016.   He  said  that  maybe  they  had
    overlooked  the  issue  in  their  witness  statements.   I  asked  the
    Appellant what he and the Sponsor told the Tribunal in relation to  his
    brother. He said that they described the condition of his  brother  and
    that it was getting worse.

6.   Mr Mills submitted that the judgement of the Grand Chamber in O  and  B
    v The Netherlands [2014] Case C-456/12 were in his view expressing  the
    same test as that in Regulation 9; however, differently it was  worded.
    The issue is genuine residence. The judge was entitled on the  evidence
    before him to conclude that residence  was  not  genuine.  Neither  the
    Appellant nor the Sponsor referred to the  brother's  health  in  their
    witness statements.  There  was  no  mention  of  it  in  the  skeleton
    argument. It was an issue raised in oral evidence and the judge engaged
    with the evidence and made lawful and sustainable findings.


Conclusions

7.   There is no error of law. The  judge  made  findings  on  the  evidence
    before him.  The Appellant's brother's health was not an issue that was
    raised in the Appellant or Sponsor's witness statements.   It  was  not
    raised  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument  relied  on   by   his
    representative Mrs Ali at the hearing before the judge.  I accept  that
    it was an issue that was  raised  at  the  hearing  in  oral  evidence;
    however,  I  conclude  that  the  judge  made  lawful  and  sustainable
    findings.  The  grounds  misrepresent  the  way  that  the  appeal  was
    advanced and argued before Judge Lawrence.

8.   The Appellant was unrepresented.  The  grounds  do  not  challenge  the
    judge's decision as to the legality of the  Regulation  and  any  issue
    involving tension between O and B and the 2016 Regulations. However,  I
    raised the issue of Regulation 9 and compatibility with what the  court
    said in O and B and Article 21(1) of the Treaty on the  Functioning  of
    the European Union (TFEU). The judge did  not  make  reference  to  the
    decision of the Grand Chamber.  The  Grand  Chamber's  decision  unlike
    Regulation 9 makes no reference to  any  "centre  of  life"  test,  the
    nature  and  quality  of  accommodation,  the  question  of   principal
    residence and integration.  It could be argued  that  Regulation  9  is
    more restrictive than the Directive to which it  is  intended  to  give
    force and certainly more restrictive than the judgment of the court  in
    O and B.  I agree with Mr Mills, who submitted that Regulation 9 and  O
    and B are  both  in  effect  concerned  with  the  genuineness  of  the
    residence in the host member state.  In O and B at  paragraph  54,  the
    court stated:

         "Where, during the genuine residence of the union  citizen  in  the
         host  member  state,  pursuant  to  and  in  conformity  with   the
         conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2)  of  Directive  2004/38,
         family life is created or strengthened in that  member  state,  the
         effectiveness of the rights conferred  on  the  union  citizens  by
         Article 21(1) TFEU requires that the citizen's family in  the  host
         member state may continue on returning to the member state of which
         he is a national, through the grant of a derived right of residence
         to the family member who is a third-country national.  If  no  such
         derived right of residence were granted, that union  citizen  could
         be discouraged from leaving the member  state  of  which  he  is  a
         national in order to exercise his right of residence under  Article
         21(1) TFEU in another member state because he is uncertain  whether
         he will be able to continue in his member state of origin a  family
         life with his immediate family members which has  been  created  or
         strengthened in  the  host  member  state  (see,  to  that  effect,
         paragraphs 35 and 36)."

9.   It was not the intention of the court in O and B to  extend  union  law
    to cover abuses.  I considered whether the judge dealt  only  with  the
    terms of Regulation 9 to the exclusion of issues raised in O and B.   I
    have considered  whether  the  judge's  analysis  of  Regulation  9  is
    consistent with O and B.

10.  The motivation of the Appellant and Sponsor  for  making  use  of  free
    movement rights is irrelevant.   The  court  determined  in  Akrich  C-
    109/01:

         "Where the marriage between a national of  a  member  state  and  a
         national of a non-member  state  is  genuine,  the  fact  that  the
         spouses install themselves in another member  state  in  order,  on
         their return to the member state of which the former is a national,
         to obtain the benefit of rights conferred by community law  is  not
         relevant to an assessment of their legal situation by the competent
         authorities of the latter state."

11.  On a proper reading of Judge  Lawrence's  decision,  I  find  that  the
    judge has concluded that notwithstanding formal observance of the Rules
    the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  never  genuinely  intended  to  remain
    permanently in Ireland.  The judge was entitled to attach weight to the
    unsatisfactory evidence given about the reasons why the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor returned to England.  The  judge's  core  findings  are  in
    effect that the Appellant and the Sponsor have not told the truth about
    the reasons for their return from Ireland to the United Kingdom.

12.  The decision of  the  judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  was  lawful  and
    sustainable and the decision to dismiss the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    the 2016 Regulations is maintained.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 27 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
