
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02859/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2018                          |On 7 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             MD ASADUZZAMAN MIA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


On the papers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. On 10 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew,  when  considering
         the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant  a
         residence card as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national
         exercising treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom,  dismissed  the
         appeal for want of jurisdiction.

      2. The Judge relied upon the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  of  Sala
         [2016] UKUT 411 for which,  at  that  time,  the  Judge  cannot  be
         criticised.

      3. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  refused  by
         another  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   but   renewed   the
         application to the Upper Tribunal. In an order  dated  18  December
         2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to appeal given
         that the Court of Appeal in Khan v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 had found  that  Sala  was  wrongly
         decided.

      4. Judge Jordan gave directions for the respondent to serve and file a
         response  to  the  grant  of  permission  within  twenty-one   days
         confirming whether the respondent agrees that the determination was
         in error, that the  determination  should  be  set  aside  and  the
         determination remade by the first-tier Tribunal. Judge Jordan noted
         that if the respondent considers this can be dealt with by  consent
         there will be no need for a hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  and  an
         order will be made to that effect.

      5. There is no trace of a response being received from  the  Secretary
         of State and accordingly the matter came before me as Duty Judge on
         the 29 January 2018. A further direction was made and sent  to  the
         parties, in the following terms:

             "Upon there being no response from the Secretary of  State  to
             [2] of the direction of Upper Tribunal Jordan contained in the
             grant of permission to appeal  dated  18  December  2017,  the
             following direction shall apply to the further conduct of this
             appeal:


                   1. Unless the Secretary of State by 4 PM 9 February 2018
                      responds to the direction  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
                      Jordan and, in addition, confirms whether she has any
                      objection to the Upper Tribunal  finding  a  material
                      error of law in the manner identified in the grant of
                      permission and remitting the appeal to the First-tier
                      Tribunal to be heard afresh without  further  hearing
                      and/or receiving further evidence, the Upper Tribunal
                      shall proceed on the basis the Secretary of State has
                      no objection to such a proposed course of action  and
                      shall determine the  merits  of  the  appeal  on  the
                      papers in accordance with  the  grant  of  permission
                      remitting the same to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
                      considered afresh.


                   2. The appeal shall be referred to Upper Tribunal  Judge
                      Hanson  for  further  consideration  on   the   first
                      available date after 10 February 2018."


      6. The matter has been referred in  accordance  with  that  direction.
         There is still no response from  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
         direction of either Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan or the direction of
         the 29 January 2018 set out above. Whilst  it  is  appreciated  the
         Secretary of State has, to some extent, reserved  her  position  in
         relation to Sala pending an application for permission to appeal to
         the  Supreme  Court  against  that  decision,   in   SM   (Algeria)
         (Appellant) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK Visa Section (Respondent)
         [2018] UKSC 9 the Supreme Court found that Sala  had  been  wrongly
         decided.

      7. Accordingly, for the reasons set out in the grant of permission  of
         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan I find  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal has erred in law in a manner material to the decision that
         Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal. I  set  that
         decision aside and remit the appeal to the  First-tier-Tribunal  to
         be heard on its merits.

Decision

      8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of that Judge. I remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be considered on its merits.

  Anonymity.

      9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 23 February 2018

