
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02124/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 January 2018                        |On 23rd January 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                SEHAR FATIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Housego promulgated on 24 April 2017 dismissing her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 9  February  2016
    to refuse to issue her with  a  family  permit  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 to join Mr Muhammed Javeed, a
    Belgian citizen, living and working in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that she is the adoptive daughter of Mr  Javeed
    and his wife, Ms Misbah Naureen who is also  the  appellant's  maternal
    aunt. The appeal before Judge Housego was heard jointly with the appeal
    of Ms Naureen (EA/02122/2016)  who  had  also  been  refused  a  family
    permit. That appeal was allowed and she has now been  issued  a  family
    permit.

 3. Rule 40 (1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    provided that the Upper Tribunal  may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
    hearing. Ruled 40 (3) provides that the  Upper  Tribunal  must  provide
    written reasons for its decision with  a  decision  notice  unless  the
    parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons
    which both Ms Rothwell and Mr Walker did, it being  accepted  that  the
    judge had failed to make a finding as to whether the  appellant  is  Ms
    Naureen's niece and/or whether she could be a relative  and  thus  fall
    within reg. 8 of the 2006 EEA regulations (albeit  that  the  situation
    may be different under reg.8 of the 2016 EEA Regulations).

 4. Accordingly, given the failure to make findings of fact in respect of a
    core issue, and given also that the case may fall within the  ambit  of
    the forthcoming decision of the Supreme Court in SM (Algeria), and with
    the consent of the parties, I am satisfied that the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

 2. The appeal must not be listed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego.




Signed                                  Date:  19 January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





