
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/02788/2016
                                                               EA/03837/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2019                           |On 22 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                               MAHFUJUL ISLAM
                             NOOR-E-JANNAT JAHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Biggs, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellants.
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellants with permission, appeal against the decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal ( hereinafter referred to as the  "FtTJ")  who,
         in a determination promulgated on the 20th September 2018 dismissed
         their appeals against the decision  of  the  Respondent  to  refuse
         their applications for a residence card as  confirmation  of  their
         right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  the
         dependency  upon  the  first  Appellant's  brother,   pursuant   to
         Regulations 8 and 17(4) under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations  2016  ("hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  2016
         Regulations").

      2. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh and are husband and wife.
         Their immigration history is set  out  in  the  papers.  The  first
         Appellant arrived in the UK in October 2007 with leave to enter  as
         a student valid to March 2010. He obtained leave  to  remain  which
         was extended until 17  February  2015  (having  been  curtailed  to
         expire on 17 February 2015 on 16th of December 2014 as a result  of
         his Tier 4  sponsor  losing  its  licence).  The  second  Appellant
         entered the UK  with  leave  to  enter  as  the  first  Appellant's
         dependent spouse and was granted leave to remain in line with  that
         of the first Appellant.

      3. On 12th June 2015 applications were made by the  first  and  second
         Appellants for a residence card  based  on  the  first  Appellant's
         dependency on his brother, a Swedish national and EU  citizen.  The
         sponsor is the brother of the first Appellant.

      4. In a decision made on the 19th February 2016 the Respondent refused
         that application. The application was considered  under  Regulation
         8(2) of the 2006 Regulations. Whilst it was accepted that the first
         Appellant was related to the sponsor  as  claimed,  the  Respondent
         considered that the Appellants had provided  insufficient  evidence
         of dependence on the sponsor immediately prior to entering  the  UK
         as required under Regulation 8(2) (a) and  there  was  insufficient
         evidence that they were residing with or had  been  dependent  upon
         the sponsor since entering the UK,  as  required  under  Regulation
         8(2)  (c).  Furthermore,  the  financial  evidence   provided   was
         insufficient  to  demonstrate  dependence  or  residence  with  the
         sponsor while the Appellants were living in Bangladesh.  There  was
         also  insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate   the   sponsor   was
         exercising treaty rights in the UK pursuant to Regulation 6. In the
         decision of the FtTJ  at  paragraph  6,  he  records  further  oral
         submissions made on behalf of the Respondent. It is  not  necessary
         to set them out they are a matter of  record  as  set  out  in  the
         determination.

      5. The Appellants lodged grounds of appeal against  that  decision  on
         22nd March 2016. At the time of lodging the appeals,  the  decision
         of Sala (EFM's Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  0411  (IAC)  had  held
         that there was no right of appeal. Subsequently in the light of the
         decision in Khan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA  Civ  1755,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  set  aside  the
         decision on the basis that it was arguably wrong  in  law  to  have
         concluded that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

      6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  10th  September
         2018. In a decision promulgated on 20th September 2018 the  appeals
         were dismissed.

      7. The judge had the advantage of hearing the  oral  evidence  of  the
         first Appellant and his EEA sponsor  and  also  a  further  witness
         attended the hearing to give oral evidence. There was also a  large
         bundle of documentary evidence submitted in support of the appeals.

      8. The findings of fact and conclusions reached by the  FtTJ  are  set
         out at paragraphs 15 - 42. The relevant findings  of  fact  can  be
         summarised as follows:-

          1) The first  Appellant  had  worked  in  the  UK  part-time  (at
             [19(a)]).

          2) The second Appellant has worked  part-time  in  the  UK  until
             2012. There is no evidence  that  the  second  Appellant  ever
             studied in the UK (at [19 (c)])

          3) The sponsor and the first Appellant lived together with  their
             parents until the sponsor left Bangladesh to live in Sweden in
             1995. The first Appellant was  15  at  that  time.  The  judge
             accepted the evidence that the sponsor migrated to  Sweden  in
             order to support his family  in   Bangladesh.The  judge  found
             that the sponsor was sending money from Sweden  to  Bangladesh
             to support his parents and siblings and that he  had  done  so
             for the whole period prior to the first Appellant's  departure
             for the UK in 2007 (at [20]).

          4) The documentary evidence (bank statements and confirmation  of
             transfer of funds)  demonstrated  significant  deposits  which
             were consistent with funds being sent from Sweden by her  son.
             The judge found that  that  was  used  to  support  the  first
             Appellant who was living in the family home in  Bangladesh  at
             that time (at [21]).

          5) When the first Appellant applied for a student Visa, the entry
             clearance officer was satisfied that the sponsor's  income  in
             Sweden as at August 2007  was  sufficient  to  enable  him  to
             support the first Appellant throughout his proposed period  of
             study in the UK (at [22]).

          6) The judge accepted the evidence of the witness  that  when  he
             travelled to Sweden in June 2009, June 2012 and June 2013  and
             December 2013 he collected cash from the sponsor  to  give  to
             the first Appellant on his return to the UK (at [23]).

          7) There were documents that suggested that the sponsor's  income
             from employment was received in Sweden,  rather  than  UK  (at
             [24]).

          8) When the first Appellant arrived in the UK, the sponsor rented
             accommodation which was sufficient to accommodate not only the
             first Appellant but the sponsor. The sponsor had paid for  the
             accommodation in the UK (at [29]).

          9) The judge accepted that the Appellants were dependent  now  on
             the sponsor and that the second Appellant had  been  dependent
             since her arrival here as the wife of the first Appellant. The
             judge found that the sponsor had supported the first Appellant
             financially since his arrival in Sweden in 1995  and  that  he
             had continued to do so since. He took into  account  that  the
             Appellants had worked in the UK, but their earnings and  part-
             time employment were not sufficient to cover  their  share  of
             the rent and their maintenance costs. Therefore,  they  needed
             the financial  support  of  the  sponsor  in  order  to  cover
             essentials are  living  in  the  UK.  In  summary,  the  judge
             accepted that the Appellants are and have  been  dependent  on
             the sponsor as they claimed (at [31]).

         10) There  is  no  evidence  the  sponsor's  employment  or  self-
             employment in the UK prior to 2014. The sponsor was living and
             working in Sweden until 2014. The judge did not find that  the
             sponsor was residing  in  the  UK  with  the  first  Appellant
             between 2007 and 2014. The sponsor was not  exercising  treaty
             rights in the UK between 2007 and 2014 (at [36]).

 9. The judge concluded that the Appellants did not satisfy the Regulations
    and dismissed the appeals. As can be seen from the  findings  of  fact,
    although the FtTJ found that  the  Appellants  were  dependent  on  the
    sponsor at what the judge considered  to  be  the  material  times  (as
    reflected a paragraph 31), the sponsor was not residing in  the  UK  in
    accordance  with  EU  law  from  2007-2014  and  therefore  the   judge
    considered that the Appellants were not  entitled  to  residence  cards
    (subject to  the  Respondent's  exercise  of  discretion)  pursuant  to
    Regulations 8 (2) and 17 (4) of the 2006 Regulations (see paragraph  36
    - 37 and 39 of the decision).

10. On 2nd October 2018 grounds of appeal were  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants and whilst permission  was  initially  refused  by  the  FtT
    permission to appeal the decision was granted on  14  January  2019  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane.

11. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, it was common ground  between
    the advocates that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  the  correct  course  to
    adopt would be for the decision to be set aside and for the Tribunal to
    re-make the appeal by allowing the appeals.

12.  It is therefore only necessary for me to set out why I agree with that
    course and to set out briefly my reasons. I am satisfied  that  grounds
    are made out.

13.  Mr Biggs on behalf of the Appellants relied on the  redrafted  grounds
    that he submitted on 22 November 2018. At paragraph 4, he had  set  out
    three points which he relied upon. Firstly, the judge erred in  law  in
    concluding  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Regulations 8 (2) and 17 (4) (a) of the 2006 Regulations by incorrectly
    stating that it  was  a  requirement  of  those  Regulations  that  the
    Appellants EEA national sponsor should be resident in the UK under  the
    2006 Regulations or EU law or otherwise from 2007 -  2014  or  at  some
    point during that period. He submitted that the decision  of  the  FtTJ
    was contrary to the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Aladeselu  and  others
    (2006 Regulations - Reg 8) Nigeria [2011] UK UT00253  as  confirmed  by
    the Court of Appeal in their decision of Aladeselu [2013] EWCA Civ  144
    (see paragraphs 42 - 46 of the Court  of  Appeal  decisions.  Mr  Biggs
    submitted that at paragraph 44 of that decision, the Secretary of State
    had made an important concession that there was no temporal  limitation
    and therefore a dependent can be in the UK  before  or  after  the  EEA
    national.

14. In support of his legal argument, Mr Biggs made further submissions  by
    reference  to  the  authorities  cited  and  summarised  in  Aladeselu,
    including those of Metock, Bigia and Rahman  to  demonstrate  that  the
    clear approach set out in Aladeselu was  correct.  Thus,  he  submitted
    when applying that decision, the issue is whether at the time the  FtTJ
    came to assess whether the Regulations were  met,  the  sponsor  was  a
    qualified  person  under  the  2006  Regulations  (i.e,  that  he   was
    exercising treaty rights) and also that the Appellants  were  dependent
    upon him and had been so dependent as required by the Regulations.

15. Mr Avery accepted that  the  judge  erred  in  law  when  reaching  the
    conclusion that the sponsor was required to be  "resident"  in  the  UK
    from 2007 - 2014 under the Regulations in the light of the decision  of
    Aladeselu. He further accepted that there had been no challenge to  the
    FtTJ findings of fact and as set out above, it had been  found  by  the
    judge that the Appellants were dependent  upon  him  and  had  been  so
    dependent as required by the Regulations.

16. Furthermore, there was no  dispute  that  the  sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights from 2014 (see paragraph 40 of  the  FtTJ  decision).  Mr
    Biggs made reference to  the  "overwhelming  evidence"  that  had  been
    before the Tribunal as to the  nature  and  extent  of  employment.  In
    particular, in accordance with his witness statement at paragraphs 11 -
    13 (page  23)  there  were  letters  from  his  employers  (page  172),
    payslips, copies of the 60s for 2015  and  2016,  and  in  relation  to
    current employment, the bundle at pages 183 onwards  provided  evidence
    of the recent exercise of treaty rights. As to self-employment that was
    evidence at page 204. This was not disputed by the Secretary of State.

17.  I accept those submissions made by Mr Biggs and therefore it has  been
    demonstrated that the decision of the FtTJ involves the  making  of  an
    error on a point of  law.  Both  parties  are  in  agreement  that  the
    decision should  be  set  aside.  It  is  further  agreed  between  the
    advocates that in the light of the factual findings made by the  judge,
    which have not been the subject of challenge, that the  appeals  should
    be allowed. There was only one issue  outstanding  that  had  not  been
    addressed as recorded at paragraph 38 of the FtTJ decision,  which  was
    the requirement that the sponsor must have been an EEA national at  the
    relevant time for prior dependency. The FtTJ  did  not  know  when  the
    sponsor became a Swedish citizen. However, evidence has  been  provided
    before the Tribunal at this hearing to demonstrate  that  he  became  a
    Swedish citizen in  1999.  As  accepted  by  Mr  Avery,  this  did  not
    undermine any of the factual findings made by the judge.

18. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtTJ for the reasons set  out
    above. I remake the appeals by allowing  the  appeals  insofar  as  the
    Respondent shall be required  to  consider  exercising  his  discretion
    under Regulation 17 (4) as set out in  the  decision  of  Aladeselu  at
    paragraph 52 and in accordance with the factual findings made and  this
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set aside,  and  the  appeal  is  remade  as
follows: the appeals are allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19/02/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


