
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02528/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2018                              |On 08 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                sajid rehman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 11 September  1978.   He
    is married to a Polish national and  they  have  two  children.   On  3
    September 2016 he applied to the Respondent for  a  Residence  Card  as
    confirmation of his right of permanent residence.  On 13 February  2017
    the Respondent refused the application on the basis he  had  not  shown
    that his wife who was his Sponsor had exercised Treaty  Rights  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years.  There was a  gap
    in her work record between December 2006 and February 2009 and  between
    December 2013 and March 2016.  There was evidence  that  the  Appellant
    himself had been employed for more than five years.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 2. By a decision promulgated on 25  July  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Ian Howard allowed the appeal of  the  Appellant  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to issue a permanent residence card.

 3. On 27 February 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal to the Respondent on  the  ground  it  was
    arguable the Judge had erred in  the  application  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended to the factual matrix.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 4. The Appellant continued to be unrepresented and attended  the  hearing.
    I explained the purpose and procedure to be adopted.  He confirmed  his
    wife cared full-time for their two children.  In answer to  a  question
    from me he said he did not understand the difference between a retained
    right of residence and a permanent right of residence.

 5. The Appellant insisted that in 2009 when he was issued with a Residence
    Card his wife was not working and was pregnant  and  that  evidence  of
    that pregnancy had been supplied  to  the  Respondent.   He  could  not
    understand why the position was accepted in 2009 that his wife was  not
    working it should be any different in 2018 in relation  to  his  latest
    application.

 6. There followed a lengthy discussion between the Appellant,  Mr  Bramble
    for the Home Office  and  myself  with  the  purpose  of  enabling  the
    Appellant  to  understand  the  legal  principles  applicable  to   his
    situation and in particular that any Residence  Card  he  might  obtain
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 was entirely dependent  on
    the circumstances of his wife, an EEA national.

 7. I am satisfied that at the hearing, the Appellant had an  understanding
    why any application he might make for a Residence Card under  the  2006
    Regs was entirely dependent upon the circumstances of his wife  who  is
    an EEA national.  I cannot, of course, comment  whether  the  Appellant
    would be able to recall and explain the position to any legal  adviser.
    Both Mr Bramble and myself strongly recommended to the  Appellant  that
    he needed urgently to take good legal advice on his position  and  what
    he might do to ameliorate his situation.

 8. Mr Bramble relied on  the  Respondent's  grounds  for  appeal  and  the
    grounds as identified in the grant of permission  to  appeal  by  Judge
    Hollingworth.

 9. I find Judge Howard erred in law at paragraph 14  of  his  decision  in
    which he did not take account of the fact that the  Appellant  had  not
    shown his wife had been  exercising  Treaty  Rights  for  the  relevant
    period of time to enable him to claim permanent residence.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and I re-make  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal which was doomed  to  failure  from  the
    start for the reasons already given.

11. There was no request for an anonymity direction and had considered  the
    appeal, I find none is warranted.

NOTICE SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside and is remade in the following terms:-


    The appeal of the Appellant against refusal of  a  Permanent  Residence
    Card is dismissed.


    The appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
    allowed.


     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 02.05. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



