

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02743/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision promulgated         |
|On 19th October 2018                          |On 23rd October 2018         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  BRYAN [B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: In Person.
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant, a citizen of Brazil born on 6 February 2004, appeals
        with permission a decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  McLaren
        promulgated on 31  May  2018  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the refusal to issue a residence card as
        a family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in  the
        United Kingdom.



Error of law


     2. The Judge noted the appeal was to be dealt with on the  papers  but
        claimed to have been provided with the refusal letter  and  grounds
        of appeal only. The Judge noted the application was refused as  the
        decision maker concluded the appellant had failed  to  provide  any
        evidence to support his application showing he was  in  the  United
        Kingdom. At [12] the Judge states the appellant's case consisted of
        a statement on the appeal form that he was in the UK  in  full-time
        education and the  address  of  that  establishment,  but  that  no
        evidence was provided. Accordingly the Judge  found  the  appellant
        had not discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to  the  required
        standard and dismissed the appeal.
     3. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  asserting  that  the
        deadline for paper submissions was 17 May 2018, the day before  the
        matter was considered by the Judge on the papers, and  that  a  24-
        page bundle including letters  from  the  appellant's  school  were
        faxed to Hatton Cross on 16 May 2018 with hard copies being  posted
        by special delivery. The appellant states  the  bundle  arrived  at
        Hatton Cross within the deadline providing proof of  delivery  with
        the application to appeal.
     4. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  as  it  is  said  an  arguable
        unfairness has arisen and can be seen to have arisen.
     5. In his Rule 24 response dated  25  September  2018  the  respondent
        confirm he does not  oppose  the  application  for  permission  and
        invites the Tribunal to determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
        hearing to consider whether the appellant meets the requirements of
        the Regulations as a family member.
     6. On the basis  of  that  concession  and  clear  evidence  that  the
        appellant's bundle had been filed within the time  limit  provided,
        even if not before the Judge on 18 May 2018, I find  the  claim  to
        procedural unfairness sufficient to amount to an arguable error  of
        law made out and accordingly set the decision aside.




Discussion



     7. The Upper Tribunal is in a position to remake the decision today.
     8. A reading of the refusal letter shows that the sole basis  for  the
        refusal of the residence card application  was  an  allegation  the
        appellant had failed to prove that he  is  present  in  the  United
        Kingdom. The evidence provided in support of this matter shows that
        the appellant was in fact born in the United Kingdom on 6  February
        2004 in Basingstoke. It also  shows  that  the  respondent  sent  a
        request to the appellant to file  his  biometric  documents  on  28
        December 2017, providing a 15 working day deadline to do so,  which
        the appellant complied with. A point made by the applicant is  that
        it is impossible for him to have provided his biometrics, taken  at
        a nominated centre in the United Kingdom, if he  was  not  in  fact
        present in the UK.
     9. No other issues are raised in the  refusal  letter  to  oppose  the
        application for a residence card.
    10. Evidence has been provided by the appellant's  father,  an  Italian
        national, of  employment  as  a  company  director  in  the  United
        Kingdom. There is therefore evidence  of  the  exercise  of  treaty
        rights by the EEA national.
    11. It was accepted by Mr Walker that as the appellant  was  physically
        before the Upper Tribunal today this is clear evidence he is in the
        United Kingdom.
    12. Accordingly I find no merit in the sole ground relied upon  by  the
        decision-maker to refuse the  application  for  a  residence  card,
        namely that there was no evidence the appellant is  in  the  United
        Kingdom and allow the appeal on this basis.

Decision

    13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 October 2018












