
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02648/2016
                                                               EA/02650/2016
                                                               EA/02653/2016
                                                               EA/02654/2016
                                                               EA/02652/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd November 2016                |On 23 November 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                   ALI [A]
                                 FATIMA [K]
                                   [S A1]
                                   [S A2]
                                    [Z A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellants  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
    Grant-Hutchinson, promulgated on 12th July 2016, by which she dismissed
    the appeals against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  to
    issue this Dutch family with residence  cards  confirming  a  permanent
    right of residence under the EEA Regulations.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal determined the appeals on  the  papers  at  the
    Appellants' request.

 3. No one appeared on behalf the Appellants before me and  the  Appellants
    did not attend either. The Tribunal contacted the  representatives  who
    indicated that they were unaware that a hearing had  been  listed.  For
    reasons which will become apparent I proceeded to deal with the  matter
    in their absence.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the applications  because  she  was  not
    satisfied that the First Appellant had been a qualified  person  for  a
    continuous period of five years under Regulation  15  (1)  (a)  of  the
    Regulations. The Judge set out the relevant parts  of  the  Regulations
    and then considered the evidence. The judge was satisfied, on the basis
    of payslips, and P45s and medical evidence that the First Appellant had
    been a worker as defined by Regulation 6 from  15th  March  2008  until
    30th April 2011 when he became permanently incapacitated. On that basis
    the Judge found that the First Appellant clearly fell within Regulation
    5 (3) of the 2006 Regulations. He is a worker who has ceased  activity.
    He had been working in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  two  years
    before 30th April 2011 and then, due to his medical conditions, he  has
    been permanently incapacitated and unable  to  work  since.  The  Judge
    referred herself to the case of FMB (EEA Regulations - reg  6  (2)  (a)
    "temporarily unable to work") Uganda [2010] UKUT 447  (IAC)  and  found
    that there was no evidence to indicate that  this  Appellant  would  be
    able to work in future or that  his  condition  could  be  regarded  as
    "temporary". Having so found throughout the body of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons, the Judge then at paragraph 18 found that  the  Appellant  had
    not discharged the burden of proof and that the reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent justified the refusal.

 5. It is apparent from reading the Decision and Reasons as  a  whole  that
    paragraph 18 has been inserted in error because throughout the document
    the judge has expressed herself satisfied that the Appellant meets  the
    requirements of the Regulations and the appeals should have succeeded.

 6. Mr Avery, on behalf the Secretary of State, had not had  sight  of  the
    Decision and Reasons prior to the hearing and having been given time to
    read it accepted that the final paragraph of the document did not match
    the body of it and it was clearly the Judge's intention  to  allow  the
    appeals.

 7. Determining an appeal against the weight  of  findings  is  a  material
    error of law such that I set aside the Decision and Reasons. There  has
    been no challenge by the Secretary of State to the factual findings and
    so I redecide the appeals on the basis of  the  findings  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and allow the appeals.

Notice of Decision

 8. The Appellants appeals to the Upper Tribunal are allowed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22nd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

