
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02942/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Friday 11 January 2019                |On 25 January 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                         MR ADEYINKA ROTIMI ADELEYE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not appearing nor represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Roopnarine-Davies promulgated on 14 June 2018 ("the Decision")
       dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  29
       March 2018 refusing him  a  residence  card  as  the  family  member
       (spouse) of an EEA (Polish) national, Miss Apanasewicz.  The  reason
       for  the  Judge's  dismissal  of  the  appeal  is  that  there   was
       insufficient evidence that  Ms  Apanasewicz  was  exercising  Treaty
       rights in the UK at all relevant times ([3] of the Decision).


    2. The Appellant challenges the Decision on  two  grounds.   First,  he
       says that the Judge erred in requiring the Appellant  to  produce  a
       payslip for May 2018 when he was required to  lodge  his  bundle  so
       that it was received by 21 May 2018 by which time  the  May  payslip
       would not be available.  Second, he submits that the Judge erred  by
       not considering in the alternative if Ms Apanasewicz was nonetheless
       exercising Treaty rights as  a  jobseeker  based  on  the  offer  of
       employment letter which appears at [AB/21-122].


    3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy
       in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "... 3.   In the decision  the  Judge  made  findings  on  the
             question of whether the EEA national was a "worker" within the
             Regulations.   However,  it  is  arguable  that  she  attached
             insufficient weight to the evidence adduced by the  Appellant,
             such as to amount to an error of law.   It  is  also  arguable
             that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  other  aspects  of  the
             exercise of Treaty rights, including job seeking.


             4.  The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

    4. The matter comes before us to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.


    5. On 9 January 2019, Mr Deller on behalf of  the  Respondent  informed
       the Tribunal by e mail that, following a  further  application,  the
       Appellant has been granted a residence card  on  6  September  2018.
       Unfortunately, Mr Deller had only just been made aware of  this  and
       was unable to resolve the appeal by agreement with the Appellant  as
       the Appellant does not have legal representatives.  Mr Deller had no
       address for correspondence with the Appellant.  Mr Deller went on to
       say that "[f]or what it  is  worth  my  provisional  view  had  been
       sympathy with the grounds on which permission was granted".


    6. No doubt due to the Appellant having  obtained  the  residence  card
       which he sought, he did not attend the  hearing  and  was  therefore
       unrepresented before us.  Mr Deller accepted that the granting of  a
       residence card does not lead to statutory abandonment of the  appeal
       in the same way as does the grant of leave  to  remain  due  to  the
       wording of the statute.

    7. We discussed with Mr Deller the ways in which the  appeal  might  be
       resolved in the Appellant's absence.  In light of the fact  that  Mr
       Deller accepted that the grounds of appeal might have merit and that
       the Respondent has  since  been  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  is
       entitled to a residence card as the spouse  of  Ms  Apanasewicz,  Mr
       Deller conceded that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
       Decision, that it should be set aside and that the appeal should  be
       allowed.



      DECISION


    Based on  the  Respondent's  concession  and  our  own  review  of  the
    evidence, we are satisfied that the Decision contains a material  error
    of law.   The Appellant could not have produced any later payslips  due
    to the date of filing of evidence and the offer  letter  issued  to  Ms
    Apanasewicz for new employment beginning on 1 May 2018 is evidence that
    (at the very least) she was a jobseeker at that time.


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies promulgated
    on 14 June 2018 is set aside.


    We re-make the decision.  For  the  above  reasons  and  based  on  the
    Respondent's concession, we allow the Appellant's appeal. The Appellant
    has already been granted the residence card which he seeks.

      Signed           [pic] Dated:  11 January 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
