

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02885/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Friday 1 March 2019                        |On 07 March 2019             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                ZOHAIB WAHEED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel instructed by Makka Solicitors
                    Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Bulpitt  promulgated  on  5  December  2018  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 2 March 2017 refusing the Appellant a residence  card
       as the family member (spouse) of an EEA (Polish) national,  Ms  [N].
       This is the second appeal in relation to the Appellant's  case.   On
       21 June 2016, his previous appeal against a refusal of  a  residence
       card dated 25 February 2015 was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge White ("the First Decision").  Mr Melvin produced  a  copy  of
       the First Decision during the hearing before me and my attention was
       drawn to the relevant parts of it for my purposes.


    2. On both occasions, the Respondent has refused to issue  a  residence
       card as  he  contends  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  is  one  of
       convenience.  Both Judge Bulpitt and Judge White found that it  was.
       The appeals were therefore dismissed on the basis that as a party to
       a marriage of convenience, the  Appellant  does  not  qualify  as  a
       spouse and therefore is not to be regarded as the family  member  of
       an EEA national.


    3. The Appellant contends that Judge Bulpitt was not entitled  to  rely
       on the findings of Judge White as to the existence of a marriage  of
       convenience as Judge White's conclusions came at a time prior to the
       case of Sadovska and  another  v  SSHD  (Scotland)  [2017]  UKSC  54
       ("Sadovska") since when it has been understood that what has  to  be
       established in  a  marriage  of  convenience  case  is  whether  the
       predominant aim of the marriage is to gain an immigration advantage.
        Sadovska post-dates the First Decision.

    4. The Appellant accepts that Judge Bulpitt was entitled  to  take  the
       First Decision as his starting point but argues that  he  failed  to
       take  into  account  that  the  First  Decision   proceeded   on   a
       misunderstanding of the issue and that  Judge  Bulpitt  should  have
       taken that into account.  He also submits  that  Judge  Bulpitt  has
       failed to consider whether immigration advantage was the predominant
       aim of both parties and not just that of the Appellant.  It is  said
       that this is contrary to the approach in Sadovska.

    5. The Appellant  also  takes  issue  with  the  Judge's  finding  that
       immigration advantage was the predominant aim based  on  the  facts.
       He points out that he did not marry Ms [N] until a year after he was
       faced with removal.  He says that  he  faced  removal  in  September
       2012, that they applied for a residence card as  unmarried  partners
       in April 2013 but did not marry until November 2013.


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew
       on 2 January 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:


            "... [2]   It is apparent from paragraph 31 of the decision the
           Judge  made  clear  findings  that  the  marriage  between   the
           Appellant  and  his  EEA  Sponsor  was  entered  into   for   an
           immigration advantage.  However, in accordance with the guidance
           in Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54  the  objective  to  obtain  a
           right of entry and residence must be the predominant purpose for
           the marriage to be  one  of  convenience.   The  Judge  made  no
           findings in this  regard.   Accordingly,  I  find  there  is  an
           arguable error of law."


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and if so to either remit the  appeal  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal or to re-make the decision.  The Respondent  has
       filed a Rule 24 Notice on 27 February 2019  seeking  to  uphold  the
       Decision.


    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


    8. Mr Davison focussed on [30] and [31] of the Decision  as  being  the
       findings under challenge.  Those paragraphs read as follows:


            "[30]      Applying this finding  to  what  is  the  issue  for
           determination in this appeal - namely whether the  marriage  was
           entered  into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of   gaining   an
           immigration advantage - I must consider whether the endurance of
           the relationship between the appellant and Ms [N] makes it  more
           likely that the marriage was entered into for  a  purpose  other
           than an immigration advantage.  On one hand the endurance of the
           relationship for a not insignificant period of time does suggest
           that there was more to  the  marriage  than  simply  gaining  an
           immigration  advantage.   However,  it   is   significant   that
           throughout the time the relationship has endured  the  appellant
           has used it as grounds for an immigration application.  In  this
           context the endurance of the relationship is equally  consistent
           with the marriage being for the predominant purpose  of  gaining
           an immigration advantage.  I find therefore the fact that  there
           is a marriage which has endured gives me little assistance  when
           determining  what  was  the  predominant  purpose  when  it  was
           commenced.
            [31] Balancing all these factors, taking as my  starting  point
           the decision reached by Judge White,  who  assessed  this  issue
           much closer in time to the  commencement  of  the  marriage  and
           attaching particular  weight  to  the  clear  incentive  to  the
           appellant  of  entering  into  a  marriage  for  an  immigration
           advantage, his apparent willingness to do so and  the  lies  and
           inconsistencies over when their relationship began, I find  that
           it is more likely than not  that  the  appellant's  relationship
           with  Ms  [N]  and  their  subsequent  marriage  was   for   the
           predominant  purpose  of  obtaining   for   the   appellant   an
           immigration advantage.  On the definition in the  regulations  I
           therefore  find  on  balance  that  this  is   a   marriage   of
           convenience."


    9. Mr Davison accepted that in light of what is said  at  [31]  of  the
       Decision, he could not rely upon Judge  Andrews'  assertion  in  the
       grant of permission that Judge Bulpitt had made no findings  of  his
       own about the predominant purpose of  the  marriage.   He  submitted
       however that the  wording  of  the  Judge's  findings  was  somewhat
       unfortunate in the reference to the endurance  of  the  relationship
       being  "equally  consistent"  with  the  predominant  purpose  being
       immigration advantage.  He said that it was hard to  say  that  this
       was the predominant  purpose  if  there  was  an  equally  plausible
       explanation for the marriage.


   10. I do not accept that submission.  To begin with, Mr  Melvin  submits
       and I accept that the finding that the relationship is "enduring" is
       not the same as saying that the marriage is genuine and  subsisting.
       Mr Davison accepted that, even if it were,  the  Judge  could  still
       find the marriage to be one of convenience (as the  Judge  notes  at
       [9] of the Decision).  Particularly in light of what is said at [18]
       to [29] of the Decision concerning inconsistencies in  the  evidence
       about the relationship before both Judge Bulpitt and Judge White,  I
       do not accept that the Judge was saying any more than, as  he  finds
       at [28] of the Decision, that "there  is  an  enduring  relationship
       between the two from their marriage until  the  hearing,  which  has
       involved them both living at the address in Grove Road".


   11. The Judge clearly understood that the burden of proof  lies  on  the
       Respondent ([8] of the Decision) and from what is there said and  as
       directed at [30] of the Decision that the standard is the balance of
       probabilities.  All that the Judge is saying at [30] of the Decision
       is that he does not accept that the endurance  of  the  relationship
       means that it was not a marriage of convenience at the outset.


   12. Turning then to the main ground on which permission was granted,  Mr
       Davison submitted that there is now a "different gloss" in  relation
       to the distinction between a genuine relationship and a marriage  of
       convenience and that Judge Bulpitt erred in  adopting  the  negative
       finding from the First Decision without  recognising  the  different
       test.  If Judge Bulpitt found that the relationship was genuine  and
       enduring now, he needed to consider  how  that  should  sit  with  a
       finding that the marriage was initially one of convenience.  He also
       said that the finding needed to be considered in the context of such
       factors as the attitude of the parties  to  marriage  generally.  If
       they believed in the institution of marriage,  then  the  fact  that
       they were committed to each other would lead them to marry for  that
       reason.  This was something which the Judge failed to consider.

   13. He drew my attention in particular to the distinction  between  what
       is said by Judge White at [31] of the First  Decision  and  what  is
       said at [28] of the Decision which he said reflected the  difference
       in the situation between 2016 and now  and  the  difference  in  the
       evidence on which the findings are based.   Paragraph  [31]  of  the
       First Decision reads as follows:

           "I am in no doubt that  the  answers  given  in  interview  were
           sufficiently discrepant and otherwise concerning to raise a real
           doubt over the genuineness of this  relationship,  and  thus  to
           discharge the initial evidential burden  on  the  respondent  of
           raising a case to answer that this is or may be  a  marriage  of
           convenience."


       Paragraph [28] of the Decision reads as follows:


           "It is now five years  since  the  appellant  and  Ms  [N]  were
           married in November 2013.  The vast  majority  of  the  evidence
           adduced before me is about  what  has  happened  in  those  five
           years.  Both the appellant and  Ms  [N]  attended  the  marriage
           interviews in February 2015, both attended  the  hearing  before
           Judge White in April 2016 and both attended this  hearing.   The
           evidence of Ms Rochnowska and Mr [N] that the appellant  and  Ms
           [N] have lived  at  the  same  address  in  Grove  Rd,  Hounslow
           throughout  this  time  was  largely  unchallenged.   Both   the
           appellant and Ms [N] were found at the  Grove  Road  address  by
           Immigration Officer Muir when he attended without appointment at
           07:12  hours  of  27  January  2017.   In  the  context  of  his
           unfavourable report I consider it significant  that  Immigration
           Officer Muir  does  not  mention  seeing  anything  within  that
           address which undermines the claim by the appellant and  Ms  [N]
           that they live at that address.  There is overwhelming  evidence
           that from May 2014 until the date of hearing Ms [N]  has  worked
           at the same care home and that her employers, HMRC, her bank and
           various doctors and hospital have all corresponded with  her  at
           the same address in Grove Rd, Hounslow throughout that time.  On
           the basis of this evidence I find  that  there  is  an  enduring
           relationship between the  two  from  their  marriage  until  the
           hearing, which has involved them both living at the  address  in
           Grove Road."


   14. Those two paragraphs need to be read in context.  First, Judge White
       was considering at [31] of the  First  Decision  only  the  evidence
       relied upon as establishing the evidential burden by the Respondent.
        Although there were discrepancies in the documentary evidence as to
       residence at the Grove Road address, Judge White accepted at [32] of
       the First Decision that they lived at  that  address  but  concluded
       that the "significance to be attached to them sharing an address  is
       minimal" because Grove Road is a house in multiple  occupation  (see
       [15] of the First Decision).


   15. Second, as I have already observed, there is  a  distinction  to  be
       drawn between finding an enduring relationship  and  a  genuine  and
       subsisting marriage.  I do not accept, based on the  Judge's  record
       of  the  evidence  and  the  inconsistencies  which  he   identifies
       throughout the Decision (which includes consideration  also  of  the
       evidence on which Judge White relied), that Judge Bulpitt was  doing
       more than recording in the Appellant's favour that  he  still  lives
       with Ms Niemic and, as he says at [30] of the  Decision,  that  this
       might  be  indicative  of  immigration  advantage  not   being   the
       predominant aim of the marriage.


   16. Judge Bulpitt has taken as his starting point the  findings  in  the
       First Decision and what Judge White there says about  the  evidence.
       The law at that time was based on the Court of Appeal's decision  in
       Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and the Upper Tribunal's decision  in
       Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT
       38 (IAC).  The burden and standard of proof were therefore the same.
        Further, as Judge White records at [9] of the First Decision:


           "A marriage of convenience is an abuse of free movement  rights.
           It is a marriage entered into for  the  purpose  of  immigration
           advantage.  On the authorities the question whether  a  marriage
           is one of convenience is to be determined at  the  time  of  the
           marriage.  The relationship  between  the  parties  might  later
           change but the marriage  cannot  either  become  a  marriage  of
           convenience if it was not at the outset or cease to be one if it
           was.  I  note  that  in  Rosa  a  comment  was  made  about  the
           "interesting possibility" of a marriage changing its nature, but
           that was obiter since the issue did not arise on the facts.  Nor
           does it in this case."


       Whilst Judge White observed that the issue was yet to be the subject
       of binding authority, he concluded that the issue did not  arise  on
       the facts of the Appellant's case.  I can therefore see no  need  to
       consider whether there is any  difference  in  "gloss"  between  the
       legal position then and at the time of  the  Decision.  Judge  White
       made a finding of fact that the issue regarding  whether  a  genuine
       relationship could still have been a marriage of convenience did not
       arise at that time.


   17. Nor do I understand there to be any other legal distinction  between
       the position at the time of the First Decision and the time  of  the
       Decision  or  at  least  not  one  which  could  make  any  material
       difference.  At the time of the First Decision, the prevailing  case
       law was that of Papajorgji.  The test was stated to be whether there
       is a marriage of convenience based on the purpose  of  the  marriage
       being to gain an immigration advantage (as Judge White identifies in
       the extract cited above).  Insofar as Sadovska modifies that test to
       whether the immigration advantage is the predominant purpose and not
       the sole one, that cannot assist the Appellant because the burden of
       proof is on the Respondent and, if anything, what he has to prove is
       less.


   18. Further and in any event,  as  I  have  already  noted,  Mr  Davison
       conceded that Judge Bulpitt did make findings of his own.   That  is
       clearly the case based on what is said at [31] of the Decision.   He
       takes Judge White's finding that the marriage is one of  convenience
       as the starting point ([17] and [31]) but does so only  because,  as
       he notes, the Judge was considering the issue nearer to the time  of
       the marriage.  He also has regard to the evidence before Judge White
       and particularly the inconsistencies  with  that  evidence  and  the
       evidence now.  That he was clearly entitled to do.   The  Judge  has
       considered all the evidence before him and made findings  which  are
       reasoned.


   19.  The  Appellant  raises  a  factual  issue  concerning  the  Judge's
       understanding of the timing of the relationship and  says  that  the
       Judge failed to understand that the Appellant  was  not  relying  on
       immigration advantage because he did not marry Ms [N] until November
       2013 when he was made subject to removal in  September  2012.   That
       point though is readily explained by what the Judge says at [19] and
       [20] of the Decision as follows:


            "[19]      It is equally evident that the  appellant  was  well
           aware of the immigration advantage  to  be  obtained  through  a
           relationship  with  an  EEA  national  because   when   he   was
           interviewed by immigration officers on September 2012 he claimed
           to have been in a relationship for  year  with  Karolina  Halina
           from Poland.  In his evidence before me the  appellant  conceded
           that this was a lie, which he told because he  had  two  friends
           who had married EEA nationals and they had told him  if  he  did
           the same he would be able to come out of the  detention  centre.
           He accepted that he  had  never  been  in  a  relationship  with
           Karolina Halina.  I find therefore  that  by  the  time  he  was
           detained for the  purpose  of  being  removed  from  the  United
           Kingdom on 28 September 2012 the appellant had the incentive  to
           commence a relationship with an EEA national for the predominant
           purpose of securing an immigration advantage and  also  that  he
           had demonstrated a willingness to do so.
            [20] It was both the evidence of  both  the  appellant  and  Ms
           [N]'s before Judge White however, that they had met in June 2012
           and moved in together before his detention  in  September  2012.
           Significantly evidence of the  Immigration  Officer's  interview
           with the appellant on 28 September 2012 was  not  placed  before
           Judge White.  Despite this Judge  White  still  did  not  accept
           their evidence about when the relationship began because of  the
           inconsistencies in their evidence, in particular  concerning  Ms
           [N]'s travel to the United Kingdom in June and  September  2012,
           inconsistencies which led Judge White to reject their  assertion
           that the relationship had begun by September 2012.  That finding
           by Judge White is only strengthened  by  the  discovery  of  the
           appellant's lie in his immigration interview.  There would  have
           been no logic to the appellant inventing a relationship  with  a
           Polish national in that interview if he was in fact already in a
           relationship with a real Polish national."


   20. In other words, on the facts, the Judge rejected the claim that  the
       Appellant had been in a relationship with Ms [N] at the time that he
       was  detained  for  removal  and  found  that  he  only  formed  the
       relationship thereafter.  He found at [27] of the Decision that  the
       Appellant had only formed the relationship  after  he  was  released
       from detention "when the appellant was looking for an  EEA  national
       on which he could found an application for an EEA  residence  card."
       That is a finding on which the Judge placed "particular  weight"  as
       he was entitled to do.


   21. That also deals with the point made  about  the  intention  of  both
       parties.  It is evident from reading [18] to [29]  of  the  Decision
       that the Judge did not accept the evidence  of  Ms  [N]  as  to  the
       relationship either.  This is not one of those cases where one party
       to the marriage believes it to be genuine and the  other  does  not.
       Further, as I pointed out to Mr  Davison  the  need  to  assess  the
       intentions of both parties arises from what is said in Sadovska.  In
       that case, both the EEA national and  non-EEA  national  spouse  had
       brought appeals against their removal.  Ms [N] is  not  a  party  to
       this appeal.  The Respondent has not taken any action against her.

   22. Having regard to  the  totality  of  the  Judge's  findings  on  the
       evidence at [17] to [32] of the Decision, I am  satisfied  that  the
       Judge reached a conclusion open to  him  on  the  evidence  for  the
       reasons there given.  It  follows  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       Decision does not contain an error of law.   Accordingly,  I  uphold
       the Decision.


    DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bulpitt
    promulgated  on  5  December  2018  with  the  consequence   that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands dismissed

      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 5 March 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
