
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02289/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2019                  |On 30 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                          Ms Catherine Nduta Ngari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr C. Ikegwuruka, OISC, Almonds Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Catherine Nduta Ngari, is a citizen of Kenya, born on 13
    December 1992. She appeals against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp  MBE  promulgated  on  16  August  2019.   The  judge
    dismissed her appeal against a decision of the respondent to refuse her
    application for a permanent residence card as a family member  who  has
    retained the  rights  of  residents  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").



Factual background

 2. On 21 August 2014, the appellant married a citizen of Portugal. She was
    issued with a residence card as the family member of an EEA national in
    2015.  Unfortunately, the relationship broke down, and, on 14  February
    2018, divorce proceedings were initiated. The appellant and her  former
    husband divorced on 21 August 2018. On  4  March  2019,  the  appellant
    applied for a permanent residence card  as  a  family  member  who  had
    retained the right of residence under regulation 15(1)(f) of  the  2016
    Regulations.

 3. On 1 May 2019, the respondent refused the application.  The  respondent
    was not satisfied that  the  appellant's  former  husband  had  been  a
    "qualified person" or had enjoyed the right of permanent residence when
    divorce proceedings were initiated. The  appellant  had  also  provided
    insufficient evidence that she was residing in the United Kingdom under
    the regulations in  her  own  capacity,  either  at  the  date  of  the
    initiation  of  divorce  proceedings,  or  thereafter.   Finally,   the
    appellant had not provided evidence that she had resided in the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the regulations for the required  continuous
    period of five years.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge E M Simpson of the First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that the appellant had satisfied "one of the  two
    routes open to her in retaining a right  of  residence  under  EU  law,
    following  her  divorce,  namely  the  retained  rights  of   residence
    provisions under Reg 10, and accordingly her appeal fell to be  allowed
    on that ground..."

Legal framework

 5. Under regulation 19(2) to the 2016 Regulations, a non-EEA national  who
    enjoys the right of permanent residence  is  entitled  to  a  permanent
    residence card.

 6. Regulation 15 sets out the criteria for the acquisition of the right of
    permanent residence.  It provides:

         "(1) The following persons acquire  the  right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom permanently-

             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
             accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period  of
             five years;

             (b)  a family member of an EEA national  who  is  not  an  EEA
             national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the
             EEA national  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years;

             (c)  a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;

             (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person who
             has ceased activity, provided-

                  (i)  the person was the family member  of  the  worker  or
                  self-employed person at the  point  the  worker  or  self-
                  employed person ceased activity; and

                  (ii)  at that point, the family member enjoyed a right  to
                  reside on the basis of being the  family  member  of  that
                  worker or self-employed person;

             (e)  a person who was the family member of a worker  or  self-
             employed person where-

                  (i)  the worker or self-employed person has died;

                  (ii) the family member resided with the  worker  or  self-
                  employed person immediately before the death; and

                  (iii)    the worker or self-employed  person  had  resided
                  continuously in the United Kingdom for at least two  years
                  immediately before dying or the death was the result of an
                  accident at work or an occupational disease;

             (f)  a person who-

                  (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
                  these Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years;
                  and

                  (ii) was, at the end of the period, a  family  member  who
                  has retained the right of residence."

 7. Regulation 10(5) makes provision for a person to be  a  "family  member
    who  has  retained  the  right  of  residence"  following  divorce   or
    termination of their marriage  or  civil  partnership.   Paragraph  (5)
    provided, at the relevant time:

         "(5) The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-

             (a)  ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or  an
             EEA national with  a  right  of  permanent  residence  on  the
             termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;

             (b)  was residing in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
             these Regulations at the date of the termination;

             (c)  satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

             (d)  either-

                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                  termination of the marriage or the civil partnership,  the
                  marriage or civil partnership  had  lasted  for  at  least
                  three years and the  parties  to  the  marriage  or  civil
                  partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at least
                  one year during its duration;

                  (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of  the  qualified
                  person or the EEA  national  with  a  right  of  permanent
                  residence has custody of a child of that qualified  person
                  or EEA national;

                  (iii)     the  former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                  qualified person or the  EEA  national  with  a  right  of
                  permanent residence has the right of access to a child  of
                  that qualified person or EEA national, where the child  is
                  under the age of 18 and where a  court  has  ordered  that
                  such access must take place in the United Kingdom; or

                  (iv) the  continued  right  of  residence  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  of  A  is  warranted  by  particularly  difficult
                  circumstances, such as where A or  another  family  member
                  has been a victim of domestic violence whilst the marriage
                  or civil partnership was subsisting.

         (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

             (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if the person  were  an
             EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person or  a  self-
             sufficient person under regulation 6; or

             (b)  is the  family  member  of  a  person  who  falls  within
             paragraph (a)."

    Regulation 10(5) was amended with effect from 15 August 2019 to reflect
    the requirements of Baigazieva  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088: see The Immigration (European Economic
    Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2019.  Baigazieva held that the  relevant
    date for the purposes of regulation 10(5)(a) and (b) was  when  divorce
    proceedings were commenced, rather than the termination of the marriage
    following the  successful  institution  of  divorce  proceedings.   The
    amendment does not have retrospective effect,  but  the  judge  in  the
    present matter correctly read regulation 10 as though regulation 10 had
    such effect in any event.  See [10].

Discussion

 8. An examination of the chronology of the appellant's  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom under the 2016 Regulations demonstrates  that  it  would
    have been impossible for her to have acquired the  right  of  permanent
    residence by  the  time  her  appeal  was  heard.   She  commenced  her
    residence under the regulations upon her marriage to her former husband
    on 21 August 2014.  Her appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took
    place on 9 July 2019.  The date of that hearing is  the  relevant  date
    for my assessment of whether the judge erred in law.  By 9  July  2019,
    the appellant had  accrued  a  maximum  of  4  years'  and  11  months'
    residence.  On any view, she was short of the five year threshold.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not, on any view,  involve  the
    making of an error of law.

 9. Regulation 10(5) of the  2016  Regulations  defines  the  term  "family
    member who has retained the right of residence".   It  is  primarily  a
    definition provision.  It establishes a gateway through which a non-EEA
    spouse of  an  EEA  national  may  pass  upon  (post-  Baigazieva,  the
    initiation of their) divorce or termination of the marriage,  in  order
    to become a "family member who has retained the  right  of  residence".
    Regulation 10(6) imposes a qualitative requirement for a putative  non-
    EEA family member to reside as though they were a qualified person (see
    regulation 6) in their own  right.   The  residence  rights  of  family
    members who  have  retained  the  right  of  residence  are  no  longer
    parasitic upon their EEA "sponsor"; rather, such  persons  acquire  the
    ability to generate their own right to reside.

10. The unchallenged findings of the judge below at [12]  of  her  decision
    are that the appellant meets the requirements to be a family member who
    has retained the right of residence under  regulation  10(5):  she  was
    married for a total of at least three years, one of which was  in  this
    country, and she satisfied regulation 10(6).

11. The effect of the  appellant  having  passed  through  the  gateway  of
    regulation 10(5) and (6) is that, upon ceasing  to  enjoy  a  parasitic
    right to reside based on her former husband's residence, she  was  able
    to enjoy a right to reside in her own capacity.  The  requirement  that
    she "exercise Treaty rights", as  though  she  were  an  EEA  national,
    continued to apply.

12. It appears that the judge granting permission to appeal  conflated  the
    three year temporal requirement contained in regulation 10(5) with  the
    five year threshold for acquiring a permanent right of residence.   The
    significance of the three year requirement in regulation 10(5) is  that
    - provided the other criteria are met - the appellant is able to secure
    a right to reside as though she were  an  EEA  national.   She  is  not
    exempted from the need to accrue five years'  continuous  residence  in
    order to acquire the right of  permanent  residence.   Being  a  family
    member who has retained the  right  of  residence  simply  enables  the
    appellant to accrue the right of permanent residence, despite no longer
    being a family member of an  EEA  national.   So  much  is  clear  from
    regulation 15(1)(f): to obtain the right of permanent  residence  on  a
    retained rights basis, it is necessary to reside in the United  Kingdom
    for five years under the Regulations and, at the end of that period, be
    a family member who has retained the right of residence.

13. Judge Boylan-Kemp's findings were entirely consistent  with  the  above
    analysis and did not involve the making of an error of law.  The  judge
    said at [14]:

         "The relevant subsection [sic] in the appellant's case  is  (f).  I
         have found that she has retained rights under regulation 10, so the
         remaining issue is whether she has lived in the  UK  in  accordance
         with these regulations for a continuous period of five  years.  The
         appellant married on 21 August 2014 and prior to this point she was
         here  on  a  student  visa  issued  under  the  immigration  rules.
         Therefore, on the chronology before me I find  that  the  appellant
         was not residing in  accordance  with  the  regulations  until  her
         marriage to an EEA national, which means that  she  cannot  satisfy
         the five-year requirement until 21 August 2019. Therefore,  I  find
         that she does not yet have a  right  to  reside  in  the  UK  on  a
         permanent basis under regulation 15."

14. Dr  Ikegwuruka  submits  that  the  respondent  should  have  issued  a
    residence card in response to the application for a permanent residence
    card.  He contends that the Secretary of State's practice is  to  issue
    "lesser"  EEA  "products"  if  the  primary  application  fails  on   a
    technicality. As such, he contends that the judge fell  into  error  by
    not allowing the appeal on the basis that the respondent  should  issue
    the appellant a  "normal"  residence  card,  rather  than  a  permanent
    residence card.

15. Dr Ikegwuruka relied on Samsam (EEA: revocation  and  retained  rights)
    Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 (IAC) as authority for the  above  proposition.
    It does not assist his submission.  The headnote states at (2):

         "Regulation 10 of Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  requires  the
         applicant to demonstrate that: a genuine marriage has lasted  three
         years and the couple have spent one year  together  in  the  United
         Kingdom and that the EEA  national  spouse  was  exercising  treaty
         rights at the time he ceased to be a family member."

    The decision is against Mr Ikegwuruka.  At [53] and [54] it  states  in
    terms that five years' residence is required to acquire  the  right  of
    permanent residence on a retained rights basis (assuming there was  not
    some other, separate, route under the Regulations).   Nowhere  does  it
    state that the respondent should issue a "normal" residence  card  upon
    an unsuccessful application for a permanent  residence  card.   In  any
    event, the authority is somewhat dated now.  Not only does  it  address
    the  situation  under   the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area
    Regulations) 2006, but it deals with the pre-Baigazieva position.

16. There are a number of additional difficulties with the submission.

17. First, the respondent was  not  asked  by  the  appellant  to  issue  a
    residence card if the permanent residence card application failed.   It
    cannot, therefore, be an error of law for the judge not to  have  found
    that the respondent did not do something that  the  appellant  did  not
    invite her to do.

18. Secondly, the statutory powers of the tribunal are simply to  allow  or
    dismiss an appeal.  The tribunal does not have the  ability  to  direct
    the respondent to take particular action.  This is an appeal against  a
    refusal to grant a permanent residence card; allowing  the  appeal  may
    only take place on the basis that the respondent  should  have  granted
    the appellant a permanent residence card, but unlawfully failed  to  do
    so.  It is not possible for me to find that the judge should have found
    that the respondent was required to act  in  some  other  way,  as  the
    statutory powers to do so do not exist.

Conclusion

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The unchallenged findings of fact of the  judge  were
    that the appellant had enjoyed a non-permanent right to reside from her
    marriage to the date of the hearing on 9 July 2019.   If  she  makes  a
    fresh application to the respondent, she may be able to establish  that
    she continued to meet the requirements for a right  to  reside  in  the
    short period that followed the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    until she met the five year threshold.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.

This appeal is dismissed.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 20 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
