
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02277/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2017                        |On 14 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                             Soumaila Kanadjigui
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McGrade promulgated on 30 December 2016.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Mali born on 15 July  1988.   On  22  May
    2015 he made an application for a Residence Card as confirmation  of  a
    right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national.   His  application
    was based on his relationship with Ms Marieme Abdoulaye Kane,  born  in
    Senegal on 22 May 1987 but subsequently a French national.


3.   The Appellant and Ms Kane had been married by proxy in  a  ceremony  in
    Mali on 12 April 2015.  In support of the application it was said  that
    Ms Kane was exercising 'Treaty rights' as a worker  by  reason  of  her
    employment with Malindobiko Limited, such employment  having  commenced
    on 9 February 2015.


4.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department refused the  Appellant's
    application pursuant to the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)
    [2014] UKUT  00024  (IAC).   The  decision-maker  identified  that  the
    Appellant's marriage to Ms Kane was  a  proxy  marriage  and  that  the
    available evidence indicated that such a marriage was not recognised in
    France, that is to say the country of nationality of the  relevant  EEA
    national in this case.  In such circumstances  the  decision-maker  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant could claim  to  be  a  family  member
    within the  meaning  of  regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


5.   The decision-maker  also  considered  regulation  8(5)  in  respect  of
    'durable relationship', but was not satisfied in this regard bearing in
    mind the amount of time that  had  elapsed  between  the  date  of  the
    marriage and the application, and the absence of any evidence that  the
    couple had been in any sort of relationship prior to that date.


6.   The decision-maker also expressed doubt in respect of the  exercise  of
    Treaty rights by Ms Kane.  The relevant passage  in  the  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter is in these terms:

         "In addition to the above the Home Office  would  also  cast  doubt
         upon that  of  your  EEA  national's  employment  with  Malindobiko
         Limited T/A BinkoCartridges.com as the wage slips you have provided
         denote that your EEA Sponsor is being paid by cash,  however,  this
         office is unable to see any deposits of a similar amount being paid
         into her bank account.  In addition to this after  researching  the
         EEA Sponsor  employer  via  Companies  House  it  has  also  become
         apparent that the EEA Sponsor's  employment  company  is  currently
         dormant and not recently filed their accounts that were due in June
         2015."




7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  The grounds of appeal  attached  to
    the Notice of Appeal are in generic terms and do  not  descend  to  any
    factual particulars in respect of the circumstances of  the  Appellant,
    and do  not  otherwise  engage  directly  with  the  reasoning  of  the
    Respondent.


8.   The appeal was listed before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McGrade  on  8
    December 2016.  The Appellant did not appear and was  not  represented.
    The Judge expressed his satisfaction that  reasonable  steps  had  been
    taken to notify the  Appellant  of  the  hearing  and  in  all  of  the
    circumstances considered that it was in the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Appellant (paragraph 4).


9.   The Judge, like the  Respondent,  also  relied  upon  the  decision  of
    Kareem and concluded that the Appellant did not  satisfy  regulation  7
    for essentially the reasons given by the Respondent in the 'reasons for
    refusal' letter.


10.  The Judge then went on to observe that pursuant to  the  case  of  Sala
    (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  411  the  Tribunal   had   no
    jurisdiction to determine an appeal based on regulation 8(5)  and  took
    no further action in respect of that aspect of the  case.   The  appeal
    was dismissed in respect of the regulation 7 issue.  The Judge in those
    circumstances, not surprisingly, did not turn his mind to the issue  in
    respect of the exercise of Treaty rights by Ms Kane.


11.  An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Appellant  by
    way of application form signed on 16  January  2017.   The  grounds  of
    appeal are limited to the following: "Procedural unfairness FP (Iran)".


12.  Notwithstanding the extremely limited nature of those  grounds,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McGinty - quite properly bearing in mind  that  the
    Appellant appeared to be an unrepresented individual - gave  close  and
    careful scrutiny to all the circumstances of the case.  In  respect  of
    FP (Iran) Judge McGinty identified that the Appellant  appeared  to  be
    referring to a case  where  an  Appellant's  legal  representative  had
    failed to notify the Tribunal of a change of address (see  paragraph  3
    of the grant of permission to appeal).  Judge McGinty  noted  that  the
    Appellant had previously been represented and that the address given on
    his application for permission to appeal was a different  address  from
    the address on the notice of hearing  that  had  been  sent.   In  such
    circumstances Judge McGinty observed:

         "It is therefore possible that the Appellant is arguing that  there
         was procedural unfairness in the Judge having to decide the  appeal
         in the absence of the Appellant,  in  circumstances  where  he  had
         moved address and had not been notified by his  solicitors  of  the
         appeal hearing."


13.  Judge McGinty  also  identified  that  the  case  of  Kareem  had  been
    overtaken by the decision in Awuku v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178.  In those circumstances  Judge  McGinty
    also granted permission on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    Judge had erred in law when finding that the Appellant and the  sponsor
    had not shown that they were legally married.


14.  For completeness I should note  that  Judge  McGinty  also  decided  to
    extend time for the appeal.


15.  The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 30 August  2017.   So
    far as the procedural fairness point is concerned that response submits
    that the onus is on the Appellant to  show  that  there  had  been  any
    procedural  unfairness  in  respect  of  notification.   Otherwise  the
    Respondent acknowledges the impact of Awuku on the decision  in  Kareem
    and therefore the decision in the instant appeal.


16.  It is in the above  circumstances  that  the  matter  comes  before  me
    today.


17.  The Appellant has not attended the  appeal,  nor  has  there  been  any
    communication from him explaining his non-attendance.  I  am  satisfied
    that notice of hearing has been communicated to the  Appellant  at  the
    address that he provided on his application for permission  to  appeal,
    and there has been no intervening communication from the  Appellant  to
    suggest  that  he  has  changed  address  in  the  meantime.   In   the
    circumstances I am satisfied that it is appropriate to proceed  in  the
    Appellant's absence.


18.  I note that the Appellant has filed no evidence, and, as I say, he  has
    not attended today, to support the allegation of procedural unfairness.
     In the circumstances I am not satisfied that the  factual  premise  of
    the potential challenge identified by Judge McGinty has been made  out.
    Accordingly I reject that line of challenge.


19.  However, as Mr Avery very properly accepts, the Judge  was  clearly  in
    error in applying Kareem to the Appellant's circumstances in  light  of
    the decision in Awuku.  It may well be that the decision in  Awuku  had
    not been published by the time of the  decision  and  consideration  by
    Judge McGrade, but nonetheless it now provides an accurate statement of
    the law and the decision of Judge McGrade must be  considered  in  that
    light.


20.  In the circumstances it  seems  to  me  that  that  error  of  law  was
    material because it led to the rejection by Judge McGrade of  the  case
    pursuant to regulation 7. I conclude that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained a material error of law and must be set aside.


21.  It falls to me to consider how best to remake  the  decision.   I  note
    that the Appellant has not  explained  his  non-attendance  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and there is nothing by way of explanation  of  his
    non-attendance before this Tribunal.  In the  circumstances  I  do  not
    consider it appropriate to remit this appeal again  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but am of the view that it should now  be  determined  on  the
    basis of all of the available evidence.


22.  Pursuant to Awuku I do  not  uphold  the  Respondent's  reasoning  with
    regard to the proxy marriage: in the circumstances I am satisfied  that
    the Appellant did produce evidence in support of his  application  that
    showed he was in a marital relationship with an EEA national.


23.  However, the Appellant has not  addressed  in  his  grounds  of  appeal
    before either the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal the  issues
    raised in respect of the exercise of Treaty rights by Ms Kane. Nor  was
    there anything filed before the First-tier Tribunal in this regard. Nor
    has anything now been filed before the Upper Tribunal, and neither  the
    Appellant nor Ms Kane have attended in order to  assist  in  the  event
    that the Tribunal decided it was appropriate to proceed to  remake  the
    decision.  (In this latter regard I note the Directions issued  by  the
    Tribunal to the parties on 30 August 2017.)


24.  In such circumstances I consider there  is  substance  to  the  matters
    raised in the 'reasons for refusal' letter  in  respect  of  Ms  Kane's
    claimed employment.  I find that those concerns have not  been  allayed
    by the Appellant or by Ms Kane. Accordingly I find that  the  Appellant
    has failed to demonstrate  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  his
    partner is exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  In those  circumstances
    the appeal fails under the EEA Regulations.


Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


26.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.


27.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
