

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
  EA/02162/2017

                                                      EA/02426/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 7 December 2017                    |            On 9 January 2018        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                     ALADE TESLIM KOLAWOLE ABIODUN JOSE
                          BUKUNOLA ADESOLA ADEBAYO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Olujinmi
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born in 1970  and  1977.   They
      appeal against the decision by the respondent made on 8 February  2017
      to refuse their applications for  permanent  residence  cards  on  the
      basis that they are  the  family  members  of  a  EEA  national  under
      Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2016.

 2. The respondent was  not  satisfied  that  adequate  evidence  had  been
    provided to show that their sponsor is a qualified person who has  been
    exercising Treaty Rights in the UK for a continuous five  year  period.
    Whilst original P60's for  the  years  2007/08,  2008/09,  2009/10  and
    2010/11 had been submitted, the evidence provided beyond that date  was
    photocopied and, as a result, not accepted as evidence of employment.


 3. They appealed.


    First tier hearing


 4. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 17 May 2017 Judge of the  First-
    Tier Hussain dismissed the appeals.  There was no appearance by  or  on
    behalf of the appellants and  the  judge  proceeded  to  determine  the
    appeal as a hearing in absence.


 5. In brief findings the judge at paragraph [8] noted that having  perused
    the grounds of appeal they were "no more than generic.  They appear not
    to engage the respondent's reasons for the decision".  There were  also
    no attachments.


 6. He concluded (at [10]):  "In  my  view,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    correct in requiring original documents.  As explained in  the  refusal
    letter, photocopies cannot be  assessed  properly  to  establish  their
    reliability."


 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal on two grounds. First,  that
    the judge erred by expecting them to attend the hearing when  they  had
    requested a consideration "on papers" only.   Second,  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the appellants bundle of documentation.


 8. In respect of ground one, Judge Chohan, who granted  permission  on  27
    September 2017, stated that there was nothing to suggest that the First-
    Tier judge made adverse credibility findings on the basis of their non-
    appearance.


 9. However, in granting permission, he noted the claim that a  bundle  had
    been sent to the Tribunal at Hatton Cross, and  a  receipt  from  Royal
    Mail confirmed delivery on 16 May 2017, the day before the hearing.  It
    appeared that the documentation had not been placed before  the  judge.
    Had it been so his decision may well have been different.


    Error of law hearing


10. At the error of law hearing before me the claimed bundle was still  not
    on file, nor did the respondent have it.


11. Copies were obtained from Mr Olujinmi who also produced  a  Royal  Mail
    tracker notice which, I was satisfied, indeed, showed that  the  bundle
    had been delivered to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  day  before  the
    hearing.  It appears to be lost.  The photocopy bundle provided  to  me
    contained photocopy P60's for the five year period  as  well  as  other
    items.  Mr Olujinmi said that the originals for the years complained of
    by the respondent had been submitted in the bundle sent  to  the  First
    tier Tribunal.


12. In the briefest submissions Mr Olujinmi sought a rehearing. Mr Nath was
    content to leave it to me.


    Consideration


13. I considered that in determining the appeal without  reference  to  the
    bundle there was procedural irregularity amounting to an error of  law,
    albeit one through no fault of the First-tier judge.


14. The decision  is  set  aside  to  be  reheard.   Such  will  allow  the
    appellants the opportunity of approaching HMRCS to get confirmation  of
    the claimed employment. No findings stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.
In terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and of
Practice Statement 7.2 the case is remitted to the First tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh,
Before any judge other than Judge MB Hussain.



No anonymity orders made.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
