
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02774/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2016                         |On 8th December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                               kehkshan rizwan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 22nd August 1977.
     On 18th December 2014 she was issued with  an  EEA  Family  Permit  to
    allow her to accompany her spouse to the UK valid until 18th June 2015.
     On 8th June 2015 the Appellant applied for a  residence  card  as  the
    wife of her Sponsor, Saeed Rizwan, an Italian citizen resident  in  the
    UK.  That  application  was  refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 11th November 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and
    her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Keith  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Harmondsworth on 14th March 2016.  He allowed the appeal for
    the  reasons  given  in  his  Decision  dated  29th  March  2016.   The
    Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  23rd  August
    2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before me, the  Appellant  appeared  unrepresented,  but
    indicated that she  was  happy  for  the  hearing  to  proceed  without
    representation.

 4. The issue before the Judge at the original hearing was  a  narrow  one.
    The Appellant's application had been refused because the Respondent was
    not satisfied that the Sponsor had been in employment following October
    2015, and  was  therefore  a  qualified  person  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 6(1) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 (the Regulations).  The Judge allowed the appeal because he  found
    from the evidence before him comprising a contract  of  employment  and
    relevant wage slips that the Sponsor had remained in employment  up  to
    the date of the Appellant's application and therefore at  the  relevant
    time was a qualified person for the purposes of the Regulations.

 5. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni submitted that the Judge had erred in law  in
    coming to this conclusion because the relevant period  that  the  Judge
    should have considered ought to have been until the date of the hearing
    before him in March 2016.  However, Mrs Aboni accepted that  the  error
    of law was not material because there was evidence before the Judge  of
    the Sponsor's employment up to the date of the hearing in March 2016.

 6. Following the comments of Mrs Aboni, it was not  necessary  for  me  to
    hear from the Respondent.  I find that there was an error of law in the
    decision of the Judge, but that that error was not material in that  if
    the Judge had considered the period up to the date of hearing in  March
    2016 on the evidence before him he would have come  to  the  conclusion
    that the Sponsor had continued in employment  and  therefore  to  be  a
    qualified person  for  the  purposes  of  the  Regulations.   He  would
    therefore still have allowed the appeal had he considered  the  correct
    period.  As the error of law is immaterial, I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.


I do not set aside that decision.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so, and therefore I make  no
order for anonymity.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

