
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02413/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 September 2017                      |On 28 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                  awa lemon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Amgbahah, UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Awa Lemon, was born on 13 July 1987 and is a citizen  of
    Gambia.  The appellant claims to be married to a  Mr  Abdulii  Djabi  a
    Portuguese citizen.  The appellant's application for a confirmation  of
    her right to remain in the country on account of her marriage to an EEA
    national was refused by a decision of the respondent dated  3  November
    2015.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Buckwell)  which,
    in a decision and reasons promulgated on 9 January 2017, dismissed  the
    appeal.

 2. I note that the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  had  initially  been
    listed on 21 December 2016 for an oral hearing.  However, the appellant
    did not attend.  Consequently, the file was allocated to Judge Buckwell
    as a paper case on 23 December 2016.

 3. The judge considered the various items  of  documentary  evidence.   At
    [17] he wrote as follows:

         "Additionally provided are affidavits in support of  the  marriage.
         There is an affidavit by Ba Foday Jabbi who, at paragraph 2 of  the
         affidivat, states that Abduadulai Djabi is his biological son.   He
         confirms the marriage by his son to Awa Lemon.   The  affidavit  is
         dated 25 March 2015.  However there is also  an  affidavit  in  the
         name of Alh (which I assume to be short for Alhadji) Muhammad Kairu
         Djavi dated 3 December 2014 in which that deponent  also  maintains
         that Abduadulai Djabi is his son.  Accordingly I have before me two
         affidavits wherein two separate male deponents state that they  are
         both the biological  father  to  Abduadulai  Djabi.   There  is  an
         affidavit by Mariama Jarra confirming that she is the mother of Awa
         Lemon.  There is also an affidavit in which Lie Lemon confirms that
         the appellant is his daughter."

 4. The judge had before him also a marriage certificate  relating  to  the
    marriage of Abduadulai Djabi and the appellant.  He also  had  what  he
    describes as an "authentication certificate" relating to  the  marriage
    which confirmed that it took place on 28 August 2014 and was  witnesses
    by a Commissioner of Oaths, Amie Jammeh.

 5. The judge considered it "critical" to the outcome of  the  appeal  that
    the claimed proxy marriage, which the appellant claimed  was  evidenced
    by these various documents, had genuinely taken place  in  Banjul.   At
    [25], the  judge  found  that  it  was  "totally  incredible  that  two
    different individuals could claim to be the biological  father  of  the
    sponsor in this appeal and I believe that  the  provision  of  the  two
    affidavits  totally  discredits  the  application   overall   including
    evidence as to the stated proxy marriage  formalities  stated  to  have
    taken place in Banjul on 28 August 2014."  Since the burden of  proving
    that a proxy marriage had validly taken place rested upon the appellant
    (see Cudjoe [2016] UKUT 180) the judge found that the appeal should  be
    dismissed.

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the affidavit of  Mariama  Jarra  had
    been "prepared and submitted in error"  to  the  Home  Office  and  the
    Tribunal and "should not have been included in the  documents"  because
    Mariama Jarra is not the biological mother of the  appellant,  but  her
    sister.  Further,  because  the  affidavits  have  not  been  "used  to
    register or authenticate the proxy marriage  certificate"  they  should
    not have prevented the judge from finding that the marriage  was  valid
    on  the  basis  of  the  certificate  itself  and  the   authentication
    certificate.  Given  that  an  "authentication  certificate"  had  been
    produced in evidence, the judge need have gone no further and,  on  the
    basis of the certificate, should have allowed the appeal.

 7. I disagree with the grounds  of  appeal.   The  judge  was  obliged  to
    consider all the evidence before making his decision.  He duly did  so.
    That evidence included the affidavits which, by any standard, contained
    material which cast a very serious doubt upon the  credibility  of  the
    appellant, the sponsor and the application as a whole.  The  affidavits
    were put in evidence by the appellant to support her appeal; she cannot
    now complain that the judge considered this evidence  in  reaching  his
    decision.  The judge may well  have  concluded  on  the  basis  of  the
    marriage certificate and authentication certificate that  the  marriage
    was genuine and the fact remains that there  was  also  evidence  which
    cast doubt on the validity of the marriage.  The grounds of appeal  are
    nothing more than a disagreement with findings which were open  to  the
    judge on a consideration of all the evidence.  Accordingly, the  appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 27 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 27 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

