
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02514/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2019                      |On 16th September 2019               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMED [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Laughran, Counsel, instructed by Solicitors' Inn
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the
    First tier Tribunal  Durance  dated  18  December  2018,  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 7
    March  2018  refusing  him  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regs')  confirming
    a right of residence in the United Kingdom as a family member of an EEA
    national who was a qualified person.

Background

2     There is some history to the appellant's  applications  for  residence
    cards. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, and originally  entered
    the United Kingdom with a valid entry clearance  as  a  student  in  or
    around 2009. He obtained extensions of leave to  remain  as  a  student
    until 12 September 2014.  The appellant married Ms Eliza [O] ('EO'),  a
    national of Poland, on 5 April 2014, and on 20 June 2014, the appellant
    applied for a residence card in relation to his marriage to EO.

3     Prior to the marriage on 5 April 2014, it appears that  the  registrar
    at Manchester Register Office had, on 4 March 2014, provided  a  report
    to the respondent under s.24 Immigration  and  Asylum  act  1999  under
    which provision inter alia a Registrar, if having   reasonable  grounds
    for suspecting that a proposed marriage will be a sham  marriage,  must
    report his suspicion to the Secretary of State  without  delay  and  in
    such form and manner as may be prescribed  by  regulations.  Throughout
    the various proceedings before the Tribunal which are set out  in  more
    detail below, the only evidence provided by the respondent  as  to  the
    content of that report ('the s.24 Report') is  a  print  out  from  the
    respondent's 'CID' (Case Information Database) system, relating  to  an
    entry apparently created on 4 August 2014, the entire content of  which
    reads as follows:

         "Please note a section 24  report  of  a  suspicious  marriage  was
         received on 4.3.2014 from Manchester Register Office.

         The reasons for suspicion given by the registrar were:

         One party giving the impression of knowing very  little  about  the
         other person.

         Either party referring to notes to answer questions about the other
         person.

         One of the parties seemed unable to give the full name  or  address
         of the other party.

         The wedding was booked to take place on 5.4.2014 at 11.10."

4     It is  apparent  that  notwithstanding  any  concerns  raised  by  the
    registrar on 5 April 2014, the marriage took place on that date.

5     In considering the appellant's application for  a  residence  card  in
    2014, the respondent interviewed the Appellant and EO on  11  September
    2014. In a decision dated 22 September 2014, the respondent refused the
    appellant a residence card. The respondent  also  made  a  decision  in
    relation to EO, which was to refuse her a registration certificate. The
    respondent asserted that the marriage between the appellant and EO  was
    one of convenience.

6     Both the appellant  and  EO  appealed  against  that  decision,  their
    appeals coming before First tier Tribunal Judge Mather on  23  December
    2014.

7     In a decision dated 9  January  2015  dismissing  the  appeals,  Judge
    Mather directed herself at in law at [5] - [6]  as  to  the  burden  of
    proof in the appeal as follows:

         "5.      The burden of proof in this case is  upon  the  Appellants
         and the standard of proof is upon the balance of probability. It is
         on the applicant/appellant to establish any EEA right of  admission
         or residence ...

         6. I have also reminded  myself  of  the  case  of  Papajogji  (EEA
         Spouse; marriage of convenience) Greece 2012 UKUT 00038."

8     The judge noted at [8] the content of the s.24 Report. She  then  held
    at [9]: "I do not accept the Appellants are  credible  witnesses."  The
    judge was not satisfied about a number of matters,  set  out  at  [10]-
    [16]: certain evidence given by the  appellant  and  EO  regarding  the
    website on which it was said they met ('BearShare'); when the appellant
    told EO about his temporary  immigration  status  in  the  UK;  certain
    evidence given  by  the  appellant  regarding  his  qualifications  and
    employment; evidence given  by  the  appellant  and  EO  regarding  the
    circumstances of their second date, the purchase of an engagement ring,
    and when they agreed to marry; and the quality of the evidence given by
    supporting witnesses in the appeal.

9     The judge then held:

         "17.     I accept the report made by the Registrar made pursuant to
         Section 24. I  do  not  accept  (the  appellant's  representatives)
         submission that it was made in bad faith.

         18.      I have reminded myself of the case of Papajorgji  (check).
         I am satisfied on the totality of the evidence  before  me,  it  is
         more probable than not that this is a marriage  of  convenience.  I
         have taken into account Appendix A of the Judgement.

         19.      As such, I am satisfied that the appellant entered into it
         knowing that they would give the second  appellant  a  platform  to
         stage the application made.

         20.      I accept the appellants lived together for the purpose  of
         making the applications and were able to give many correct  answers
         in their marriage interview. That does not obviate my finding as to
         the reasons for their claimed marriage.

         21.      I find the Appellants have not discharged  the  burden  of
         proof as required and I therefore find that the  decisions  of  the
         respondent appealed against are in accordance with the law and  the
         applicable Regulations."

10    The  appellant  made  a  second  and  then  third  application  for  a
    residence card in relation to his marriage to EO. The Respondent made a
    further appealable decision on 16 March 2016 refusing the  appellant  a
    residence card, again asserting that the appellant's marriage to EO was
    one of convenience. The appellant appealed against that  decision,  the
    appeal being heard by Judge of the First tier  Tribunal  Hudson  on  11
    July 2017. The judge dismissed the appeal in a decision dated  21  July
    2017. The appellant was then represented by Mr Thornhill  of  Thornhill
    Solicitors.

11    Judge Hudson noted  at  [13]  that  "Mr  Thornhill  accepts  that  the
    starting point is IJ Mather's determination but refers me to  paragraph
    40 of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 ..." (in relation  to  an  argument
    that Judge Mather may have proceeded under a mistake of fact as to  the
    nature of the BearShare website on which the appellant and EO were said
    to have met, and whether it was a dating site, or music sharing  site).
    At [15] Judge Hudson held that:

         "I am obliged to  take  my  starting  point  the  determination  of
         Immigration Judge Mather dated 9 January 2015. She  concluded  that
         (the appellant and EO) were not credible.  She  further  considered
         that they had produced two false witnesses to support their  claim.
         While I accept she did make findings in relation to  the  BearShare
         website, I do not consider them to be the finding  from  which  all
         other findings flowed."

12    Judge Hudson then: set out certain discrepancies within  the  evidence
    relating to EO's employment around the time  of  her  marriage  to  the
    appellant [16-17], and discrepancies between answers given  during  the
    marriage interviews of  11  September  2014  [18];  noted  certain  new
    evidence, but commented that most would have  been  available  for  the
    previous hearing but was not produced [19]; noted  limitations  in  the
    evidence of contact prior to  marriage  [20];  noted  that  photographs
    relied upon by the appellant were limited  and  appeared  staged  [21];
    deduced from certain petrol receipts that the appellant could only have
    spent a short time visiting EO on or around  19  May  2013  as  alleged
    [22]; decided to pay no regard to the demeanour of the appellant and EO
    at the hearing before her [23]; held that certain Facebook posts and an
    email were impersonal and not  suggestive  of  a  genuine  relationship
    [24]; noted that phone records relied upon by the appellant post  dated
    the decision appealed against and were  limited  [24];  held  that  the
    timing of the appellant's proposal to EO was implausible,  and  that  a
    Christmas card sent by the appellant to EO in December  2013  had  been
    produced with the intent of using it as evidence [25];  and  noted  the
    limitations of, and discrepancies within,  certain  evidence  given  by
    supporting witnesses [26].

13    Judge Hudson then held:

         "27.     In considering whether Mr [A] meets  the  criteria  for  a
         permanent residence card, I am mindful that the burden of proof  is
         ordinarily upon the appellant and the standard of proof required is
         a balance of  probabilities.  However,  in  this  case  it  is  the
         respondent who makes  the  claim  that  he  is  in  a  marriage  of
         convenience and therefore must prove it to the same standard. I  am
         satisfied on the totality of the evidence before  me,  that  it  is
         more probable than not that  this  is  a  marriage  of  convenience
         (Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]
         UKUT 00038) IAC)."

14    The judge then dismissed the appeal.

15    The appellant made a fourth and then fifth application  for  residence
    card, resulting in an appealable decision of 7 March 2018 (the decision
    which is the subject of the present proceedings). Again, the respondent
    refused  the  appellant  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  that   the
    appellant's marriage to EO was one of convenience. Further, at  page  5
    of 6 of the decision, the respondent queried certain evidence  provided
    by the appellant as to EO's employment, and concluded that EO  was  not
    exercising treaty rights in line with regulation 6 of the 2016 Regs.



Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Durance

16    The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision,  the  appeal  coming
    before Judge Durance on 6 December 2018. The appellant was by  then  no
    longer represented by Thornhill Solicitors, but by those now acting.

17    Judge Durance summarised the previous history of the  appeals  at  [7-
    21]. The judge then said as follows at [13]:

         "I have considered the section 24 report dated 4 August  2014.  The
         reasons given by the registrar were that both parties had notes  to
         assist them to answer questions about each other. It was noted that
         one of the parties did not know the full name  or  address  of  the
         other party. In addition, one party  seemed  to  know  very  little
         about the other person. That document is  in  the  original  bundle
         which was before Judge Mather."

18    Judge Durance observed at [23] that the appellant sought to rely  upon
    a witness statement in the present appeal, but observed that:

         "In many respects, his witness  statement  reads  like  a  rebuttal
         statement to a reasons for refusal letter. However, this  statement
         is a rebuttal statement to the final  decision  of  an  Immigration
         Judge. This underscores a central difficulty with  the  appellant's
         case. Essentially, he is seeking to overturn  a  previous  decision
         which has been finally determined and which has no onward rights of
         appeal. He had competent representation and he has elected  not  to
         appeal much of what he says in his witness  statement  has  already
         been the subject of findings of fact. For instance,  the  appellant
         is still contesting elements relating to the interview  which  took
         place in September 2014. The appellant takes the  Tribunal  through
         various banking transactions in  2013  and  2014.  The  fundamental
         difficulty with this is that the matter has already  been  resolved
         and determined against him."

19    The judge set out at [34-41] that certain further  evidence  was  sent
    to the Tribunal after the hearing, without permission of the  Tribunal,
    being copies of advice given to the appellant by Thornhill  Solicitors.
    The appellant must have  sought  advice  from  Thornhill's  immediately
    after receiving the decision of Judge Mather, as on 14 January  2015  a
    letter from Thornhill's  advised  the  appellant  that  there  were  no
    grounds of  appeal  against  that  decision.  Further,  a  letter  from
    Thornhill's of 24 July 2017, after  Judge  Hudson's  decision,  advised
    that there were similarly no grounds of appeal against  that  decision.
    Judge Durance,  although  noting  that  it  was  discourteous  for  the
    appellant to seek to rely upon such further evidence after the close of
    hearing, clearly decided to admit that evidence [38].

20    Judge Durance directed himself at  [42]  by  reference  to  SSHD  v  D
    (Tamil) [2002] UKAIT 00702 (Devaseelan) and at  [45],  [47],  48],  and
    [63] as to the purported effect of the decision of the Supreme Court in
    Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.

21    At [19] Judge Durance made his primary  findings,  for  which  reasons
    are given at [47] onwards. The judge held at [46(a)] that the  starting
    point was the findings of fact reached by Judge Mather, and at  [46(g)]
    that Judge Hudson had later made other findings of fact. At [46 (f) and
    (k)] the judge held  that  'no  evidence  has  been  advanced  (to  the
    Devaseelan standard) that the legal representation  was  negligent'  in
    respect  of  the  proceedings  before  Judge  Mather  or  Judge  Hudson
    respectively.

22    At [46(l)-(q)] Judge Durance held:

         "(l)     on a  balance  of  probabilities,  I  concluded  that  the
         appellant had not provided evidence which meant that those findings
         of fact should be disturbed.

         (m)      I find that the  appellant's  repeated  arguments  in  the
         lodging of new evidence seek to mask the critical finding  of  fact
         which was been reached in this case. That critical finding of  fact
         was made by Judge Mather which was that  an  independent  registrar
         was so concerned about the parties that s/he had  encountered  that
         the registrar went to the trouble of completing a s.24 notice.  The
         evidence set out in that notice was neither petty nor  trivial.  On
         the contrary this was a well-founded  basis  to  suspect  that  the
         couple  were  entering  the  wedding  contract  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience.

         (n)      Judge Mather heard submission to the effect that this s.24
         statement had been made in bad faith and rejected this argument.

         (o)      That evidence and those findings of fact pose a very  high
         threshold to surmount when Devaseelan is in play.

         (p)      The  new  photos,  the  new  witnesses,  the  new  witness
         statements do not surmount that threshold.

         (q)      The appeal is dismissed."

23    At [48], within the 'reasons' section of his decision, the judge  held
    as follows:

         "Much of the evidence which is relied upon by the appellant and  Ms
         O postdates the marriage contract. In  my  judgement,  there  is  a
         difficulty with this approach. A  person  could  enter  a  marriage
         contract with the predominant intention of  obtaining  a  residence
         card and then go about building up a picture of a  relationship  to
         contradict that. The Supreme Court  made  it  clear  that  contrary
         evidence should predate the marriage contract and act as a rebuttal
         to any argument raised as to the marriage being one of convenience.
         That correlates to the acid legal test  which  is  the  predominant
         purpose of the marriage. It is not an evaluation of  any  purported
         relationship which has arisen  afterwards.  In  that  respect,  the
         evidence which has been produced by those instructing the appellant
         and Ms O relating to events after the  wedding,  including  letters
         from councillors and letters  from  fertility  specialists  do  not
         really assist with the critical question as to whether or  not  the
         marriage was entered into with the predominant purpose of obtaining
         a residence permit."

24    Further, at [49] onwards, the judge held:

         "49.     The starting point is to look  at  the  findings  of  fact
         which had been made in early appeals. Those findings of  fact  have
         not been vitiated in law by the Upper Tribunal and  those  findings
         of fact stand. I have summarised those key findings of fact above.

         50.      The additional evidence from  Thornhill's  indicates  that
         the appellant was advised that he did not have grounds  of  appeal.
         The author of the letter indicated that there was no material error
         of law. In my judgement,  there  is  no  evidence  of  omission  or
         negligence by the solicitors insofar  as  their  legal  advice  was
         concerned in respect of either Judge  Mather's  decision  or  Judge
         Hudson's decision. That rather disposes of the argument  which  has
         been advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant  there  has  been  some
         failing. It is certainly not the case that the appellant's  present
         solicitors  have  taken  steps  to  identify  what  the  error   of
         professional standards was in the instant appeal  and  what  action
         has been taken to remedy this via the SRA. Given what  is  said  by
         Judge Ockelton above I find that the threshold is not satisfied  in
         this regard.

         51.      In many respects, that is  determinative  of  the  appeal.
         Absent any arguable error from a legal representative insofar as  a
         presentation of an earlier appeal is concerned then there is little
         scope to go behind a  prior  determination.  That  becomes  a  more
         ominous amount of the appellant to  traverse  another  two  appeals
         where findings of fact of (sic) been made."

25    The judge stated at [52]  that  he  would  nevertheless  consider  the
    appellant's evidence. At [54], the judge stated:

         "In my judgment, the  fundamental  difficulty  that  the  appellant
         cannot overcome is the finding of fact which was made at the  first
         hearing which related to the  evidence  from  the  registrar.  That
         contemporaneous evidence was made in conjunction with the statutory
         obligation to  report  reasonable  grounds  for  suspicion  that  a
         marriage  is  a  sham  marriage.  The  grounds  identified  by  the
         registrar make it clear that  both  parties  were  using  notes  to
         answer questions about each other. Judge  Mather  focussed  on  the
         argument advanced by the appellant's solicitor that this  registrar
         had  acted  in  bad   faith.   This   allegation   was   completely
         unsubstantiated. Judge Mather rejected that argument. I should  add
         that such conclusion was one which I would endorse. The idea that a
         public official would go out of his or her way to falsify  evidence
         against a complete stranger is frankly absurd. I note  that  at  no
         juncture has the appellant tackled this matter head-on  in  any  of
         his witness statements. I find the reason  is  that  the  appellant
         prefers to focus his attention on peripheral matters  in  the  hope
         that it will distract the Tribunal from this  core  event.  I  find
         that this is powerful, compelling and entirely persuasive  evidence
         from an independent third  party  who  has  reasonable  grounds  to
         suspect that the relationship is a  sham.  That  evidence  emanates
         from a person with wide experience  of  couples  celebrating  their
         nuptials. The evidence that the parties to the wedding had briefing
         notes about each other is highly persuasive and fulfils  the  legal
         criteria set out by the  UKSC.  Whilst  the  appellant  has  lodged
         numerous photos from social media which purport to show the  couple
         together,  there  has  been  no  plausible  explanation  for   this
         evidence. I find  that  the  reason  that  there  is  no  plausible
         explanation is because there is no plausible explanation. A genuine
         couple who were entering into a marriage with each other would  not
         leave notes about their partner.

         55.      In my judgement, the appellant's inability to  tackle  the
         contemporaneous   observations   of   the   registrar   is   highly
         problematic."

26    The judge noted at [62] that he had  heard  evidence  from  a  further
    witness (a Mr Jamil), but held at [63]: "I found that the  evidence  of
    the witness adds very little to the appellant's case. The  witness  did
    not meet Ms O until 2016. As such  his  evidence  with  regard  to  the
    marriage  of  convenience  is  wholly  immaterial.  Adopting  the  UKSC
    rationale, he can add  nothing  to  the  question  about  the  marriage
    contract."

27    The judge then noted at [64] that in  any  event  there  were  certain
    inconsistencies and limitations of that witness's evidence.

28    The judge then held at [65]:

         "My own assessment of the evidence is that for the reasons  already
         adjudicated upon, the  respondent  has  discharged  the  burden  of
         proving that the  marriage  was  entered  into  as  a  marriage  of
         convenience. Whilst there are elements of the interview  which  are
         consistent, there are equivalently elements of the interview  which
         are lacking in consistency. When one adds up those  inconsistencies
         to the evidence of the registrar above, I consider that the  burden
         of proof has been discharged."

29     In  considering  at  [68-69]  whether   the   respondent's   decision
    represented an unlawful interference with the appellant's rights  under
    Article 8 ECHR (such consideration potentially  being  unnecessary,  as
    the decision did not include any removal decision), the judge  held  as
    follows:

         "68.     I do not accept  that  the  couple  are  in  a  subsisting
         relationship. The appellate process indicates  that  the  appellant
         seeks to obtain  evidence  to  counter  the  findings  of  previous
         immigration judges. When findings  are  made  to  the  effect  that
         photos are staged, new photos are generated to attempt to determine
         otherwise. The collective evidence of a number of witnesses to  the
         relationship has been  rejected  on  the  grounds  that  they  have
         disclosed information which is  either  vague  or  discrepant  with
         knowledge of Ms O. To that extent the production  of  new  evidence
         has all the appearance of evidence which is  being  constructed  to
         override earlier findings of fact. Those findings of fact all  stem
         from an follow-on from the section 24 report.

         69.      There is evidence of fertility (treatment) but this is not
         evidence that the couple are in a relationship. It is evidence that
         Ms O is seeking fertility treatment and that the appellant has been
         involved in some  consultations  relating  to  this.  However,  the
         appellant has gone to some lengths to generate  evidence  which  he
         feels will support his case for legal status in the UK.  I  do  not
         find that this evidence shows anything other than the fact that  Ms
         O is receiving fertility treatment. The  semen  analysis  does  not
         refer to the appellant by name [152] and as such I  do  not  accept
         that the appellant has discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in  this
         regard."

30    The appeal was dismissed.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

31    The appellant appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  grounds  dated  1
    January 2019. The grounds are, with respect, somewhat opaque in some of
    the arguments advanced, but argue, in summary, that the judge erred  in
    law in:

    (i)    structuring his decision as he did,  revisiting  and  rehearsing
         the reasons given by Judges Mather and Hudson, the structure of the
         decision being irrational or flawed (Grounds, para 5);

    (ii)   giving the impression that the judge has treated the decision of
         Judges Mather and Hudson as the endpoint for considering  the  core
         issues in the appeal, and the judge had  closed  his  mind  to  the
         possibility that this was not a marriage of  convenience  (Grounds,
         para 5);

    (iii)  refusing permission for further evidence to be produced from the
         appellant by way of examination in chief (Grounds, para 5);

    (iv)   treating the  starting  point  of  his  decision  as  being  the
         findings in the decisions of judges Mather and  Hudson,  as,  prima
         facie, both decisions appeared to contain an error of law  such  as
         that at paragraph 5 of the decision of Judge  Mather  which  stated
         "the burden of proof, in this case, is upon the  appellant",  which
         represents a misdirection in law in cases involving allegations  of
         a marriage of convenience; it was stated  that  this  argument  had
         been advanced before the judge; thus, it was argued that Devaseelan
         did not apply in the present proceedings (Grounds, para 6);

    (v)    failing to acknowledge the application made by the appellant  to
         adduce further evidence post hearing, and  failing  to  acknowledge
         that the respondent did, contrary to the suggestion by  the  judge,
         have an opportunity to respond to the application (Grounds, para 8-
         9);

    (vi)   erring in the  consideration  of  the  existence  of  a  durable
         relationship between the appellant and EO, and in his consideration
         of fresh evidence; in particular proceeding under a mistake of fact
         at [69] that the evidence of fertility treatment showed  only  that
         EO was receiving fertility treatment, and that the  semen  analysis
         did not refer to the appellant by name, whereas the evidence before
         the judge did identify the appellant as the semen donor.

32    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Gibb in a decision dated 28 February  2019.  Although  summarising  the
    appellant's grounds somewhat differently to the way we have done above,
    and suggesting that the appellant's argument that the judge  had  erred
    in his consideration of further documents provided  after  the  hearing
    had little force,  Judge  Gibb  found  the  remainder  of  the  grounds
    arguable.

Submissions

33    On behalf of the appellant, Ms Laughran argued that  para  30  of   LD
    (Algeria) v Secretary Of State For Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ  804
    established that 'perhaps the most important feature  of  the  guidance
    (in  Devaseelan)  is  the  fundamental  obligation  of  every   special
    adjudicator independently to decide each new  application  on  its  own
    individual  merits  was  preserved',  but  that  the  judge   had,   by
    characterising the appellant's desire to overcome the findings  of  the
    previous judges as a 'central difficulty'  in  his  appeal,  failed  to
    perform that task. The judge had, at his para [12],  noted  that  Judge
    Mather had stated that the appellant had not discharged the  burden  of
    proof, but had failed to recognise that such a finding by Judge Mather,
    contained at  both  paragraphs  [5]  and  [21]  of  her  decision,  had
    represented a misdirection in law, notwithstanding that  she  had  also
    referred at [6] and [18] to the authority of Papajorgji. Judge  Durance
    had erred in at least not considering whether it  was  appropriate,  in
    those circumstances, to  not  treat  Judge  Mather's  decision  as  the
    relevant starting point. Further, Judge Husdon had similarly  erred  in
    her decision when finding at her paragraph [15] that she was obliged to
    treat judge Mather's decision as  her  starting  point  in  making  the
    decision in the appeal before her. A misapprehension by the First  tier
    Tribunal as to where the burden of proof lay was the  very  error,  set
    out at [14] of Sadovska, which resulted in the Supreme  Court  deciding
    to remit the appeal in that case to the First tier Tribunal.

34    Further, in relation to  the  evidence  which  Judge  Durance  thought
    relevant to the issues in the appeal, Judge Durance misdirected himself
    in law as to the guidance given in Sadovska, which does  not,  contrary
    to Judge Durance's findings at [47]-[48], limit the  evidence  relevant
    to the existence of a  marriage  of  convenience  to  the  evidence  of
    circumstances at the time of the marriage. The judge had, in  appearing
    to find that there was no evidence that the semen sample used  in  EO's
    fertility treatment was the appellant's, failed to  take  into  account
    evidence in the respondent's bundle at page E7/121, and the appellant's
    bundle at page [35].

35    Mr Tan argued  that  there  was  no  material  error  in  the  judge's
    decision. Judge Durance had been correct  to  treat  the  decisions  of
    Judges Mather and Hudson as the starting point  his  decision.  He  was
    entitled to have identified inconsistencies in the evidence provided by
    the appellant and EO. Mr Tan appreciated that  Judge  Mather  may  have
    recited the burden of proof incorrectly in her decision, but  this  did
    not and would not affect her findings; she had also  made  findings  on
    the quality of the witnesses' evidence, and on the s.24  report.  Judge
    Hudson had correctly directed herself in law as to the burden of proof.
    Further, Judge Durance did not misdirect himself in law as to the ratio
    of Sadovska; it was right to focus on the circumstances at the time  of
    the marriage to determine  whether  it  was  one  of  convenience,  not
    whether a relationship might have blossomed thereafter. Any mistake  of
    fact or failure to take into account relevant  evidence  regarding  the
    identity of the person giving the semen sample was not material to  the
    outcome of the appeal, because that evidence  did  not  relate  to  the
    circumstances at the time that the marriage of convenience was  entered
    into.

36    In reply, Ms Laughran referred to para  39  of  Rosa  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14, where  the  Court  of
    Appeal had found that a misdirection in law as to where the  burden  of
    proof lay did not, in that case result in  a  material  error,  on  the
    basis that "this was not one of those rare cases that  turns  on  where
    the legal burden of proof lies. The answer to the question whether  the
    appellant marriage was a marriage of convenience  was  clear-cut."  The
    issue is not clear-cut in the present case, she argued.

Relevant law

37    The headnote of Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC) provides:

         "i)      There is no burden at the outset of an  application  on  a
         claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is  not
         one of convenience.

         ii)      IS (marriages  of  convenience)  Serbia  [2008]  UKAIT  31
         establishes only that there is an evidential burden on the claimant
         to  address  evidence  justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
         marriage is entered into for the predominant  purpose  of  securing
         residence rights.

         iii) The guidance of the EU Commission is noted and appended."

38    In Rosa v Secretary of State for the home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    14, the Court of Appeal held, inter alia

         "24.     In my judgment, the legal burden lies on the Secretary  of
         State to prove that an otherwise valid marriage is  a  marriage  of
         convenience so as to justify the refusal of an  application  for  a
         residence card under the EEA Regulations.  The  reasoning  to  that
         effect in Papajorgji, as endorsed in Agho, is compelling."

    and

         "39.     I have already held that the legal burden of proof on  the
         issue of marriage of convenience lies throughout on  the  Secretary
         of State. It follows that the First-tier  Tribunal  was  indeed  in
         error in proceeding on the basis that it was for the  appellant  to
         show on the balance of probabilities that the marriage  was  not  a
         marriage of convenience. In my judgment, however, the error was not
         material. This was not one of those rare cases that turns on  where
         the legal burden of proof lies. The answer to the question  whether
         the appellant's marriage was a marriage of convenience  was  clear-
         cut. The findings of the previous tribunal in her husband's  appeal
         were sufficient to shift the evidential burden in  this  case  onto
         the appellant, as  was  effectively  recognised  in  her  counsel's
         concession that the issues raised by the previous determination had
         to be dealt with. The appellant produced a body of evidence  in  an
         attempt to  deal  with  them.  But  the  tribunal  found  that  the
         inconsistencies in the evidence of the appellant  and  her  husband
         supported the conclusion of the previous tribunal that the marriage
         was one of convenience and that there was no satisfactory  evidence
         that it had ever been the appellant's intention to  live  with  her
         husband as husband and wife. The emphatic finding in  paragraph  26
         that "I am entirely satisfied that it is a marriage of  convenience
         and always has been" is a fair reflection of the tribunal's overall
         reasoning and is the clearest of indications that the  outcome  did
         not turn on the tribunal's direction as to the burden of proof.  It
         is fanciful to suggest that the finding might have  been  different
         if the tribunal had approached the matter on  the  basis  that  the
         legal burden of proof lay throughout on the Secretary of State."

    and

         "41.     ... The tribunal was  correct  to  look  at  the  evidence
         concerning the relationship between the appellant and  her  husband
         after the marriage  itself  (both  before,  during  and  after  the
         husband's period  of  imprisonment),  since  that  was  capable  of
         casting light on the intention of the parties at the  time  of  the
         marriage. ..."

39    In Sadovska, where the appeal before the  Supreme  Court  included  an
    appeal against a decision to remove Ms Sadovska, an EEA  national,  for
    'abuse of rights' on the ground that she had attempted to enter into  a
    marriage of convenience with a Mr Malik, the Court held:

         "14.      Under  the  heading  "Applicable  law",  the   First-tier
         Tribunal judge said this, at para 7:

             "In immigration  appeals,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
             appellant and the standard of proof required is a  balance  of
             probabilities.  In  human  rights  appeals,  it  is  for   the
             appellant to show that there has been an interference with his
             or her human rights. If that is established, and the  relevant
             article permits, it is then for the  respondent  to  establish
             that the interference was justified. The appropriate  standard
             of  proof  is  whether  there  are  'substantial  grounds  for
             believing the evidence.'"

         It is apparent from his determination that his whole  approach  was
         to require Ms Sadovska and Mr Malik to prove  that  their  proposed
         marriage was not a marriage of convenience, rather than to  require
         the Home Office to prove that it was."

    and

         "28.     ...  Furthermore,  although  the  Regulations  permit  the
         respondent to take steps on the  basis  of  reasonable  grounds  to
         suspect that that is the case, Ms Sadovska is entitled to an appeal
         where the facts and circumstances must be fully investigated.  That
         must mean, as held in Papajorgji, that the tribunal has to form its
         own view of the facts from the evidence presented.  The  respondent
         is seeking to take away established rights. One of the  most  basic
         rules of litigation is that he who asserts must prove. It  was  not
         for Ms Sadovska to establish that the relationship  was  a  genuine
         and lasting one. It was for the respondent to establish that it was
         indeed a marriage of convenience."

    and

         "31.     The First-tier Tribunal did not analyse her rights in this
         way. It was quite simply incorrect to deploy the statement that "in
         immigration appeals the burden  of  proof  is  on  the  appellant",
         correct though it is in the generality  of  non-EU  cases,  in  her
         case. She had established rights and it was for the  respondent  to
         prove that the quite narrow grounds existed for taking  them  away.
         Nor did the determination address the issue of proportionality.  It
         is impossible for this court to conclude that, had the matter  been
         approached in the right way, the  decision  would  inevitably  have
         been the same.

         32.      The position of Mr Malik  is  different,  for  he  has  no
         established rights, either in EU law or in non-EU immigration  law.
         In order to benefit from the Directive, he would have to show  that
         he has a "durable relationship" with Ms Sadovska. However,  article
         3.2 requires the respondent to justify  any  refusal  of  entry  or
         residence in such cases.  So  if  he  can  produce  evidence  of  a
         "durable  relationship"  (a  term  which  is  not  defined  in  the
         Directive), it would be for the respondent to show that it was  not
         or that there were other good reasons to deny him entry.

         33.      It is not impossible that a tribunal,  properly  directing
         itself, would reach different conclusions in the case of these  two
         appellants. But it is impossible for this court to  conclude  that,
         had the matter been approached  in  the  right  way,  the  decision
         relating to Mr Malik would inevitably have been the same.

40    Finally, on the issue of the evidence that may be taken  into  account
    by the First-tier Tribunal upon little by the Supreme Court, the  court
    commented as follows:

         "34.     It follows that the appeal must be allowed  and  the  case
         remitted for a full  re-hearing  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In
         seeking to  establish  its  case,  the  respondent  will  no  doubt
         concentrate  on  the  interviews,  the  discrepancies  between  the
         appellants' accounts, and the gaps in Ms Sadovska's knowledge of Mr
         Malik's family, together with the sentence in their statement of 28
         March that their thoughts of living together and marriage  had  not
         yet "manifested into action" (which on 28 March was  strictly  true
         in that they were not yet living together or married but  they  had
         given notice of intention  to  marry).  But  in  considering  those
         discrepancies, the circumstances in which the interviews took place
         and  the  statement  was  made  must  be  borne  fully   in   mind.
         Furthermore, there were many matters on which their  accounts  were
         consistent. It turns out, for example, that  Ms  Sadovska's  mother
         does indeed live in Lithuania, as Mr Malik said in  explaining  why
         she was not there. There is also a considerable  body  of  evidence
         which supports their claim to have been in a genuine  relationship,
         dating back some time before  they  gave  notice  of  intention  to
         marry. Should the tribunal conclude that Mr Malik was delighted  to
         find an EU national with whom he could form a relationship and  who
         was willing to marry him, that does not necessarily mean that their
         marriage was a  "marriage  of  convenience",  still  less  that  Ms
         Sadovska was abusing her rights in entering into  it.  Their  legal
         and their factual cases must be considered separately."

Discussion

41    Having set out above in detail the history  of  the  appeal,  and  the
    reasons given for the decisions of Judges Mather, Hudson  and  Durance,
    we are able to state our own conclusions in rather shorter terms. There
    is nothing in grounds (i), (iii) and (v) as  we  have  summarised  them
    above. There is no error of law established by reason  of  the  overall
    structure of the judge's decision; there is no reason advanced  why  it
    was necessary for further oral evidence by way of examination in chief,
    and no procedural unfairness appears to have resulted;  and  the  judge
    did not err in relation to the post hearing evidence, which he  clearly
    admitted.

42    However, we find that Judge Durance did err in  law  in  finding  that
    the starting point to his own deliberations were the findings  of  fact
    made by Judge Mather. We  find  that,  as  is  now  made  clear  beyond
    peradventure by the Supreme Court judgement in Sadovska,  Judge  Mather
    erred in law in directing herself as she did by directing herself  that
    the burden of proof in the appeal before her lay on the  appellant.  We
    find that such error is not  ameliorated  by  any  reference  by  Judge
    Mather to the case of Papajorgji.

43    Although Judge Durance observed correctly that no appeal  was  brought
    by the appellant to the Upper Tribunal in relation to the  decision  of
    Judge Mather (or indeed against the decision of Judge Hudson), we  find
    that Judge Durance erred in law in appearing to treat the lack  of  any
    appeal against those decisions as determinative  against the appellant,
    in relation to the findings made in those decisions, notwithstanding  a
    clear misdirection in law contained within Judge Mather's decision.  As
    per para 30 of LD Algeria, the guidance given  in  Devaseelan  is  just
    that, guidance, and issues determined in previous appeals are not to be
    treated as res judicata. We are of the view that Judge Durance, in  the
    language he used in his  paragraphs  [23]  ('central  difficulty',  and
    'fundamental difficulty'), [46(m)] ('critical finding of  fact'),  [51]
    ('In many respects, that is determinative of  the  appeal'),  and  [54]
    ('core event'), has erroneously restricted  his  consideration  of  the
    appeal, particularly in light of  the  misdirection  in  law  contained
    within Judge Mather's decision.  Even if Judge Durance was right to  be
    concerned that no appeal had been  brought  against  the  decisions  of
    Judges Mather and Hudson at the time that they were made, he was  wrong
    in law to treat the absence of any such appeal as a significant factor,
    given in particular that the Supreme Court in Sadovska, post dating the
    decisions of Judges Mather and Hudson, gives  guidance  which  is  even
    clearer than that provided in Papajorgji  and  Rosa,  that  in  a  case
    involving an allegation of marriage of convenience, the burden lies  on
    the respondent.

44    Further, we find that as a result of the misdirection in law in  Judge
    Mather's decision, Judge Hudson ought not to have  treated  herself  as
    'obliged' to treat Judge Mather's decision as the starting point in her
    own decision. Although  Judge  Hudson  clearly  had  many  of  her  own
    concerns regarding the appellant's evidence in the appeal  before  her,
    we cannot be sure that she would  inevitably  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion in the appeal had she not  misdirected  herself  in  law  by
    treating Judge Mather's decision as the starting point.

45    We are of also of the view that Judge Durance misdirected  himself  in
    law in appearing to find that it is part of the ratio of Sadovska  that
    evidence relating to the question of  whether  a  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience should predate the marriage (Judge's decision, at [48]  and
    [63]). We find that that it simply not part of the ratio of the Supreme
    Court's decision. The Court merely observed in the latter part of  [34]
    that the evidence which was available to be taken into account  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal at the remitted  hearing  included  a  considerable
    body of evidence which supported the appellant's claim to have been  in
    a genuine relationship, dating back some time before they  gave  notice
    of intention to marry. This does not represent, in our view,  a  ruling
    that evidence relating to the intentions of  parties  at  the  date  of
    marriage must predate the marriage. Such a ruling would be contrary  to
    the guidance at para [41] of the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  of  Rosa
    (above). If the Supreme Court intended to overrule  that  guidance,  it
    would have done so in clear terms.

46    The practical effect of Judge Durance's misdirection as to  the  ratio
    of Sadovska is that he has erroneously  left  out  of  account  in  his
    assessment of whether the appellant's marriage was one of  convenience,
    the evidence before him of the fertility treatment  being  received  by
    EO. Although this post dates the marriage  by  some  time,  it  is  not
    entirely irrelevant. Further, Judge Durance erred in law by failing  to
    take into account evidence which did in fact identify the appellant  as
    the donor of the  semen  sample.   Although  the  letter  from  Ascroft
    Medical dated 26 January 2018  at  [152]  in  the  appellant's  bundle,
    regarding EO's fertility treatment,  and referred to by  the  judge  at
    [69],  refers  to  EO's  'partner'  and  does  not  actually  name  the
    appellant, the letter makes reference to the results  obtained  from  a
    semen sample given by the 'partner' in November 2017. Numerical results
    are given for three different factors that were assayed in  tests.  The
    separate document at E7/121 in  the  respondent's  bundle  is  a  semen
    analysis dated 14 November 2017, naming the appellant, and contains the
    same figures for the three  factors  mentioned  in  the  letter  of  26
    January 2018. There is also another letter from Ascroft  Medical  dated
    14 November 2017 at F15/148 of the respondent's bundle, relating to  EO
    and stating that her partner was at that time  waiting  for  his  semen
    analysis result. The dates of, and the test  results  contained  within
    these letters do tend to support the proposition that it was indeed the
    appellant who had given  the  semen  sample  under  discussion  in  the
    Ascroft Medical letters. We find that  the  documents  should  be  read
    together, and that the judge therefore left  out  of  account  relevant
    evidence in purporting to find that  the  appellant's  evidence  showed
    only that EO was receiving fertility treatment.

47    We find that, notwithstanding that the appellant may  well  have  very
    many hurdles to overcome in his appeal, which we intend to remit to the
    First-tier Tribunal, we are unable to say that it  is  inevitable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal would find that the appellant's marriage to  EO
    was one of convenience. The matter is not 'clear-cut', and we  find  it
    is not fanciful (Rosa, para [39]) to suggest that the finding  on  that
    issue might be different if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  re-hearing  the
    appeal properly directs itself.

48    For example, we are of the view that the content and  meaning  of  the
    section 24 report requires closer examination than has been given to it
    hitherto. The report does not, contrary  to  the  suggestion  of  Judge
    Durance, necessarily represent a  contemporaneous  observation  by  the
    registrar that both the appellant and EO used briefing notes about each
    other during discussions with the registrar. All that  is  known  about
    the opinion  of  the  registrar  is  that  which  is  recorded  in  the
    respondent's CID note, set out above. A full copy  of  the  Registrar's
    report is not given, and the three 'reasons' said to have been given by
    the Registrar for making the report, appear to us to be drafted in  the
    form of standard criteria that have  been  selected.   Even  if  it  is
    correct that  the  registrar  selected  those  standard  criteria,  the
    language (eg 'either party') used does  not  state  unequivocally  that
    both parties referred to notes to answer  questions  about  the  other.
    Although there was no ground of appeal before us regarding the  wording
    of the report, and the wording of the report has not formed part of our
    reason for setting aside Judge Durance's  decision,  we  are  concerned
    that Judge Durance was not entitled to give the report the significance
    he did at [46(m)], [54], [55], [65], and [68].  When the decision is re-
    made it would be helpful for the parties to address this issue in  more
    detail.

49    We further direct  that,  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    appeal, Devaseelan has no relevance to the rehearing of the appeal, and
    the findings of fact of Judges Mather and Hudson  shall  not  form  the
    starting point of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  rehearing
    this appeal for the reasons set out above.

50    We also note that in relation to the doubts that have previously  been
    expressed regarding EO's economic activity,  we  were  informed  by  Ms
    Loughran that EO has now been granted a certificate confirming a  right
    of permanent residence in United Kingdom. Whilst EO having been granted
    such a certificate has formed no part of our decision this  appeal,  it
    may be relevant in the determination of the issues  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

    Decision

    The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and is set aside.

    Due to the extent of the findings of fact which will need to be made in
    the appeal, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:                           Date: 13.9.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
