
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02671/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2016                 |On 20 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, legal representative, Tamsons Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page,
    promulgated on 14 March 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant was issued with a residence card on 2 June 2011,  as  the
    family member of a  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  national.   On  17
    November 2015, the appellant returned to the United Kingdom from Ghana.
    He was refused admission and his EEA residence card was revoked because
    it was not accepted that  he  remained  a  family  member  of  his  EEA
    national spouse. The appellant's claim to have a child with a  Ghanaian
    national unlawfully residing in the United Kingdom was  considered  but
    it  was  concluded  that  it  would  be  proportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant.

 3. When this matter came before Judge Page, initially on 2 February  2016,
    it was adjourned for the appellant to produce documentation in relation
    to divorce proceedings and for the respondent to make enquiries of HMRC
    to see if the appellant's spouse was exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom. The appeal resumed on 9 March  2016.  The  judge  noted
    that the mother of the appellant's child, S, did not attend. Judge Page
    concluded that the appellant had failed to discharge  the  burden  upon
    him to establish that his wife was in the United Kingdom or  exercising
    treaty rights. With regard to the  appellant's  Article  8  claim,  the
    judge found no evidence of any family life between  the  appellant  and
    his wife, the mother of S or S herself. The  appeal  was,  accordingly,
    dismissed under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 and the ECHR.

Error of Law

 4. In the grounds of appeal, it was argued that  the  burden  was  on  the
    respondent to show that the EEA sponsor was not in the United  Kingdom;
    that the judge contradicted himself  as  to  whether  the  sponsor  had
    issued the divorce proceedings in the United Kingdom or not;  that  the
    judge had declined to hear from three witnesses who  were  present  and
    that the judge made  a  mistake  of  fact  in  stating  that  no  birth
    certificate for S had been provided. It was contended that  S  and  her
    mother were present during the hearing.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale
    considered that the criticisms of the judge's conclusion regarding  the
    EEA Regulations matter amounted to no more than disagreement  with  his
    findings. Permission was granted as it was said to be arguable that the
    judge overlooked the birth certificate and that his findings as to  the
    appellant's parentage of a "British" child was arguably flawed.

 6. The respondent, in her Rule 24 response, indicated that the appeal  was
    opposed. It was said that the judge gave adequate reasons regarding the
    genuineness of the relationship between the appellant, his partner  and
    child and was entitled to find on the basis of the  evidence  that  the
    appellant was not in a genuine relationship with a partner and was  not
    the child's father.

The hearing

 7. When this matter came before me, Mr Tampuri attempted to argue that the
    HMRC evidence which showed a lack  of  economic  activity  by  the  EEA
    sponsor did not address an entire financial year. I did not permit  him
    to pursue this argument, which was not raised in the grounds of appeal,
    did not feature in the grant  of  permission  and  was  not  raised  in
    advance by way of a skeleton argument. He continued to argue  that  the
    burden of proof was on the respondent to show that the EEA sponsor  was
    not in the United Kingdom or not exercising treaty rights  despite  the
    fact that permission to appeal was not granted on this basis.  At  this
    juncture, I drew his attention to the issue upon which  permission  had
    been  granted  and  indicated  that  the  birth  certificate   of   the
    appellant's child was on the IAC case file and Mr  Walker  stated  that
    the respondent had sight of the same.

 8. There was then some discussion of the allegation made in  the  grounds,
    to the effect that the judge prevented the calling of  the  appellant's
    witnesses. I remarked that there was no supporting evidence as to  what
    took place at the hearing and  that  it  was  not  appropriate  for  Mr
    Tampuri, who represented the appellant before the First-tier,  to  give
    evidence and advocate simultaneously.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,
    Mr Walker advised me that  the  note  of  the  presenting  officer  who
    attended before the First-tier indicated that the judge did  not  allow
    cross-examination on the HMRC and divorce evidence and that the hearing
    proceeded by way of submissions only. In view of the contents  of  this
    note, I invited Mr Tampuri to respond. He replied that he had wished to
    call the appellant, the appellant's partner (the mother of S)  and  two
    others. He added that the appellant wished to rely on his  relationship
    with his partner's British child.

    Decision on error of law

 9. At the end of the hearing, I announced that  the  judge  made  material
    errors of law in relation to his  findings  in  respect  of  Article  8
    alone. My reasons are as follows.

10. Permission to appeal was not granted in respect of the judge's findings
    under the Regulations. In any event, Mr Tampuri's submission, that  the
    onus was on the respondent to  prove  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was  not
    residing in the United Kingdom or exercising treaty rights, is  plainly
    incorrect. In any event, the respondent  produced  evidence  from  HMRC
    which showed no evidence of any PAYE income by the sponsor for the 2015-
    2016 financial year nor any evidence that she  was  claiming  benefits.
    If, as it appears to be contended, the sponsor was  self-employed,  the
    onus was on the appellant to provide this evidence to the judge and  he
    failed to do so. Should further evidence come to  light  regarding  the
    sponsor's whereabouts and economic activity after  April  2015,  it  is
    open to the appellant  to  make  the  appropriate  application  to  the
    respondent. Accordingly, the judge's findings under the Regulations are
    upheld.

11. Turning to the human rights grounds,  at  [27]  The  judge  found  that
    "there is no evidence that the appellant and  this  woman  have  had  a
    child together called (S)."  Elsewhere in the same passage, he  remarks
    upon the absence of a birth certificate relating to S. Yet, at page B18
    of the appellant's evidence, is a photocopy of a certified copy of  S's
    birth certificate naming both parents,  including  the  appellant.  The
    judge's error of fact is material because at [33]  the  judge  suggests
    that the appellant is not the father of S and concludes that he is  not
    satisfied that the appellant has any family life in the United Kingdom.



12. Of even more  relevance,  is  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner's child, O, who is disabled, is a British citizen  and  thus  a
    qualifying child under section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Owing  to  the
    fact that neither the appellant nor  his  partner  gave  evidence,  the
    judge's concerns regarding the extent of family life, expressed between
    [25] and [30] were not addressed. I conclude that the judge  fell  into
    procedural error in deciding the appeal on  the  basis  of  submissions
    alone when it certainly appears that there were four witnesses  present
    at the hearing with relevant evidence to  give  regarding  the  claimed
    family life between the appellant, his partner, S and O.

13. For the foregoing reasons, the judge's findings, in respect of  Article
    8, cannot be sustained.




    Conclusion

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision except for the findings under the Regulations.






    Directions

       . This appeal is remitted to  be  heard,  de  novo  (in  relation  to
         Article 8 ECHR alone), by  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  except
         Judge Page

       . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Taylor House

       . Time estimate is 3 hours (4 witnesses)

       . A Twi interpreter is required




    No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. In view  of
    the fact that this claim involves minors, I consider it appropriate  to
    continue the said direction in the following terms:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "


Signed   Date: 16 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

