
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/02096/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16th January 2018                      |  On 8th February 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MR ABU BAKAR SHAHZAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler of Counsel instructed by MA Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the Appellant is the Secretary of State I will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  27th
    January 2016  to  refuse  his  application  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the UK as  the  extended  family
    member of an EEA national (his cousin, a Dutch  national).   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G A Black allowed his appeal under the EEA  Regulations.
    The Secretary of State now appeals to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Saffer on 18th January 2017.

 3. The decision of the Secretary of State of 27th January 2016 refused the
    Appellant's application for a residence  card  as  an  extended  family
    member of an EEA national under  Regulation  8(2)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.  Regulation 8(2) provides as follows:


         "8.  Extended family members:


         (2)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person is-
             (a)  a relative of an EEA national; and
             (b)  residing in a country other than the United  Kingdom  and
                  is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member  of  the
                  EEA national's household; and either-
                  (i)  is  accompanying  the  EEA  national  to  the  United
                      Kingdom or wants to join  the  EEA  national  in  the
                      United Kingdom; or
                  (ii) has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                      continues to be dependent upon the EEA  national,  or
                      to be a member of the EEA national's household."

 4. In order to be issued with a residence card the Appellant had therefore
    to demonstrate that he  had  been  residing  outside  the  UK  and  was
    dependent on the EEA national or a member of  his  household  and  that
    since joining the EEA national in the UK he continues to  be  dependent
    on him or to be a member of his household.

 5. In the reasons for refusal letter the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  sufficient  evidence  of  his
    dependency on the EEA national Sponsor at any time either  in  Pakistan
    or in the UK.  The Secretary of State considered that the Appellant had
    not provided sufficient evidence that he was dependent on  the  Sponsor
    immediately prior to entering the UK or that he has been residing with,
    or has been dependent upon the Sponsor since entering the UK.

 6. The Secretary of State set out a number  of  reasons  for  refusing  to
    issue the residence card set out at page 2 of the reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor are cousins as claimed.  The Secretary of State referred to
    the fact that the Appellant first entered the UK on 28th March 2011, as
    a Tier 4 Student with entry clearance valid until 21st July  2014,  and
    then made a further application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 student
    which was refused on 20th July 2015.  The Secretary of State noted that
    the records showed that the Appellant did not refer  to  dependency  on
    his claimed family at any point.  The Secretary of  State  referred  to
    the fact that the bank statements provided by the Appellant in relation
    to himself and the Sponsor show that they lived in different  addresses
    which raised doubts as to whether he  is  a  member  of  the  Sponsor's
    household.  It was also noted that the Halifax Bank statements  in  the
    Appellant's name showed that he was in receipt of payments from various
    people, not just the Sponsor which raised doubts as to whether he is in
    fact financially dependent on the Sponsor.

 7. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on 13th  September  2016  the
    Secretary of State did not appear and was not represented.   The  judge
    found that the Appellant gave credible and reliable  evidence.   Whilst
    noting that the Appellant was not subject to cross-examination as there
    was no Home Office representative, the judge noted that the Appellant's
    representative covered all of the issues raised in the refusal  letter.
    The judge noted that the Appellant produced the originals of all of the
    documents relied on.  The judge noted that the Sponsor  was  unable  to
    attend the hearing as he had been injured in a car accident in Pakistan
    and was unable to return in time for the hearing.  The Sponsor produced
    an affidavit in which he confirmed  the  Appellant's  account  but  the
    judge placed little weight on that  document  in  the  absence  of  the
    Sponsor's attendance. The judge noted that the Appellant produced birth
    certificates for his  mother,  his  cousin  and  his  cousin's  mother,
    establishing the links between the family members and  found  that  the
    Appellant is related as a cousin to the Sponsor who is an EEA  national
    from the Netherlands.

 8. The judge also accepted that there was sufficient evidence to show that
    the Sponsor is exercising treaty rights in the UK.  The key findings in
    relation to the EEA Regulations are at paragraphs 6  and  7  where  the
    judge said:

         "6.  I find that the appellant was dependent on  the  sponsor  from
             when he was living in Pakistan and since 2005 when the sponsor
             came to the UK after having lived  in  the  Netherlands.   The
             sponsor paid for his school fees  in  Pakistan  in  2002,  his
             college fees in Pakistan and when residing in the UK  he  paid
             for his tuition and living expenses as a student.  He produced
             evidence of monthly money transfers between 2009 and 2011  and
             receipts from the school and college in Pakistan.  When living
             in the UK as a student I find that the appellant  supplemented
             the money from the sponsor with earned  income  as  a  student
             limited by the restrictions imposed.  At that time I find that
             he was living in the  same  household  as  the  sponsor  at  [
                  ].  For a short time they moved out together to  live  at
             two addresses during a period  when  the  main  residence  was
             being renovated. The appellant produced  documentary  evidence
             to  support  the  residence  at  [                 ]  and  the
             addresses where they lived during the renovations. I find that
             the appellant lived in the same household as  his  cousin  and
             was dependent on him."

    The judge went on to conclude at paragraph 7:

         "7.  I asked the appellant why he had not made an application as an
             extended family member rather than a student visa?   I  accept
             his rely [sic] as credible.  I find that he was  unaware  that
             he could make such an application at the  time  and  his  main
             concern was to pursue his studies in the UK.  I find that  his
             sponsor paid for his studies in the  UK.   The  appellant  was
             asked to explain the  payment  into  his  account  of  various
             significant sums.  He provided credible explanations for those
             payments made which I accept.  For example one payment  was  a
             refund from  the  Grafton  College  of  his  fees,  which  was
             consistent with the education history.  I find no evidence  to
             support the respondent's  assertion  that  the  appellant  was
             dependent on others."



The grounds

 9. The Secretary of State challenges the judge's decision putting  forward
    three grounds as follows:

    1) There was no jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal  in  light  of  the
       decision in Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC);

    2) the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider the  nature  of
       the claimed level of dependency as to whether or not  the  financial
       assistance provided by the Sponsor amounted to dependency or  simply
       financial assistance.  The Secretary of State relied on the decision
       in Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 341  (IAC)  which  states
       that "financial dependency should be interpreted as meaning that the
       person needs financial assistance from the EEA national in order  to
       meet his/her essential needs";

    3) the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to make a finding on a material
       ground raised in the reasons for refusal letter in failing  to  make
       findings as to whether  the  EEA  national  or  the  Appellant  were
       residing at different addresses.

Ground 1

10. In relation to Ground 1, Ms Fijiwala  submitted  at  the  hearing  that
    although the decision in Sala was overturned in  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Khan v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, that decision has been stayed and  the  Secretary
    of State is seeking to appeal against  that  decision  to  the  Supreme
    Court and the Secretary of State maintains that the  decision  made  in
    Sala is the correct one.  On the other hand, Ms Butler  submitted  that
    the reasoning given by the Court of Appeal  in  Khan,  for  example  at
    paragraph 45, should be followed unless or until it is overturned.   At
    paragraph 45 Lord Justice Irwin said:

         "In my view, not only  does  the  context  favour  the  appellant's
         interpretation (for the reasons set out above) but that is the more
         natural meaning of the words.  'Entitlement'  is  subtly  different
         from a 'right'.  The natural meaning of  the  latter  is  something
         inherent and existing.  The natural meaning of an 'entitlement'  is
         a benefit which is obtained or granted.  Moreover, a decision which
         concerns 'an entitlement' appears to  me  naturally  to  include  a
         decision whether to grant such an entitlement.  That  is  precisely
         what the Secretary of State must do in such a case as this."

11. I accept Ms Butler's submission that it is appropriate  to  follow  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Khan  unless,  or  until,  the
    Supreme Court makes a decision in relation to  this  issue.   In  these
    circumstances I accept  that  the  Appellant,  having  been  refused  a
    residence card as an extended family  member,  does  have  a  right  of
    appeal against that decision to refuse his application for a  residence
    card as an extended family member.  Therefore the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had jurisdiction to consider this appeal.



Ground 2

12. In terms of the second ground, Ms Fijiwala submitted that  the  judge's
    findings were inadequate in relation to dependency in Pakistan  and  in
    the UK.  In relation to the circumstances in Pakistan she  pointed  out
    that the  judge  referred  to  the  Appellant's  education  and  living
    expenses but made no reference to his essential needs.  In terms of the
    UK, the judge notes that the Appellant was earning money  but  made  no
    finding as to needing support from the Sponsor to  meet  his  essential
    needs.  She referred to the decision in Lim v ECO (Manila) [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1383, in particular paragraphs 25, 29 and 32  where  the  Court  of
    Appeal emphasised that:

         "It is not enough simply to show that financial support is in  fact
         provided by the  EU  citizen  to  the  family  member.   There  are
         numerous references in these paragraphs which are  only  consistent
         with a notion that the family member must need  this  support  from
         his or her relatives in order to meet his or her basic needs." [25]

13. And at [32] where Lord Justice Elias said:

         "In my judgment, the critical question is whether the  claimant  is
         in fact in a position to support himself  or  not,  and  Reyes  now
         makes that clear beyond doubt, in my view. That is a simple  matter
         of fact. If he can support himself, there is no dependency, even if
         he is given financial material support by  the  EU  citizen.  Those
         additional resources are not necessary to enable him  to  meet  his
         basic needs. If, on the other hand, he cannot support himself  from
         his own resources, the court will not ask why  that  is  the  case,
         save perhaps where there is an abuse of rights. The  fact  that  he
         chooses not to get a job and become self-supporting is irrelevant."

14. In her submissions Ms Butler highlighted that the  Secretary  of  State
    did not appear at the hearing and provided no  representation  nor  did
    the  Secretary  of  State  provide  any  further  written  submissions.
    Accordingly, the only indication of the Secretary of State's  view  was
    contained in a reasons for refusal letter.  She submitted that  all  of
    the matters highlighted in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  had  been
    addressed.  The judge addressed the issue of  the  family  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor and this  finding  has  not  been
    challenged on appeal.   She  pointed  out  that  the  judge  asked  the
    Appellant about his decision to enter the UK as a student and  accepted
    his reply as credible [7].  Therefore, in her  submission,  this  issue
    had been dealt with.  The reasons for refusal  letter  noted  that  the
    bank statements suggested that  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  were
    living at separate addresses.  Ms Butler submitted that  this  was  not
    material as the Appellant did not need to show that he is a  member  of
    the Sponsor's household but in any event the judge made  a  finding  at
    paragraph 6 that the Appellant and the Sponsor had  been  living  at  [
            ] but moved out for a short time.  The  judge  therefore  found
    that the Appellant and Sponsor lived in  the  same  household.   In  Ms
    Butler's submission nothing more was required of  the  judge  than  the
    finding that the Appellant and Sponsor lived  in  the  same  household.
    The judge confirmed that she had asked questions of the  Appellant  and
    had looked at the documentary evidence and had accepted the Appellant's
    explanation.  In her submission it would be onerous to ask the judge to
    provide a detailed analysis of addresses,  times  and  dates  when  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor had lived at addresses  when  ultimately  the
    judge was satisfied with the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  and  the
    Sponsor were part of the same household.

15. In any event, in her submission, the judge also dealt with the issue of
    dependency which is an alternate to residence in  the  same  household.
    The reasons for refusal letter refers to receipt of payments from other
    people.  This is dealt with by the judge at  paragraph  7.   The  judge
    accepted the Appellant's explanation as credible and found there was no
    evidence to support the Respondent's assertion that the  Appellant  was
    dependent on others.  In her submission the judge's reasoning was  more
    than sufficient where nothing had been provided by the Respondent other
    than the doubts expressed in the reasons for refusal letter.

16. Ms Butler submitted that,  although  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    raised the issue of dependency, where the Secretary of  State  was  not
    represented at the hearing the Secretary of State could not  now  raise
    the broader considerations in relation to dependency. In any event,  in
    her  submission,  even  considering  the  broader   considerations   of
    dependency under the EEA Regulations, the judge has in  her  submission
    given sufficient reasons for finding that the Appellant  was  dependent
    on the Sponsor.  She referred to the evidence given in the  Appellant's
    witness statement and submitted that in accordance with  this  evidence
    it was open to the judge  to  make  findings  that  the  Appellant  was
    dependent on the Sponsor. She relied on the decision in  NH  (India)  v
    ECO [2007] EWCA Civ 1330  where  Lord  Justice  Sedley  said  that  the
    appellate courts are not to engage "in a microscopic search  for  error
    and should give Immigration Judges credit for knowing their  job,  even
    if their written determinations are imperfectly expressed".

17. I have considered the judge's findings at paragraphs  5  to  7  in  the
    context of her initial finding that the Appellant  gave  "credible  and
    reliable evidence".  The judge set out elements of the Appellant's oral
    evidence in the findings.  But also  of  significance  is  the  witness
    statement which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   In  the
    witness statement the Appellant said as follows:

         "7.  I confirm that I have been financially wholly  dependent  upon
             my sponsor  since  I  was  in  Pakistan  and  this  dependency
             continued when I arrived in the UK; this dependency  continued
             when my sponsor was in the Netherlands and UK.

         8.   Whilst I was in Pakistan I was wholly dependent on my  sponsor
             whereby he used to send me money on a monthly basis.  He  used
             to send my education fees in Pakistan directly  to  my  school
             and my progress reports were sent to  him.   I  have  attached
             money transfer receipts and college fee receipts.

         9.   Apart from supporting me for my education, I  have  also  been
             dependent on my sponsor for my daily/monthly expenditure  such
             as food, travel,  rent  for  college  and  general  day-to-day
             expenditure.

         10   He supported  me  financially  from  my  school  education  in
             Pakistan through to my College education in the UK.

         11.  My parents were not able to financially support me  throughout
             my education; this is primarily because for the past 25 years,
             my father has been suffering from  liver  disease.   This  has
             significantly affected his health and he has  been  bed  bound
             since  being  diagnosed  with  the  disease.   He  is   taking
             continuous medication upon the doctor's instruction.   Due  to
             my father's illness, my mother's employment opportunities were
             restricted as she was taking full-time care of my father.   If
             it were not for my sponsor, I would have suffered an extremely
             difficult childhood and life.

         12.  My sponsor took my entire financial burden on  his  shoulders;
             my family and I became totally dependent on him as  there  was
             no other source of income or property in Pakistan  due  to  my
             father's illness.

         13.  I will never forget the amount of support my cousin has  given
             me throughout my life; I am indebted to him for the support he
             has given me.  He has provided me with a quality education.  I
             look up to him as an older brother as he raised  me  like  his
             own blood brother.

         14.  Despite having his own personal problems, he never  failed  to
             make me feel in need of anything and  fully  supported  me  in
             order to meet my education and other living expenses.

         15.  When I came to the UK in 2011, he paid for all  my  travelling
             and other related expenses; this dependency has  continued  in
             the UK and until today I am dependent on him in the UK."

18. It is clear that the judge was relying upon this evidence  in  reaching
    her conclusions.  The judge found at paragraph 6 that the Appellant was
    dependent on the Sponsor from when he was living in Pakistan and  since
    2005 when the Sponsor came to  the  UK.   The  judge  referred  to  the
    documentary evidence including evidence about school fees  and  college
    fees paid in Pakistan and tuition and living expenses in the  UK.   The
    judge referred to the documentary evidence of money  transfers  between
    2009 and 2011 and receipts from the school and college in Pakistan.  In
    my view the judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant was dependent on the Sponsor before coming to the UK  on  the
    basis of this evidence.

19. The judge found that the  Appellant  was  a  member  of  the  Sponsor's
    household in the UK and that he was dependent upon him in  the  UK.   I
    note that at paragraph 17 of the witness statement the  Appellant  said
    that, since arriving in the UK, he and the Sponsor had  lived  together
    at [              ] except for a period between late May 2015 and  late
    October 2015 when that property was being renovated when the  Appellant
    did not change his address  but  was  regularly  picking  up  his  post
    whereas the Sponsor changed his address for this period.  On the  basis
    of this evidence it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant has been a member of the same household as his  cousin  since
    coming to the UK.

20. In my view it was also open to the judge to find that the Appellant has
    been dependent on the Sponsor since coming to the UK [6]. The Appellant
    dealt with this in his witness statement.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Sponsor paid for the Appellant's tuition and living expenses in the UK.
    The judge also took into account that the  Appellant  has  supplemented
    his income from a part-time job within the restrictions of his  student
    visa.

21. I accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not specifically  refer
    to the need to evidence that the  Sponsor's  support  is  necessary  to
    enable the Appellant to meet his basic needs. However it is clear  from
    the evidence in the witness statement that this is the basis  on  which
    the Appellant's case  was  put.   It  is  clear  from  the  Appellant's
    evidence about his circumstances in Pakistan that it is his  case  that
    the Sponsor's support was necessary for his essential needs to be  met.
    In considering the Appellant's circumstances in the UK the judge made a
    clear finding that the Appellant supplemented  the  money  he  received
    from the Sponsor with income he earned within the limits of  his  leave
    to remain as a student. In my view this finding clearly indicates  that
    the judge accepted that  the  Sponsor  met  the  Appellant's  essential
    needs. In any event the judge also found that the Appellant is a member
    of the Sponsor's household and he therefore meets the  requirements  of
    Regulation 8 on that basis.

Ground 3

22. The Secretary of State contends in the  third  ground  that  the  judge
    failed to make a proper finding as to  an  issue  in  dispute  that  is
    whether the Sponsor and the Appellant were living together in  the  UK.
    However, as set out above, in my view the judge's finding at  paragraph
    6 clearly deals with this issue and is based on the  evidence  and  the
    witness statement.  The judge found that, apart from a short time  when
    they did not  live  at  the  address  when  that  residence  was  being
    renovated, the Appellant and Sponsor have lived  at  the  same  address
    since the Appellant came to the UK.

23. For the reasons set out above the findings made by the judge were  open
    to her on the evidence before her.  Accordingly there  is  no  material
    error of law in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee aware made by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

