
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02471/2019
                                                               EA/02472/2019
                                                               EA/02475/2019
                                                               EA/02476/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2020                   |On 21 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                SHAMSUL ALOM
                                 EMRAN ALOM
                                RUMENA KHATUN
                                LUBNA KHATUN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shah of Taj Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellants  appeal  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence  ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  the  29
       October 2019 in which the Judge dismissed the appeals  of  the  first
       appellant, who was born on 1 January 1965 and who is married  to  her
       British national sponsor, and of the  remaining  appellants  who  are
       said to be their biological children, who were born on the  12  March
       1997, 11 August 1999 and 18 April 2000 respectively.
    2. Permission was granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on
       the basis it was said to be arguable that the Judge had erred in  law
       by applying a 'centre of life test' which was not permitted following
       the decision of the Upper Tribunal reported as ZA (Reg 9.  EEA  Regs;
       abuse of rights) Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 00281 (IAC).

Error of law

    3. In ZA, handed down on  17  September  2019,  it  was  held  that  the
       requirement to have transferred the centre of one's life to the  host
       member state is not a requirement of EU law, neither is  it  endorsed
       by the CJEU.  It is for the appellant to show that there has  been  a
       genuine exercise of Treaty rights in the host state in the sense that
       the exercise of Treaty rights was real,  substantive,  or  effective.
       The  question  of  whether  family  life   was   established   and/or
       strengthened and whether there has been a genuine exercise of  Treaty
       rights requires a qualitative assessment which will need to  be  fact
       specific bearing in mind that any work/self-employment must have been
       "genuine and effective" and not marginal or ancillary; the assessment
       of whether the stay was genuine does not involve an assessment of the
       intentions of the parties over and above a consideration  of  whether
       what they intended to do was to exercise Treaty rights; there  is  no
       requirement for the EU national or his family to have integrated into
       the host state nor for it to be their sole place of residence;  there
       is no requirement to have severed ties with the  home  member  state;
       albeit that these factors may, to a limited degree,  be  relevant  to
       the qualitative assessment of whether the exercise of  Treaty  rights
       was genuine.  If it is alleged that the stay in the  host  state  was
       such that reg 9(4) applies, the burden is on the SSHD  to  show  that
       there was an abuse of rights.
    4. Despite the hearing before the Judge not having taken place  until  7
       October 2019 and the decision being promulgated on  29  October  2019
       there is no reference in the determination to ZA by the Judge or  any
       indication of how the guidance provided in that case has been applied
       to this appeal. The reference by the Judge to a "centre of life test"
       indicates the Judge  was  either  unaware  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       guidance or failed to apply it.
    5. Mr Tan also observed a further fundamental error in the  decision  in
       that the Judge at [7] specifically states "The  appellants  bare  the
       legal burden of proof from start to finish and the standard of  proof
       is on the balance of probability" yet decides  that  Regulation  9(4)
       applies in this appeal; in relation to which the burden was upon  the
       Secretary of State not the appellants.
    6. It was not disputed before the Upper Tribunal  by  Mr  Tan  that  the
       Judge had erred in law in  a  manner  material  to  the  decision  to
       dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out in  the  grounds  and  the
       specific points referred to above. It was accepted that  the  failure
       to apply the correct burden of proof and the failure to consider  the
       merits in accordance with ZA means the appellants' have not  received
       a fair hearing of their repeal.
    7. In light of the fact the appeal will have to be considered afresh  in
       relation to which substantial findings of fact will  be  required  by
       reference to the correct legal framework, it is  a  case  which  when
       considering the Presidential Guidance on the remittal of  appeals  is
       suitable to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
       Birmingham to be heard by a judge  other  than  Judge  NMK  Lawrence.
       There shall be no preserved findings.

Decision

    8. The First-tier Judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Judge. This appeal shall be remitted to  the
       First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham to be  heard  afresh  by  a
       judge other than Judge NMK Lawrence.

  Anonymity.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 October 2020

