
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02814/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 1 March 2018                                |On: 20 April 2018             |
|                                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 MARY BOATEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, has appealed against a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 26 May 2017  in  which  it  dismissed  an
    appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing her a  residence
    card.


 2. Mr Harrison conceded that there was an error of  law  in  the  decision
    such that it should  be  set  aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is because the First-tier Tribunal failed to  make  any
    findings of fact.  The First-tier Tribunal did not have the benefit  of
    Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178, when the decision was  signed  on  20
    May 2017, and this is likely to have  influenced  the  absence  of  any
    findings in a very short decision.  I am satisfied that Mr Harrison was
    entirely correct to concede an error of law  was  made  such  that  the
    decision must be set aside.

 3. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant
    Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the
    factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I have  decided
    that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.


 4. The appeal proceeded on the papers before the First-tier Tribunal.   If
    it is  considered  that  an  oral  hearing  is  more  appropriate,  the
    requisite steps to pay the necessary fee for an oral hearing should  be
    made forthwith.

Decision


 5. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


 6. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 1 March 2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
