
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02264/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2016                  | On 18 November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                               QASIM SHAFIQUE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan whose date of birth is 2  March
    1990.  On 9  February  2016  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    application for a residence card.

2.   In brief, the decision of the respondent, so far  as  relevant  to  the
    present proceedings, was this: it was held that the appellant  had  not
    established  that  he  was  an  "extended  family  member"  under   the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  in  that  it  was  not  held  as
    established  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  in   a   durable
    relationship.

3.   The appellant appealed the above decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal was refused.

4.   The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal and permission was  granted  on  18
    October 2016.

The Issue

5.   In the Rule 24 response the respondent argued that  the  appellant  had
    no right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  support  of  this
    position the respondent directed our attention to the decision in  Sala
    (EFMs: right of appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 in which it  was  held
    that:

         "There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the
         Secretary of State not to  grant  a  residence  card  to  a  person
         claiming to be an extended family member."  (see: the headnote).

6.   The determination in Sala was not before the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   Mr Bandegani having sought an opportunity to consider (1) the terms  of
    the determination in Sala and (2) its practical effect with respect  to
    the appellant advised that he did not intend to advance any substantive
    argument in reply to the respondent's position based on Sala.   It  was
    therefore his position that he did not oppose the substantive  argument
    put forward in the Rule 24 note in terms of Sala.

Error of Law

8.   As above set out it was conceded on behalf of the appellant that  there
    was in light of the decision in Sala a material error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal in that it had no jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal from the respondent's decision.

Decision

9.   We accordingly for the above reasons hold  that  the  decision  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal was void for want of jurisdiction.  We  accordingly
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  With respect to the appellant's grounds of appeal, given the  way  that
    matters developed before us with respect to the Sala issue  these  were
    not argued as they were no longer relevant.  In these circumstances  we
    refuse the appellant's appeal.

    Further Matters

11.  Mr Bandegani addressed us on one further issue: he submitted  that  the
    findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal should not be carried  over
    by the respondent to any future consideration of applications  made  by
    the appellant.  It  was  his  position  that  in  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination was void, the  findings  of  fact  were  never
    made.  We indicated to Mr  Melvin  that  we  believed  that  there  was
    substantial merit in this submission.  He conceded, on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, that it would not be appropriate for any findings  of  fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal to be had regard to by  the  respondent
    when considering any future applications.

12.  We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

