
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02535/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2018                          |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                            Anita Konadu Abrokwa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Eteko, Legal Representative from Iras & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of the appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 13 February 2007 refusing her application for  "permanent
    residence" as a family member of an EEA national who retained  a  right
    of residence in the United Kingdom when the marriage was dissolved.

 2. The refusal letter says that "in order to qualify for a retained  right
    of residence following divorce from an EEA national, in accordance with
    Regulation  10(5)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016,  the
    following information is required:".  The letter then sets out in  some
    detail the requirement that there is evidence that  the  former  spouse
    was exercising free movement rights at the time of  divorce,  that  the
    marriage lasted for at least three years, that the  appellant  and  her
    (then) spouse resided in the United Kingdom for at least one  of  those
    years and  that  the  appellant  was  currently  in  employment,  self-
    employment or economically  self-sufficient  as  if  she  were  an  EEA
    national.

 3. I draw attention  to  the  requirement  that  "the  former  spouse  was
    exercising free movement rights at the time of divorce" (see the  first
    bullet point on the Reasons for Refusal Letter).

 4. The letter then continues: "In addition, as  your  application  is  for
    permanent residence you must  demonstrate  that  you  have  resided  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous five year  period...".



 5. Essentially this means that the appellant had to show that her  husband
    was exercising treaty rights until the divorce and she was acting as if
    she were exercising treaty rights thereafter.

 6.  The  respondent  expressly  accepted  that  the  appellant  had   been
    exercising treaty rights as a worker from the date of divorce until  14
    July 2015 but not that she had been  exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous five year period.

 7. Further, the respondent was not satisfied with the  evidence  that  her
    former husband was employed as a worker or self-employed person for the
    necessary period.

 8. The respondent found the evidence to be incomplete  and  unsatisfactory
    rather than dishonest.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence  before  her  and
    came to substantially the same conclusion, namely that the evidence was
    just not sufficient to prove the case.

10. Permission to appeal was given by the First-tier  Tribunal  essentially
    because it was found arguable that the judge had not  given  sufficient
    thought to the evidence before her.

11. I hope that the appellant's representatives will see it as constructive
    criticism when I say that they  could  have  presented  the  case  more
    helpfully.  This is a case that would have benefited  from  a  skeleton
    argument, or possibly a witness statement from  the  appellant,  cross-
    referencing the documents relied upon and explaining what  she  thought
    she had to prove and how she could do it.

12. That said, I agree with Mr Eteko for the appellant, (as did Mr Bramble)
    that the First-tier Tribunal did err in this case. There is evidence in
    the bundle that tends to support (I make no finding on its quality) the
    appellant's assertion that her former  husband  continued  to  exercise
    treaty rights  and  the  judge  had  not  considered  it,  particularly
    evidence that he paid national insurance contributions in the tax years
    ending in April 2010,  2011,  2012,  2013  and  2014.  Paying  national
    insurance suggests receipt of an income about 8 times greater than then
    the sums paid.

13. However I find that error to be immaterial.

14. As is apparent from the above, the appellant was required to show  that
    her husband was exercising treaty rights at the time of the divorce.

15. The date of divorce has been given as 7 July  2015  but  the  appellant
    said in her witness statement that her marriage  was  dissolved  on  14
    April 2015. I wonder if the appellant meant that the  decree  nisi  was
    given on 14 April 2015. Be that as it may, Mr Bramble  submitted  that,
    following Baigazieva v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1088, the relevant date was
    the date when proceedings were initiated (see regulation  10(5)(d)(i)).
    I am inclined to agree with him but it makes no difference in this case
    because, according to the original application, which is  clearer  than
    the copies, proceedings were issued on an unspecified  day  in  January
    2015.

16. Although not expressly "spelled out" in the refusal letter there was no
    evidence that the appellant's husband had  been  continuously  employed
    after then end of April 2014  until  the  divorce.  There  was,  in  Mr
    Bramble's words, a "dead zone" between tax year ending  in  April  2014
    and the appellant initiating divorce proceedings in January 2015.

17. In short, there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the
    appellant's husband had worked between the start  of  the  2014/15  tax
    year and the divorce in the end of that tax year.

18. It follows that there was no evidence to support a necessary finding of
    fact and the error was not material.

    Notice of Decision

19. This appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 May 2019                    |



