
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02431/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 September 2017                   |On 13 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              MR HAMID HUSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Norman, Counsel instructed by KQ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shanahan) dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue him  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    extended family member ("EFM" or "OFM") of an EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights here.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity
    direction in favour of the appellant, and I do  not  consider  that  he
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In his  decision  promulgated  on  29  November  2016,  Judge  Shanahan
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the  Tribunal   had   no
    jurisdiction to hear it, following Sala (EFMs: rights of appeal) [2016]
    UKUT 00411 (IAC).

 3. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Gillespie on 9  May  2017  on
    the ground that "[t]he proposed point of law is not arguable  and  must
    be regarded as settled and binding".

 4. However, on 7 July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  held  that  it  was
    arguable that Sala was wrongly decided, and  so  (he  implied)  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong to hold that  the
    appellant did not have a right of appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. Mr Bates reported that there were a number of Sala appeals  pending  in
    the Court of Appeal, of  which  the  first  had  an  expedited  hearing
    scheduled for early October. He also produced a print out  of  Case  C-
    89/17 (SSHD v Rozanne Banger) in  which  the  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal had made a reference to the ECJ on  20  February  2017  for  a
    preliminary ruling on inter alia the following question:

         Is a rule of national law which precludes an appeal to a  court  or
         tribunal against a decision of the executive refusing  to  issue  a
         residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family member
         compatible with the Directive?

 6. Ms Norman, who did not appear below, adopted the case  which  had  been
    advanced by her colleague, which was that the  Regulations  2006  -  as
    interpreted by the UT in Sala - were  incompatible  with  the  Citizens
    Directive of 2004. This was because, upon a proper construction of  the
    Directive, EFMs had the same appeal rights as direct family members.

 7. At the outset of  the  hearing,  Ms  Norman  invited  me  to  stay  the
    proceedings until the Court of Appeal had given a ruling as to  whether
    or not Sala correctly stated the law. I declined to do so, as I did not
    consider such a course would  be  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective. A definitive decision from the Court of Appeal might be some
    way off, and whatever the Court of Appeal decided, the outcome  of  the
    ECJ reference might change the landscape, and there was  no  indication
    that the ECJ was going to deliver a ruling in the near future.

Discussion

 8. The ratio decidendi of Sala is that a decision taken by  the  Secretary
    of State "in the exercise of her discretion" not to issue an EFM with a
    residence card is not an appealable decision under the EEA  Regulations
    2006.

 9. The Tribunal in Sala held that such a decision  is  not  an  appealable
    decision as it does not meet the  definition  of  an  EEA  decision  in
    Regulation 2(1) which  is  that  the  decision  "concerns"  a  person's
    entitlement to be issued with a residence card, whereas deciding that a
    person is not an EFM is not a decision which concerns  his  entitlement
    to be issued with a residence card.

10. The Judge was right to apply Sala, as it was binding on  him.  However,
    the law always speaks, so he could  be  held  retrospectively  to  have
    erred in law, if Sala is declared to be wrongly decided.

11. The representatives were in agreement that I am  not  bound  to  follow
    Sala. However, while there  is  reasonable  doubt  as  to  whether  the
    decision is correct  (and  hence  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  granted
    permission to appeal), it is indisputably a very comprehensive and well-
    reasoned decision by two eminent judges of the Upper Tribunal  and,  as
    such, it commands respect.

12. It is also important to recognise that the  appellant's  error  of  law
    challenge to Sala, and hence to the decision of Judge Shanahan,  is  an
    oblique one. The appellant does not attempt to engage with Sala on  the
    territory over which Sala was fought. Although Ms Norman clarified that
    one of her arguments was that the Tribunal was wrong  to  construe  the
    Regulations 2006 as excluding  appeal  rights  for  EFMs,  no  reasoned
    argument to this effect is advanced in the grounds of appeal.

13. The jumping off point for the appellant's error of law challenge is the
    statement in Sala at paragraph [23] that it was  not  suggested  before
    the Tribunal, "that our domestic law in the EEA Regulations 2006 is, in
    any way, inconsistent with the provisions of the  Citizens  Directive".
    Ms Norman submits that in fact the Regulations  are  inconsistent  with
    the Directive.

14. I have reviewed the provisions of the  Directive,  and  especially  the
    Articles relied on by Ms Norman - which include Article 9 - in order to
    ascertain whether there is any merit  in  the  argument  summarised  in
    paragraph [6] above. I am unable to find any support for the argument.

15. The Directive draws a clear distinction between Family Members, who are
    defined at Article 2(2),  and  "any  other  family  members",  who  are
    defined at Article 3(2)(a) as being a family member who does  not  fall
    within the definition of Family Members at Article 2(2)  and  who  also
    satisfies the additional criteria of present and past dependency and/or
    membership of the Union citizen's household.

16. There is a requirement on the Member  State  to  facilitate  entry  and
    residence for such persons, to undertake an  extensive  examination  of
    their personal circumstances, and to justify any  denial  of  entry  or
    residence to these people. The Directive does not address the  question
    of appeal rights, and so it cannot be said that the Directive expressly
    requires that EFMs should  enjoy  the  same  appeal  rights  as  Family
    Members.

17. I accept that in, for example, Article 10 (issue  of  residence  cards)
    the Directive refers to "family members" in a broad sense, encompassing
    both direct family members and EFMs. But while  Article  10  stipulates
    the documents and/or the proof that particular classes of person -  for
    example, persons in cases falling under Article 3(2)(a) -  must provide
    for a residence card to be issued, it is silent on the question of  how
    and  where  the  examination   of   personal   circumstances   exercise
    contemplated in Article 3(2) fits in, and it is also silent (as is  the
    rest of the Directive) on the question as to how and in  what  forum  a
    putative EFM can challenge a Member State's reasoned denial of entry or
    residence.

18.  Accordingly,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  Regulations  2006  are
    incompatible with the Directive. Thus,  the  First-tier  Judge  is  not
    shown to have been wrong to follow Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]
    UKUT 411 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands. This appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 12 September 2017

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

