
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02914/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th March 2019                    |On 10th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                hamdinou elboraei elmoursi elsherbini elsrafi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kamal, ISL Legals Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Egypt  born  on  13  January  1983.   He
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cockrill
    dismissing his appeal against  the  refusal  of  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence as a  spouse.  The  Appellant  was
    refused  a  residence  card  under  Regulation  24(1)   of   the   2016
    Regulations.

Immigration history

2.   The Appellant entered  the  UK  illegally  and  claimed  asylum  on  13
    October 2008 in the identity  of  Abdul  Ibrahim  Jamal  a  Palestinian
    national. He was served with a removal notice as  an  illegal  entrant.
    His asylum claim was refused on 7 November 2008. On 20 October 2011  he
    submitted an EEA residence card application in his own  identity  as  a
    family member of an EEA national which was refused on 11 January  2012.
    He submitted an application for leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds
    and was granted leave until 1 May 2016. On 22 April 2016 he submitted a
    further application for a residence card which was rejected on 13  June
    2016. On  22  November  2016  he  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    deportation and served with a deportation order. The application for  a
    residence card made on 24 June 2016 was refused under Regulation  24(1)
    on grounds of public policy and public security.

3.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal. The judge  accepted  at
    paragraph 34 that the offences were relatively minor and,  although  he
    was a persistent offender, he was not a serious offender. The Appellant
    was not a threat to the public in any way and  had  not  committed  any
    further offences. The  judge  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant  was
    legally married to an EEA national for the  last  five  years  and  was
    entitled to permanent residence. The judge accepted that the  Appellant
    was still married and they were trying to reconcile their marriage.

4.   Permission was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy for  the
    following reasons: "At the end  of  [34],  the  judge  states  that  he
    accepted the proposition that the Appellant  has  not  been  a  serious
    offender but does not explain why, if that is the case, the  respondent
    can be said to have discharged the burden  in  relation  to  Regulation
    27(5)(c) as required in Arranz (EEA Regulations - deportation  -  test)
    [2017] UKUT 294. This ground was arguable." The other grounds  relating
    to the 2016 Regulations were arguable  because  they  related  to  this
    fundamental  issue.  The  Article  8  grounds  were  not  arguable  and
    permission was not granted on that basis.



Submissions

5.   Mr Kamal submitted that the Appellant was legally  married  and  was  a
    family member but had been refused  a  residence  card  on  grounds  of
    criminality. It was not in  dispute  that  his  wife  was  a  qualified
    person. Having found that he was not a serious offender the  judge  had
    erred in finding that  he  was  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society.  The
    Appellant was not a threat. He had been rehabilitated and completed his
    community service in respect of the  offences  of  which  he  had  been
    convicted. The Respondent had failed to discharge  the  burden  because
    the Appellant was  not  a  current  threat.  The  judge's  comments  in
    relation to the Appellant's  alleged  deception  in  employing  another
    identity were wrong.

6.   Mr Melvin submitted that the Appellant's submissions in the grounds  of
    appeal and made  orally  amounted  to  an  argument  with  the  judge's
    decision but disclosed no material error of law. The judge  found  that
    the Appellant was an unsatisfactory witness  and  had  been  deceitful.
    Given the Appellant's fifteen previous convictions and the finding that
    his oral evidence was unreliable, it was open to the judge to  conclude
    that the Appellant was currently a risk in the UK. It  was  clear  from
    the judge's findings at paragraphs 38 to 40 that the burden was on  the
    Respondent and there  was  sufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    discharge that burden. The Appellant did not have  permanent  residence
    so it was not necessary to show serious grounds of  public  policy  and
    security. The judge's findings were sufficient and sustainable in law.

7.   In response, Mr Kamal submitted that the Appellant was  not  a  serious
    offender. He was not a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    and  had  not  committed  any  further  offences.  On  the  balance  of
    probabilities,  there  had  been  no  further  criminal  activity   and
    therefore the Respondent had not  discharged  the  burden  because  the
    Appellant was not currently a threat.



Relevant regulations

8.   Regulation 24 (1) states: The Secretary of State may refuse  to  issue,
    revoke or refuse to renew a registration certificate, a residence card,
    a document certifying permanent residence or a permanent residence card
    if the refusal or revocation is justified on grounds of public  policy,
    public security or public health, or on grounds of misuse of rights  in
    accordance with regulation 26(3). Regulation 24 (7) states: Any action
    taken under  this  regulation  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
    security or public health must be in accordance with regulation 27.

9.   Regulation 27 (1) states: In this regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"
    means an EEA decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
    security or public health.  Regulation  27  (5)  provides:  The  public
    policy and public security requirements of the United  Kingdom  include
    restricting rights otherwise conferred by these Regulations in order to
    protect the fundamental interests of  society,  and  where  a  relevant
    decision is taken on grounds of public policy  or  public  security  it
    must also be taken in accordance with the following principles-

    (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

    (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of
         the person concerned;

    (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  must  represent  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;

    (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which  relate
         to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not  justify   the
         decision;

    (e)  a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision;

    (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even  in  the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.



Discussion and conclusions

10.  The judge found that the Appellant was an  unsatisfactory  witness  and
    had been untruthful in a number of respects. He was not a  person  upon
    whom the judge could place reliance. He found that  the  Appellant  had
    used his brother's details. His brother was also  culpable  because  he
    had falsely used  the  Appellant's  address.  The  Appellant  had  been
    subject to  a  restraining  order,  which  he  disclosed  in  his  oral
    evidence. There was no reference to this in his witness statement where
    he stated that he was still living with his wife. The judge found  that
    the reality of the situation was that the Appellant was  separated  and
    had been for an appreciable time. His wife was living with an aunt  and
    the Appellant had been living on his own.

11.  This is not a case where deportation was followed. However,  the  judge
    noted that the Appellant's spouse did not attend to give  evidence  and
    there was no witness statement from her. The judge was clear  that  the
    Appellant had been  someone  who  had  been  far  from  consistent  and
    reliable in the way he gave his account and had tried at various points
    to blame  his  twin  brother.  The  Appellant  had  misrepresented  the
    situation by using his brother's details and he  had  fifteen  previous
    convictions.  The judge took into account the positive report from  the
    Appellant's probation officer and that the Appellant  has  completed  a
    certain number of hours of unpaid work, but concluded that, looking  at
    his overall conduct, the Appellant had been deceptive and  he  was  not
    currently living with his EEA national wife.

12.  In summary,  the  judge  made  the  following  relevant  findings.  The
    Appellant has fifteen previous convictions. Each offence was relatively
    minor in the scale of criminal  behaviour  but  looked  at  overall  it
    amounted  to  a  situation  where  the  Appellant  had  shown  a  clear
    propensity to  reoffend.  The  Appellant  was  a  persistent  offender,
    although not a serious offender. The Appellant did not  have  permanent
    residence and was not entitled to enhanced protection.

13.  The reference to Arranz in the grant of permission was relied on by  Mr
    Kamal to support the submission that the burden was on the Secretary of
    State  and  there  was  insufficient  evidence  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities to discharge  that  burden.  The  case  of  Arranz  is  a
    deportation case unlike the current one and other than establishing the
    burden and standard of proof does not really assist the Appellant.  The
    Appellant did not have permanent residence  and  was  not  entitled  to
    enhanced protection. The Appellant's fifteen previous convictions  show
    that he was a persistent offender. The Appellant had employed deception
    in the past and had failed to disclose, prior to  the  appeal  hearing,
    that he was no longer living with his wife. The judge was  entitled  to
    find, on the evidence before him, that the Appellant's conduct was such
    that he was a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  and,
    therefore, it would not be appropriate to grant him a residence card.

14.  The judge considered whether  the  Appellant's  conduct  justified  the
    Respondent's decision. He found that the Respondent had shown that  the
    Appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. The judge
    accepted that although the Appellant was technically married to an  EEA
    national, relying on the Appellant's overall  conduct,  the  Respondent
    was entitled to exercise discretion in refusing to  issue  a  residence
    card.  The judge's finding was open to him on the evidence  before  him
    and there was no material error of law in the decision to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.

15.  I find that there was no error of law in the judge's decision dated  24
    September 2018 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

