
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/02516/2019
                                                               EA/02729/2019
                                                               EA/02731/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On: 2nd March 2020                   |On: 17th March 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Muqaddas [Y]
                                    [A J]
                                    [M F]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel instructed by MA Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of Pakistan. They are  respectively  a
    mother (born 20th December 1987) and her two dependent daughters  (born
    6th January 2012 and 11th October 2009).  They appeal  with  permission
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  P.  Lewis)  to
    dismiss their linked appeals under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016.


 2. The Appellants all seek a Surinder Singh permission to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom under Regulation 9.  The Sponsor of  these  applications
    is Mr Javeed Iqbal, the British husband of the First Appellant and  the
    father of the children.


 3. The Respondent had refused to issue a family permit on the grounds that
    in the 15 months that this family had resided together  in  Italy  they
    had not made sufficient efforts to "integrate"  there.  The  Respondent
    concluded that this period of residence in Italy was not "genuine".

 4. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that Mr Iqbal went to live in Italy in
    2015 where he secured employment as a painter.  He  worked  there  from
    about December 2015 to August 2018.  The Appellants joined him there in
    May 2017, and all three were granted residence permits.   The  children
    attended school.  So far so good. The Tribunal went on  to  reject  the
    claim by the First Appellant that she had made many friends  in  Italy,
    or that she had managed to learn any Italian. It further  rejected  the
    explanations as to why the family decided to move to the United Kingdom
    in August 2018 and concluded that the move to Italy had been a sham,  a
    device to circumvent the Immigration Rules because Mr Iqbal  could  not
    meet  the  minimum  income  requirements  therein.    The  appeal   was
    dismissed on that basis.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
    on the basis that the Judge had arguably erred in failing to apply  the
    ratio of ZA (Regulation 9: EEA Regulation; abuse of rights) Afghanistan
    [2019] UKUT 281 (IAC).  The material part of the headnote in ZA reads:

          1) The requirement to have transferred the centre of  one's  life
             to the host member state is not a requirement of EU  law,  nor
             is it endorsed by the CJEU.


          2) Where an EU national of one state ("the  home  member  state")
             has exercised the right of freedom of movement to take up work
             or self-employment in another EU state ("the host state"), his
             or her family members have a derivative  right  to  enter  the
             member state if the exercise of  Treaty  rights  in  the  host
             state  was  "genuine"  in  the  sense  that   it   was   real,
             substantive, or effective. It is for an appellant to show that
             there had been a genuine exercise of Treaty rights.


          3) The question of whether family  life  was  established  and/or
             strengthened, and whether there has been a genuine exercise of
             Treaty rights requires a qualitative assessment which will  be
             fact-specific and will need to bear in mind the following:


               a) Any work or self-employment must have  been  "genuine  and
                  effective" and not marginal or ancillary;


               b) The assessment of whether a stay in  the  host  state  was
                  genuine does not involve an assessment of  the  intentions
                  of the parties over and above a consideration  of  whether
                  what they intended to do was in fact  to  exercise  Treaty
                  rights;


               c) There is no requirement for the EU national or his  family
                  to have integrated into the host member state, nor for the
                  sole place of residence to be in the host state; there  is
                  no requirement to have severed ties with the  home  member
                  state; albeit that these factors may, to a limited degree,
                  be relevant to the qualitative assessment of  whether  the
                  exercise of Treaty rights was genuine.


          4) If it is alleged that the stay in the host  member  state  was
             such that reg. 9 (4) applies, the burden is on  the  Secretary
             of State to show that there was an abuse of rights.

 6. Before me Mr Tan conceded that applying the guidance in ZA to the facts
    in this case the appeal must be allowed. There was no dispute that  the
    family had lived together in Italy for 18 months, or that Mr Iqbal  had
    been exercising treaty rights there. The intentions of the parties  was
    irrelevant, and the Secretary of State had produced no evidence capable
    of showing that there had been an  abuse  of  rights.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in its focus on intentions, and properly construed,  the
    period of residence in Italy  was  "genuine".   It  followed  that  the
    appeal must be allowed.




    Decision


 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


 8. There is no order for anonymity.

 9. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows: the appeal is  allowed
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              2nd March 2020
