
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
EA/02238/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |            Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                              |
|On 26 November 2018                 |            On 03 January 2019           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                         Kevin Alexander Porcel Lema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah of Counsel, Vine Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. There is now just one appellant in this case, Kevin Lema who  was  born
    on 27 July 1994.  He is a national of Bolivia.

 2. The appellant's parents came to this country in  2002/3  in  their  own
    right as students and were here lawfully until about  2009  when  their
    leave, which had been extended on occasions, expired, since  when  they
    have overstayed.  In June or July 2007 this appellant, together with  a
    sister, arrived in the UK.  Because they were both teenagers they  went
    to secondary school in the UK where the appellant's sister met a Polish
    national to whom she is now married.  It is accepted that  at  material
    times the Polish national (the  sponsor)  has  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in this country.

 3. Another child was born in May 2008 and I am told she is now  a  British
    citizen, an application having been made on her  behalf  on  the  basis
    that having been born in this country and having lived in this  country
    for ten years she was entitled to British citizenship.

 4. The appellant's sister, having  married  the  sponsor,  was  granted  a
    residence card.  It is the family's case that the appellant's  parents,
    together with him and his younger sister, were all  dependants  of  the
    sponsor and on this basis on 1  February  2016  they  all  applied  for
    residence cards as family members  of  the  sponsor.   The  appellant's
    parents  applied  under  Regulation  7  of  what  was  then  the   2006
    Regulations (which has been replaced  in  similar  terms  in  the  2016
    Regulations); within Regulation 7(1)(c) a family member entitled  to  a
    residence card includes "dependent direct relatives  in  his  ascending
    line or in that of his spouse or his civil  partner"  and  so  on  this
    basis, provided that the appellant's parents were indeed dependants  of
    the sponsor they would be entitled to residence cards under  Regulation
    7.  The appellant and his younger sister, who had been born in May 2008
    applied for residence cards on the basis that they were extended family
    members under the  relevant  Directive.   The  respondent  refused  the
    application essentially because it was not  accepted  that  either  the
    parents or the appellant and his sister were dependants of the sponsor.
     The appellant, together with his  parents  and  his  sister,  appealed
    against this decision and their  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clark, sitting at Taylor House on 27 June 2018.

 5. In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  23  July  2018  Judge  Clark
    allowed the appeals of  the  appellant's  parents  under  Regulation  7
    because she accepted that  they  (and  indeed  the  appellant  and  his
    younger sister) were indeed dependent  on  the  sponsor  but  she  felt
    obliged to dismiss the appeal of the appellant and his younger  sister.
    The reason  for  this  is  that  under  Regulation  8(2)  of  the  2006
    Regulations it is clear that in order to succeed under this  Regulation
    the appellant and his sister would have to establish  prior  dependency
    before entering the UK,  which  of  course  they  could  not  do.   The
    appellant entered the country even before his sister had even known the
    sponsor and the younger sister was born in  this  country,  so  clearly
    they had not been dependent before entering the country.

 6. The appellant and his younger sister appealed but the appeal on  behalf
    of the younger sister has now been discontinued as she is now a British
    national.  The basis of the appeal (for which  leave  was  surprisingly
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on 11 October 2018) is  that
    Regulation 8(2) does not comply with the Directive.

 7. The difficulty with this submission is  that  this  precise  point  was
    considered by the Court of Appeal in Oboh and others v SSHD [2013] EWCA
    Civ 1525 in which the Court of  Appeal  concluded  that  the  Directive
    meant what was set out within the 2006 Regulations.  Accordingly,  (and
    Ms Appiah sensibly did not seek to persuade me  otherwise)  I  have  no
    alternative other than to dismiss this appeal as this Tribunal is bound
    by the decision of the Court of Appeal.

 8. I note, as did Judge Clark, that this decision does  not  preclude  the
    appellant making an application for leave to remain  under  Article  8,
    but as this has not yet been made, that is not an issue which now falls
    to be determined by this Tribunal.

 9. Accordingly, there being no material error  of  law  in  Judge  Clark's
    decision relating to this appellant, this appeal must be dismissed  and
    I will so order.



Notice of Decision

There being no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  the
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                   Date: 27 December 2018













