

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02903/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision issued            |
|On 20th September 2018                     |On 17th October 2018       |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                        MR RAO MUHAMMAD ASIF MAHMOOD
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by LKW Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal McManus dismissing an appeal against a refusal to issue a
      residence card.  The residence card was refused because the Secretary
      of State decided the appellant had entered into a marriage of
      convenience with an EEA national.

   2. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found the appellant had entered
      into a marriage of convenience.  However, when an application was made
      for permission to appeal, the judge considering the application noted
      that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had arguably applied the
      wrong burden of proof.  Instead of following Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54
      it was arguable that the judge had accepted a submission by the
      respondent that the burden of proof was on the appellant and had
      applied this in making her decision.  In addition the judge arguably
      failed to take into account that a marriage would be one of
      convenience only if its predominant purpose was immigration benefit
      and arguably failed to consider whether deception was the purpose of
      both parties to the marriage.  The judge found that the couple lived
      together and the sponsor considered that the appellant had been kind
      to her.  A further issue considered to be arguable was that the judge
      had purported to decide the appeal under the Immigration Rules instead
      of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

   3. At the hearing before us both parties were of the view that the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for error of
      law and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. While it was clear that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had erred
      in law by not applying the correct burden of proof, we considered
      whether remittal was the proper course.  The difficulty we faced was
      that it was not possible to see what the outcome of the appeal would
      have been had the burden of proof been the right away round.  In
      addition, the judge made findings using the term "the Tribunal
      accepted...", which sometimes made it difficult to ascertain whether
      she accepted that a piece of evidence established a particular fact or
      whether she was merely recording what occurred at the hearing.

   5. We are satisfied that because the First-tier Tribunal did not apply
      the correct burden of proof the decision should be set aside.  In
      terms of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement the appeal will be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard before a differently
      constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.  The correct burden
      of proof should be applied, in terms of Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54.

Conclusions
   6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   7. The decision is set aside.

   8. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved.


Anonymity
The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.
We have not been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of
substance for doing so.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
          12th October 2018
