
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02582/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 March 2018                        |On 28 March 2018                   |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                Mr Kafil Udin
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant did not attend today's hearing. I  took  account  of  the
    overriding objective and recognising  that  he  had  been  served  with
    notice of the hearing decided to proceed in his absence.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  made  application  for  a
    Residence Card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the extended family member of a  person  exercising  "Treaty
    rights" in the United Kingdom pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006. That application was  refused  and  he
    appealed and in a decision promulgated on 23 February 2017 Judge of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Miles  dismissed   the   appeal   for   want   of
    jurisdiction.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. On 9 November 2017 in Khan v SSHD and Anor [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755  the
    Court of Appeal held that Sala was wrongly decided and that a  decision
    to refuse admission or a Residence Card to an extended family member is
    an "EEA decision" within the meaning of the Above-mentioned Regulations
    and therefore attracts a right of appeal.

 6. On this basis Mr Wilding conceded the appeal and invited  me  to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Miles.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 25 March 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



