
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03135/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2019                  |On 01 March 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           Daniel postigo gonzales
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Jegede, counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S
    Taylor, promulgated on 19  November  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM  Hollingworth  on  17  January
    2019.



Anonymity

   2. No anonymity direction was made previously and there is no  reason  to
      make one now.

Background

 3. On 24 January 2018, the appellant sought a permanent residence card  as
    a family member who had retained a right of residence following the end
    of his marriage to a Spanish national. That application was refused  by
    the Secretary of State on 10 April 2018 because the appellant  had  not
    provided an original valid identity document for his former spouse  and
    he had not provided adequate evidence that  his  former  spouse  was  a
    qualified person or had a right of permanent residence on the "date  of
    the divorce."

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. A request was made for an adjournment in order to  obtain  a  direction
    that the respondent should make further  enquiries  of  HMRC  into  the
    sponsor's employment record. The judge refused to adjourn or  make  the
    requested direction on the basis that the appellant was in contact with
    his former  spouse.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  owing  to  inadequate
    evidence of the sponsor's  employment  and  owing  to  the  appellant's
    failure to provide a valid passport or identity card for the sponsor.

The grounds of appeal

 5. In the grounds of appeal, it was argued that  the  judge  was  mistaken
    regarding the document enclosed at page 9  of  the  appellant's  bundle
    which he took to indicate that the only records of  employment  related
    to the period ended April 2014. It was further argued  that  the  judge
    was wrong in concluding that the appellant  was  in  contact  with  his
    further spouse, it being argued that if he was, he would have requested
    evidence covering the entire relevant period. Issue was taken with  the
    judge's refusal to make the direction sought. Lastly, it was said  that
    the  judge's  findings  regarding  the  sponsor's  documentation   were
    contradictory.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

The hearing

 7. Mr Jegede relied on the grant of permission. He took  me  to  the  HMRC
    document in the appellant's bundle  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He  emphasised  that  the  document  referred  only  to  the
    financial year 2013-2014. That had been the only evidence the appellant
    could acquire from the sponsor. He argued that  if  the  direction  had
    been given, the outcome would have illustrated that the sponsor  was  a
    qualified person up until the divorce proceedings were  initiated.  The
    appellant was of the view was that his former spouse had  been  working
    but had no other evidence.

 8. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bramble noted that Mr Jegede  had  made
    no reference to the other ground of  appeal,  that  being  whether  the
    appellant had submitted a valid  passport  or  identity  card  for  the
    sponsor. He argued that there was no confusion  regarding  the  judge's
    findings. At [11] the judge set out what the  respondent  accepted  and
    rejected. Mr Bramble concluded by stating that if the appellant had not
    provided the required documents, the first ground was academic. On  the
    first ground, he submitted that the judge applied Amos. It was for  the
    appellant to show that he has exhausted attempts to obtain  information
    and the document from HMRC confirming the sponsor's employment  details
    indicated that he had been in contact with her. The judge was  entitled
    to be dissatisfied that the appellant had made all attempts  to  obtain
    all the information [8].

 9. In response, Mr Jegede submitted only that it  was  difficult  for  the
    appellant to acquire evidence from the sponsor and it was  only  in  an
    ideal world that he could be expected to obtain such documents  from  a
    previous partner. In response  to  my  query,  he  confirmed  that  the
    appellant had not previously made an application for a  residence  card
    following his 2013 marriage to the sponsor.

10. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

11. The sole evidence relating to the sponsor exercising Treaty  rights  at
    any stage up to the time of the initiation of divorce  proceedings  was
    at page 9 of the appellant's bundle. That document was dated 3  October
    2017 and was addressed to the sponsor. It referred to a telephone  call
    from the sponsor on 2 October 2017 in which she  asked  her  employment
    history. The information provided was headed, "Sources  of  income  for
    the tax year ended 5  April  2014."  The  judge's  assessment  of  this
    evidence was that it indicated that "the only record available  related
    to the tax year ended April 2014." This is not what the  letter  states
    and the judge erred in so finding. While the enquiry made was  for  the
    entire employment history, this document addresses only one  tax  year.
    It is unclear whether this document is complete. Nonetheless,  this  is
    the only evidence the appellant was able  to  obtain  for  his  hearing
    relating to the sponsor's employment.

12. That the appellant obtained the HMRC document supports his  claim  that
    he has made efforts to substantiate his case. In his witness  statement
    the appellant indicates that he  no  longer  has  a  current  telephone
    number for the sponsor. It is notable that the document at page 9 dates
    from a full year prior to the hearing of the appeal and  also  predates
    the application for permanent residence by some  months.  The  evidence
    which  the  appellant  obtained  was  insufficient   as   the   divorce
    proceedings were initiated in either 2016 or 2017, it is unclear  when.
    This is the type of case which would have benefitted from  a  direction
    to the respondent to obtain the sponsor's full records from HMRC,  Amos
    v  Anor  [2]110  EWCA  Civ  552  considered.  The   judge's   erroneous
    understanding of the document at page 9 led to the situation  where  it
    appeared to him that evidence of the sponsor's employment  history  was
    complete and that no direction was required.

13. Mr Bramble argued that any error  in  relation  to  the  direction  was
    immaterial given that the appellant had failed to provide the sponsor's
    original passport or identity card.  I find that the error was material
    for the following reasons.

14. The judge simply repeated the observations of the respondent  that  the
    appellant failed to  provide  evidence  of  "circumstances  beyond  his
    control" which prevented him from providing the identity documents. The
    respondent's guidance to caseworkers does not impose such a high  test.
    What is said at page 21 of the Guidance is as follows:

         "... if you are satisfied the applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
         themselves, make enquiries on their behalf where possible,  getting
         agreement from your senior caseworker before doing so."

15. The brief reasons provided by the judge did not adequately engage  with
    the appellant's account of  having  lost  telephone  contact  with  the
    sponsor and how realistic it would be for him to  obtain  her  original
    documents following divorce to either send to the Home Office or  bring
    to his hearing. Indeed, the appellant advised  the  respondent  in  his
    application that he was unable to provide a  passport-sized  photograph
    for the sponsor along with evidence of  her  identity  and  nationality
    because, "she will not provide her Spanish ID or national passport  for
    this application." The appellant did what was requested at 2.13 of  the
    application, in that he enclosed alternative evidence in the form of  a
    photocopy of the sponsor's passport. Nor is there any evidential  basis
    for the judge concluding that the appellant was  in  contact  with  the
    sponsor over a year after the divorce was finalised and a year after he
    obtained the HMRC document from her. This issue could also be addressed
    by way of a direction to the respondent to act in accordance  with  the
    Guidance and make enquiries on the appellant's behalf.  I conclude that
    the  judge's  treatment  of  the  Regulation  21(5)  issue   was   also
    inadequate.

16. For the foregoing reasons, the decision of the judge is  set  aside  in
    its entirety.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor.

This appeal is to be case managed with reference to any  application  to  be
made on the appellant's behalf for a direction under section 40  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007.


Signed                                  Date 09 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
