
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03982/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th November, 2016                    |On 9th December 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                         Marian Mieczyslaw Pazderski
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 1st January, 1963.

2.   On 20th November, 2015 the respondent refused to  grant  the  appellant
    admission to the United Kingdom under European Community Law.  In doing
    so she said:-

         "You have sought admission to the United Kingdom under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations  2006  on  the  ground  that  you  are  a  Polish
         national.   However,  on  20th  November  2015  you  attempted   to
         facilitate the illegal entry into the United  Kingdom  of  fourteen
         Syrian nationals.  I have considered the circumstances of your case
         and I am satisfied that you would pose a threat to the requirements
         of public policy if  you  were  allowed  admission  to  the  United
         Kingdom.  I have therefore decided that your refusal  of  admission
         is justified on the grounds of public policy."

3.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sangha on 25th May, 2016.  The judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's vehicle had been secured as it should have been and checked
    regularly as the appellant claims, because if it had been it would  not
    have been possible for fourteen illegal entrants to gain access to  the
    vehicle.

4.   The judge found that the decision of the respondent  was  justified  on
    grounds of public policy.

5.   Dissatisfied with the decision,  the  appellant's  employers  submitted
    grounds of appeal.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant  believed  that  it
    was properly arguable that the judge may have erred in  law  in  giving
    inadequate reasons for his finding that the appellant was a  threat  to
    public policy in the absence of any evidence from the  respondent  that
    the appellant conspired  to  breach  immigration  laws  of  the  United
    Kingdom by knowingly attempting to smuggle fourteen  Syrians  into  the
    United Kingdom.

6.   There was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  at
    11.20am I proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant.



7.   I read allowed the grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    In response, Mr Staunton told me that the judge had clearly  considered
    Regulation  21  of  the  2006  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations in paragraph 10 of the determination and the grounds amount
    to a disagreement with that decision.  The judge  has  found  that  the
    vehicle was not secured or checked as it had been because  if  it  were
    then it would not have been  possible  for  illegal  entrants  to  have
    gained access to the vehicle.

8.   He told me that the grounds of public policy  were  the  prevention  of
    crime.

9.   Regulation 11(1) of the 2006 Regulations requires that an EEA  national
    must be admitted to the United Kingdom if  he  produces  on  arrival  a
    valid national identity card or passport issued by an EEA State.   Such
    a person is not entitled to be admitted to the United Kingdom by virtue
    of Regulation 11 if his exclusion is justified on the grounds of public
    policy, public security or public health in accordance with  Regulation
    21.  Regulation 21(5) is set out in the judge's determination and makes
    it  clear  that  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
    proportionality, must be exclusively based on the personal  conduct  of
    the person concerned and the personal conduct of the  person  concerned
    must represent  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   Matters
    isolated from the particulars of case which relate to considerations of
    general prevention do not justify the decision and a person's  previous
    convictions do not in themselves justify the decision.  In this  appeal
    it  is  not  being  suggested  that  the  appellant  has  any  criminal
    convictions.  The appellant has submitted a written statement in  which
    he explained that he stopped for  nine  hours  in  Germany  on  the  A7
    motorway close to Kassel.  He checked the trailer and back door  before
    leaving and saw no signs of any damage in the tarp (presumably  meaning
    the tarpaulin) or signs of a break in.  He took another pause  of  some
    45 minutes just before the German/Netherlands border close to the  city
    of Venlo at around 11am.  His next stop lasted eleven  hours  and  took
    place on the border between Belgium and France.  Before every departure
    he checked and found the trailer to be secure.  He did not  notice  any
    irregularities.

10.  On arrival in Calais after passport control he got  in  line  to  enter
    the ferry.  While waiting the vehicle attracted the entry of UK  border
    services and during an inspection clandestine "refugees" were found  in
    the vehicle.

11.  Also submitted to the judge were copies of instructions to drivers.

12.  Where an appellant fails to undertake adequate checks  to  his  vehicle
    he facilitates the illegal entry into the  United  Kingdom  of  foreign
    nationals if he fails to carry out adequate checks to his vehicle  even
    though he is unaware that they may have boarded it.

13.  It is clear from paragraph 11 of the judge's determination that  merely
    because  fourteen  Syrian  nationals  were  found  in  the  appellant's
    vehicle, he does not accept that the  vehicle  was  as  secured  as  it
    should have been and checked regularly as the appellant claims.

14.  The exclusion of an EEA  national  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy
    should not occur unless the person's presence or conduct constitutes  a
    genuine and sufficiently serious threat to public policy.  The decision
    to  exclude  must  be  strictly  justified  and  proportionate  to  the
    objective pursued.

15.  The respondent has failed to produce any clear  and  explicit  evidence
    that the appellant  was  reckless  or  was  complicit  in  transporting
    illegal entrants.  I believe that the judge was wrong in law to find as
    he did without clear and explicit evidence that the  appellant  was  in
    some way reckless or complicit.  It is clear that the  evidence  before
    the judge was that the vehicle had been checked by the  appellant  when
    he stopped periodically and it has been asserted on his behalf that  he
    carries out the safeguards required by his employers.  Those safeguards
    appear to have been produced solely with the  intention  of  preventing
    clandestine entrants to Great Britain.  There is  clear  evidence  that
    the appellant  underwent  company  training  to  identify  and  prevent
    threats resulting from the transportation of  clandestine  entrants  to
    the United Kingdom on 5th January, 2015.

16.  For all these reasons I find that the making of  the  decision  by  the
    judge did involve an error in law.

17.  There was no evidence before  the  judge  to  contradict  the  evidence
    submitted on behalf of the appellant that he had properly  checked  his
    vehicle at various stages and there was no clear and explicit  evidence
    before the judge  that  the  appellant  was  in  any  way  reckless  or
    complicit in the transportation of these Syrian illegal entrants.

18.  I substitute my decision  for  that  of  the  judge.   The  appellant's
    appeal is allowed.

19.  No anonymity direction is made.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appellant's appeal and therefore make a fee award in  his
favour.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

