

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/03503/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2017                        |On 21 June 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           CHIDINMA GOODNESS UBAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Kenneth of SLA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on  28  June  2016,
        following a hearing at Taylor House, in which the Judge allowed  Ms
        Ubah's appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.



Background


     2. Ms Ubah is a national of Nigeria born on 17 March 2014.
     3. In an earlier application filed on 23 May 2014 Ms Ubah applied  for
        a Residence Card in recognition of a right to reside in the  United
        Kingdom as the spouse of Samuel Joel Sinnan, who is said to  be  an
        EEA national exercising treaty rights in the  UK.  The  application
        was refused against which Ms Ubah appealed. On 28 July 2015 Ms Ubah
        made a further application for Residence Card this time claiming to
        be the unmarried partner of Samuel Sinnan.
     4. The decision maker was aware of the earlier appeal  and  considered
        not only whether Ms Ubah was entitled to  a  Residence  Card  as  a
        spouse but also whether Ms  Ubah  could  be  considered  to  be  an
        unmarried partner of Mr Sinnan. It is recorded in the  Reasons  for
        Refusal letter, in relation to the 2015 application, that a  number
        of findings were made by the first judge at paragraphs 28 to 31 and
        33 to 35 of the decision in the following terms:


        "I cannot find that the Appellant has addressed the concerns of the
        Respondent about the lack of documentary  evidence  to  demonstrate
        that he is in a durable relationship with the sponsor. I set out my
        reasons as follows;


        The Appellant relied on  her  witness  statement  and  that  of  Mr
        Sinnan. The Appellant relied on her witness statement and  that  of
        Mr Sinnan. The Appellant elected not to  attend  an  oral  hearing.
        That of course is a matter for her; she has exercised her right  to
        have the matter decided on the papers. However, the consequence  is
        that the evidence of the Appellant and Mr Sinnan cannot  be  tested
        by cross-examination. Without the opportunity to see both witnesses
        and to hear their oral evidence the weight that can  be  placed  on
        these documents is limited.


        I cannot find a  reference  in  either  witness  statement  to  any
        cohabitation made by the couple prior to the date  of  marriage  in
        March 2014. I further observe that  the  Appellant  has  not  taken
        issue with the statement made by  the  Respondent  in  the  refusal
        letter that at the date of application she could show a  period  of
        cohabitation of no more than three months duration.


        I accept that the documents provided link  the  Appellant  and  the
        sponsor to the same address, but that it is rather  different  from
        showing that the couple are maintaining a common household and have
        done so for an appreciable period of time.  If  the  Appellant  was
        indeed in a durable  relationship  with  Mr  Sinnan  I  would  have
        expected to see considerably more information  about  their  shared
        life and joint financial commitments.


        For the reasons given above, even if I am prepared to  accept  that
        the Appellant and the sponsor have shared the  same  address  since
        March 2014, I am not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  provided
        sufficient evidence to show the couple share a common household  or
        are in a relationship akin to marriage.


        For the reasons given above, I conclude that the Appellant has  not
        shown that she is entitled to a residence card as  confirmation  of
        her right to reside in the United Kingdom."


     5. The Secretary of State noted that the current application was for a
        Residence Card as an unmarried partner of Mr Sinnan as  opposed  to
        the earlier application for a Residence Card as the  spouse  of  Mr
        Sinnan. That aspect of the earlier application was rejected by  the
        original judge who upheld the Secretary States conclusions that the
        marriage was not considered valid as it was said to be  a  marriage
        of convenience. It was  also  noted,  as  stated  above,  that  the
        relationship was not deemed to be akin to marriage.
     6. In refusing the application made as an Extended Family Member,  the
        decision-maker  considered  the  previous  history  and  thereafter
        certified the decision pursuant to Regulation 26(4) and (5) in  the
        following terms:


        "As outlined in the evidence listed above, you  have  not  provided
        anything materially different from your first  application,  or  in
        the appeal dated 11 November  2014  which  would  demonstrate  your
        marriage is not one of convenience. You have therefore been refused
        a residence card with reference to regulation 2 of the Regulations.


        In addition regulation 26(4) and (5) of the Regulations states  the
        following ...


        Based on the information provided in your application dated 23  May
        2014, in your appeal dated 11 November 2014  and  in  your  current
        application dated 28 July 2015, the Secretary  of  State  considers
        that your claim to be in a genuine marriage with Samuel Joel Sinnan
        should be certified in accordance with regulation  26(5).  You  may
        not, therefore, bring an appeal or rely on such  a  ground  in  any
        appeal under these Regulations.


     7. Judge Colvin was aware of the decision to certify but finds [5]  of
        the decision under challenge:


        5.   However, in this appeal the appellant is relying on the ground
             of being the unmarried partner of the sponsor and not  on  the
             ground of being married. I consider that this  aspect  of  the
             appellant's claim has not been specifically certified  by  the
             respondent under Regulation 26(5) and therefore the  appellant
             may appeal on this ground alone.


     8. The Judge considered the merits of the case  before  concluding  at
        [15]:


        15.  After careful consideration  I  have  decided  that  this  new
             medical evidence is significant and is sufficient to show that
             the appellant and the sponsor are not merely residing  at  the
             same address but are, in fact, in a relationship.  This  does,
             in  my  opinion,  substantially  alter  the  previous   appeal
             Decision as I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that,
             taken together with all other evidence  submitted,  that  they
             are in a durable relationship akin to  a  marriage  so  as  to
             fulfil the requirements of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
             2006.


     9. The Judge accordingly allowed the appeal.
    10. The Secretary State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds
        which was initially refused by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. Renewed grounds asserted a material misdirection  of  law
        in the Judge deciding the certificate related very narrowly to  the
        claim to be in a valid marriage, hence creating a right of  appeal,
        and although relying on the original  grounds,  in  also  asserting
        that the Judge had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal  against  the
        refusal of a Residence Card to a person claiming to be an  Extended
        Family Member.
    11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  Dr  H  H
        Storey in the following terms:


         "The grounds disclose an  arguable  error  of  law.  First,  it  is
        arguable that the decision to  certify  the  appellants  EEA  claim
        against and EEA decision related to all aspects of it. Second, even
        if the judge was right to conclude the appeal  was  not  caught  by
        regulation 26 (5) because it  was  a  claim  to  be  in  a  durable
        relationship with an unmarried partner, there is no jurisdiction to
        hear such an appeal: see Salah [2016] UKUT 411".



Error of law


    12. The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as
        amended) provide at Regulation 26(4) and (5):


        (4)  A person may not bring an appeal under these Regulations on  a
             ground certified under paragraph (5) or rely on such a  ground
             in an appeal brought under these Regulations.


        (5)  The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may certify a
             ground for the purposes  of  paragraph  (4)  if  it  has  been
             considered  in  a  previous   appeal   brought   under   these
             Regulations or under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.


    13. Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
        was amended by section 26 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment
        of Claimants etc.) Act 2004 to facilitate these amendments  to  the
        original text of the Regulations.
    14. Mr Kenneth put up a robust  defence  to  the  Secretary  of  States
        arguments. In relation to the Sala point it was submitted that  the
        decision  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  found   there   was   no
        jurisdiction to appeal a decision to refuse a Residence Card by  an
        Extended Family Member was only promulgated on 19 August 2016 after
        the promulgation of the decision under challenge.
    15. Whilst the chronology is not disputed, the Upper Tribunal  in  Sala
        did not refer to legal provisions  that  had  come  into  existence
        since the date of the impugned decision or judgment on appeal,  and
        considered those related only to the correct interpretation of  the
        existing Regulations. The Judge was required to consider this issue
        even though there is a great deal of  sympathy  for  the  Judge  in
        relation to this matter as prior to Sala it was thought an Extended
        Family Member had a right  of  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
        Residence Card.
    16. Sala is a reported decision of the Upper Tribunal and sets out what
        is considered to be the correct  interpretation  of  this  specific
        appeal right, or lack thereof.
    17. Mr Kenneth also submitted that  at  the  error  of  law  stage  the
        question of jurisdiction could not be raised and it was only if  an
        error of law was found  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  consider
        jurisdiction when remaking the decision.
    18. The difficulty with this argument is  that  it  means  there  could
        never be a finding of arguable legal error for want of jurisdiction
        and that, if the jurisdiction issue  was  the  only  reason  why  a
        decision had to be set aside, the Upper Tribunal will be prohibited
        from raising it as an  issue  unless  it  was  specifically  argued
        before the First-tier Judge.
    19. There was some confusion in relation to jurisdiction in  the  past,
        which has been resolved by the case of Virk v  Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 652 it which  it  was  held
        that although the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  had
        failed to raise before the First-tier Tribunal the  issue  of  that
        Tribunal's jurisdiction to entertain  a  family's  application  for
        leave to remain, the Upper Tribunal was  entitled  to  dismiss  the
        family's  subsequent  appeal  against  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
        decision on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  had
        jurisdiction, notwithstanding that the point had  not  been  raised
        below. In Virk  it  was  said  "Statutory  jurisdiction  cannot  be
        conferred by waiver or agreement; or by the failure of the  parties
        or the tribunal to be alive to the point". It was also said however
        that if the issue had not  previously  been  raised  then  fairness
        required that the  parties  should  be  given  the  opportunity  to
        address it.
    20. The important point is that if the First-tier  Tribunal  never  had
        jurisdiction, statutory jurisdiction  could  not  be  conferred  by
        waiver, agreement, or the failure of the parties of tribunal to  be
        alive to the point, hence the Upper Tribunal is  able  to  consider
        the specific issue.
    21. In light of the decision in Sala, even if the Secretary of State is
        wrong  in  relation  to  the  first  ground  of  appeal  the  Judge
        materially erred in law as there  was  no  valid  right  of  appeal
        available to Ms Ubah on the facts of this case.
    22. Returning to the first ground of appeal, the wording of  Regulation
        26 specifically prevents Ms Ubah from bringing appeal on  a  ground
        that has been certified or to rely on such a ground  in  an  appeal
        brought under the Regulations. The basis of certification  is  that
        the ground had been considered in a previous appeal.
    23. I do not accept there is any merit in Mr  Kenneth's  argument  that
        certification cannot take effect unless there is  specific  mention
        of the decision to certify the current grounds beyond that referred
        to in the Reasons for Refusal letter, as the letter of 4 March 2016
        clearly sets out all applications and decisions  made  relating  to
        this issue and the reason for the certification decision.
    24. It appears from the refusal letter that  the  original  grounds  of
        appeal in relation to the impugned decision are in a  generic  form
        asserting:


   1. The decision of the Secretary of State is not in accordance  with  the
      provisions of Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations 2006 by denying the
      appellant right of appeal.
   2. The Secretary of State erred in law and on facts when he  refused  the
      appellant's application for residence cards in the United Kingdom as a
      family member of EEA national. The decision is not in accordance  with
      the provisions of Regulation 8(5) Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2006.
   3. The decision is unlawful because the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
      acquiesce himself with the whole facts of our clients application. The
      EEA national is exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.  The
      decision of the Secretary of State  breaches  the  appellant's  rights
      under Article 8 European Convention  on  Human  Rights.  The  European
      Convention recognises the fact that once an  EEA  national  exercising
      treaty rights in the United Kingdom, all  rights  enjoyed  by  him/her
      should be extended to their family members.
   4. The  appellant  will  contend  at  the  hearing  that  his  rights  as
      guaranteed under the community treaties in respect of leave to  remain
      in the United Kingdom is likely to be breached  as  a  result  of  the
      decision.
   5. The Secretary  of  State  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
      immigration rules and in law when he  refused  the  appellant  on  the
      basis that the appellant had his wife were not living together in  the
      UK whilst there is enough evidence show that  they  have  been  living
      together for more than 2 years as required by the Regulations.
   6. The EEA national is exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.
      The decision of the Secretary of State breaches the appellant's rights
      under Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights.
   7. The Secretary Stayed erred in  fact  and  in  law  by  the  deliberate
      isolation and a wilful mistake of facts which gives rise to  automatic
      right of appeal on a point of  law.  The  applicant  relies  upon  the
      decision of the court in  E&R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49.
   8. Acting incorrect basis of fact R (Alconbury ltd) v Secretary State for
      Home Department (2001) WLR 1389, 2001 UKHL 23, para 53 per Lord Slynn)
      R v Secretary Stage the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 49.  Secretary
      of State for Education v Tameside MBC (1997) AC 1014, 1030.
   9. The EEA national is exercising treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
      under Regulation 6 of Immigration (EEA Economic Area) Regulation 2006.
  10. Further and in the alternative, the decision of the Secretary of State
      is unreasonable, illegal, perverse and contrary to  Human  Rights  Act
      1998.
  11. The discretion under the Immigration Rules should have been  exercised
      differently.
  12. The decision of the Secretary of State should not be allowed to  stand
      by the Tribunal because it is unlawful and illegal.


    25. As can be seen, a number of the grounds of appeal fail to establish
        any arguable error and are wrong in  law.  For  example,  there  is
        nothing illegal made out in the decision of the Secretary of State,
        the immigration rules have not been shown to apply as  no  decision
        has been made under the UK domestic immigration rules, and there is
        no right of appeal on the facts of this matter to the human  rights
        element as no application for leave on  human  rights  grounds  has
        been made and no decision refusing a human rights  application  was
        before the Judge. The question  of  whether  the  EEA  national  is
        exercising treaty rights does not appear to have been an issue.
    26. Ms Ubah has not provided copies of the previous grounds  of  appeal
        that were drafted to challenge the earlier decision. Although there
        was a claim to be entitled to a Residence Card, on the basis  of  a
        genuine marriage between Ms Ubah and Mr Sinnan, if the  grounds  of
        appeal were drafted as the current  grounds  appear  to  have  been
        approached there is a strong possibility  that  within  the  claims
        made the issue of the durable relationship may have arisen.
    27. The core issue in relation  to  this  matter  is  the  relationship
        itself. The earlier  claim  was  a  claim  by  Ms  Ubah  to  be  in
        relationship with Mr Sinnan which is indeed the core  of  the  most
        recent claim.
    28. The Judge fails to examine the nature of the grounds considered  in
        the previous appeal especially as the original judge considered not
        only the question of whether Ms Ubah was in  a  marriage  but  also
        whether she was in a relationship akin to marriage.
    29. Unless and until the specific detail has been considered,  and  the
        clear inference from the decision of 4  March  2016  was  that  the
        decision to certify the grounds related to the relationship and not
        simply the validity of the marriage, it cannot be  said  the  Judge
        had sufficient evidence available to find that the  current  appeal
        was  being  pursued  on  grounds  that  had  not  been   previously
        considered.
    30. The issue is not the basis of  claim  but  nature  and  content  of
        grounds of appeal in relation to Regulation 26 certification.
    31. I find the Secretary of State has established arguable legal  error
        by the Judge in relation to the  assessment  of  the  certification
        decision and in finding that the appellant had a  right  of  appeal
        contrary to Regulation 26. I set this aspect of the decision aside.
    32. In light of the failure to  adduce  the  correct  documentation  to
        enable comparison of the grounds  of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
        current and earlier decision,  it  cannot  be  said  the  appellant
        before the First-tier Tribunal has established  a  valid  right  of
        appeal.
    33. As stated above, even if the  certification  had  no  effect,  this
        tribunal has no jurisdiction to remake the  decision  in  light  of
        Sala.


Decision

    34. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. The Upper Tribunal is unable to
        remake the decision for want of jurisdiction.


   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 June 2017












