
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03444/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8th March 2019                   |On: 12th March 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                            Sukhjinder Singh Brar
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Grell, Counsel instructed by ATM Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India date of birth 22nd August 1983.

 2. The short point raised in this appeal is whether the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lloyd-Lawrie) dated 12th December 2018  must
    be set aside for procedural irregularity.

 3. The Appellant's appeal, against a refusal to grant him a residence card
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  was
    listed at Colombus House in Newport on  the  10th  December  2018.  The
    Appellant did not attend, nor was he represented. The matter  in  issue
    before the Tribunal was whether the Respondent had demonstrated that on
    a balance of probabilities the Appellant's marriage to an EEA  national
    was a sham. In the absence of any explanation from  the  Appellant  for
    the evidential  matters  raised  by  the  Respondent,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 4. The Appellant now contends that he had, on the 8th December 2018,  made
    an    application    for    an    adjournment.    He    had     emailed
    customer.services@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk to say that his  baby  was  ill  and
    that he was therefore unable to attend the hearing.   Numerous attempts
    had been made to fax the same to the Tribunal  but  transmission  could
    not  be  confirmed.  The  Appellant's  representatives  had   therefore
    additionally  emailed  the  adjournment  request  to   the   First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. The determination records the Judge Lloyd-Lawrie  had  put  the  matter
    back in his list and had his clerk call the Appellant's representative.
    The clerk had been informed that the Appellant  was  unable  to  attend
    because "the child" was ill. The Tribunal allowed until  11.45  for  an
    adjournment application to  be  made  in  writing  but  when  none  was
    received, proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence of the Appellant.
    The determination notes that there was  no  reference  in  any  of  the
    paperwork to the Appellant having a child; the Judge therefore believed
    that the information about "the child" may  in  fact  have  related  to
    another case.

 6. I have before me the following documents:

          i) An email sent at 12.34 on Saturday the 8th  December  2018  to
             customer services which says the following:


             "The appeal is listed in  Newport  however  the  appellant  is
             resident in London. He is the father of a one year old  child,
             birth certificate attached, and in full time carer of child as
             such he cannot attend the hearing in Newport because child  is
             currently  unwell.   Appellant  therefore  request  that  this
             appeal is transferred to London either FTT IAC Hatton Cross or
             Taylor House in the interest".


         ii) The birth certificate of a child born  in  Hillingdon  on  the
             21st July 2017, with the Appellant named as the father.


        iii) An email dated the  10th  December  2018  at  9.59am  sent  to
             customer services, asking the  reader  to  please  see  urgent
             correspondence attached. It states that all  attempts  to  fax
             the same have failed as the fax number provided  is  giving  a
             "busy tone".


         iv) A fax addressed to IAC Newport containing the same text as the
             email at (i), accompanied by a series of  failed  transmission
             print outs from the 8th and 9th of December 2018.


 7. Having had regard to that evidence I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    did seek an adjournment,  and  that  at  least  items  (i)-(iii)  were,
    unbeknownst to Judge Lloyd-Lawrie, in the possession of  the  Tribunal.
    Whilst I agree with Mr Bramble that evidence  that  the  baby  was  ill
    would have certainly strengthened the Appellant's case,  it  cannot  be
    said that this was an application that would have  failed  without  it.
    The Judge gave two reasons for refusing to adjourn: there  was  nothing
    in writing and it did not appear, on the facts  before  him,  that  the
    Appellant even had a child.  Had  the  paperwork  been  properly  filed
    and/or put before the Judge, both of these  concerns  would  have  been
    allayed.

 8. I am satisfied that there has been a procedural irregularity, and  that
    in the interests of justice  the  Appellant  should  be  given  another
    opportunity to present his case.




    Decisions

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and it is set aside.

10. The decision in the appeal will be remade following a  further  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

11. There is no direction for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              8th March 2019

