
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03465/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 May 2019                                 |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                              NOUMAN CHAUDHARY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Akhtar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who has divorced his spouse,
         an EEA national.

      2. He has appealed against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ('FtT') sent on 13 July 2018.  There was only one issue in  dispute
         before the FtT.  This is because the respondent accepted  that  all
         the requirements of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016  ('the
         2016 Regs') were met, save regulation 21(5).   In  particular,  the
         respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  provided  a  valid
         national identity card or passport in the name of his EEA  national
         ex-wife.

      3. In grounds of appeal prepared on behalf of  the  appellant  it  was
         argued that the FtT erred in law in  requiring  him  to  provide  a
         certified  copy  of  identity  documents   given   the   particular
         circumstances of this case.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam in these terms:

             "It is arguable that the judge did not consider whether in the
             context of previous applications and the  arguable  acceptance
             of the EEA national's identity, the  appellant  had  satisfied
             21(5) of the 2016 Reg in submitting photocopies  of  documents
             or the materiality if any of Reg 42."

      4. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety pointed out the application to
         appeal to the FTT was four days  late.   After  hearing  from  both
         representatives I indicated that in so far as it was  necessary  to
         do so I granted  an  extension  of  time  because  it  was  in  the
         interests of justice to do so.  Although the  explanation  provided
         by the appellant's solicitors for the late appeal was difficult  to
         follow, it was sufficiently clear that this was not attributable to
         the appellant.  The  delay  was  not  lengthy  and  it  is  in  the
         interests of both parties for the matter to be resolved promptly.

      5. Mr McVeety did not dispute that  the  FTT  failed  to  engage  with
         regulation 42.  The FtT's decision clearly contains an error of law
         as identified  by  Judge  McWilliam  when  granting  permission  to
         appeal.  The 2016 Regs make it clear  at  regulation  42  that  the
         respondent  may  accept  alternative  evidence  of   identity   and
         nationality "where the person is unable to obtain  or  produce  the
         required  document  due  to  circumstances  beyond   the   person's
         control".  The FTT  completely  failed  to  consider  whether  this
         appellant  was  unable  to  provide  his  wife's  passport  due  to
         circumstances beyond his control and failed to consider whether the
         alternative  attested  copy  of  the   ex-spouse's   passport   was
         sufficient in the circumstances.

      6. Both parties agreed that I should remake the  decision  myself  and
         there was no need to provide any further evidence.  The appellant's
         marriage irretrievably broke down and there was  an  understandable
         lack of amicable relations between him and his wife to persuade her
         to submit her passport.  The appellant explained that it  had  been
         submitted  to  the  respondent  and   other   government   agencies
         previously.  The delay in returning the ex-wife's  passport  caused
         her inconvenience including preventing her  from  travelling.   The
         appellant has provided a plausible reason  for  his  ex-wife  being
         unwilling to provide her passport.  This is beyond the  appellant's
         control.   There  was  clear  evidence  that  the   appellant   had
         previously been able to submit identity evidence in respect of  the
         self-same EEA national, which has not been disputed.

      7. Mr McVeety invited me to consider the  appellant's  explanation  in
         the round. I have done so and decided there is no reason to dispute
         the appellant's claim that  his  ex-wife  refused  to  provide  her
         passport to enable him to  produce  it  and  this  was  beyond  his
         control.  There is however alternative evidence of  nationality  in
         the form of an attested copy of her passport.

      8. The decision of the FtT contains an error of law and is set  aside.
         I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


Signed   UTJ Plimmer                Dated


Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     7 May 2019

