
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03751/2019 (p)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Decided Under Rule 34                |On 24 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SYED TASLEEM MAHMOOD SHAH
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision I refer to the parties as they were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. I have decided  this  appeal  pursuant  to  rule  34  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, noting in particular rule 34(2).

 3. In Directions dated 25 September 2020, sent to the parties on 1 October
    2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker said the following:

                                 DIRECTIONS

          1. FtT Judge J Bartlett allowed  Mr  Shah's  appeal  against  the
             refusal of his application for  an  EU  residence  card  in  a
             decision  promulgated  on  16  December  2019.  The   decision
             recorded that the judge gave an oral decision with reasons  on
             the 2nd of December 2019 at the hearing before her. No summary
             of  reasons  was  given  in  the  written  judgement.  In   an
             application made on 19th December 2019, the Secretary of State
             sought permission to appeal on  the  grounds  that  the  judge
             erred in law by failing  to  give  reasons  for  allowing  the
             appeal in the written  determination  thus  not  enabling  the
             respondent  due  opportunity  to  review  the  decision.   The
             Secretary of State did not seek written reasons -  see  First-
             tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules paragraph
             29(4) & (5); no reason was given why the  Secretary  of  State
             failed to comply with the First-tier Tribunal  Rules.  In  the
             event permission was granted by the First-Tier Tribunal  judge
             Cruthers on the 6th  of  April  2020.  He  granted  permission
             without  having  seen  the  file,  because  of  the   COVID-19
             pandemic, and on that basis he considered it arguable that the
             Secretary of State had not been "given (adequate) reasons" for
             allowing the appeal. Directions for the further conduct of the
             appeal were sent on 12th June 2020 and, in  the  circumstances
             surrounding COVID 19, provision was made for the  question  of
             whether there was an error  of  law  and  if  so  whether  the
             decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be determined
             on the papers. Judge Reeds also directed that the parties were
             to provide a transcript of the  oral  decision  given  by  the
             First-Tier  Tribunal   judge.   Neither   party   provided   a
             transcript, neither party made submissions and  neither  party
             objected  to  a  decision  being  taken  on  the  papers.   No
             application to extend time was made by  either  party  and  no
             explanation was  provided  for  the  failure  to  comply  with
             directions.

          2. According to the First-Tier judge's notes of the hearing  that
             took place on the 2nd of  December  2019,  both  parties  were
             represented.  The  presenting  officer  stated  that  she  had
             received the "marriage transcript" the previous Friday and had
             served a copy on the appellant's representative that  morning.
             Neither party requested an  adjournment.  The  record  of  the
             hearing draws  attention  to  the  summary  of  the  interview
             provided  by  the  respondent  being  inconsistent  with   the
             "transcript". The judge made  a  detailed  note  of  her  oral
             judgement as follows:

                  "I have decided that the R has not discharged  the  burden
                  of proof that lies on it.

                   1. An interview record has been submitted. Some  answers
                      are in speech marks, others are not. Some answers are
                      recorded in detail others appear to be note form.

                   2. The interview summary records several phrases,  words
                      and details which are not in the interview record.

                   3. The differences between the interview summary and the
                      interview record mean that I cannot  give  weight  to
                      either document as an accurate  record  of  what  was
                      said during the interview.

                   4. The inevitable result is that there is  a  very  weak
                      evidential basis for the position set out in the  RL.
                      Such a weak basis that the R has failed to  discharge
                      the evidential burden on it."

          3. Had the respondent applied for written reasons, the  above  is
             what would have been provided. In the light of those reasons I
             am of the provisional view that this appeal by  the  Secretary
             of State should be dismissed. However I am mindful of the fact
             that she states that she has not seen the reasons and in those
             circumstances I direct:

               a) The respondent to consider and notify the Tribunal and the
                  appellant by email and hardcopy  no  later  than  14  days
                  after the sending of this decision, whether she intends to
                  pursue her appeal;

               b) In the absence of any such notification the Tribunal  will
                  proceed to dismiss the appeal without  further  notice  to
                  either party, such that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
                  tribunal stands.

               c) In the event that the Secretary of State states  that  she
                  intends to pursue her appeal, both parties have a  further
                  10  days  from  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
                  notification, to file and  serve  submissions.  Thereafter
                  the file will be placed before an Upper Tribunal judge for
                  a decision to be taken on the papers.

               d) All  documents  to  be  filed  and  served  by  email  and
                  hardcopy.

 4. In Further Directions dated  and  sent  on  3  June  2021  I  said  the
    following:

                             FURTHER DIRECTIONS

         1.   In directions dated 25 September 2020, sent to the parties  on
             1 October 2020 by email, Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  required
             the parties, in particular the  respondent,  to  take  certain
             steps within a specified time. A copy of those  directions  is
             sent with these further directions.

         2.   As far as I am aware, there has  been  no  response  to  those
             directions by either party.

         3.   Accordingly, unless no later than 14 days from the  date  that
             these  directions  are  sent  the  respondent   satisfactorily
             explains in writing why Judge Coker's directions have not been
             complied with, and  provides  a  reasoned  response  to  those
             directions, the Tribunal is likely to proceed as provisionally
             indicated by Judge Coker  without  further  reference  to  the
             parties.

 5. As far as I am aware, neither party has responded in any way to  either
    Judge Coker's or my directions.

 6. Accordingly, I proceed to determine this appeal in the way proposed  by
    Judge Coker at paragraph 3, in particular  paragraph  3(b).  Thus,  the
    respondent's appeal is dismissed. I am not satisfied that the FtT erred
    in law and its decision to allow the appeal therefore stands.

    Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of Law.  Accordingly, the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appeal stands.


Signed

A.M. Kopieczek
Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  20/08/2021
