
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03409/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2018                          |On 1st  March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                              mr Sajid Hussain
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nassim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 16th May 1977 is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant had made application for a permanent residence  card  as  the
    family member of  an  EEA  national  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   The  Respondent  had  refused  the
    Appellant's application  on  8th  February  2016.   The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal  had  been  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Graham on 7th April 2017 with the  decision  promulgated
    on 11th May 2017.  The Appellant's  appeal  had  been  dismissed.   The
    Appellant had made application for permission to appeal and  permission
    was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen on 23rd November
    2017.  It was found that it was arguable an error of law had been  made
    in the failure of the judge to take account of evidence that was before
    him in terms of the Sponsor being in employment at the relevant period.



Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 2. It was submitted by Mr Nassim that the judge's decision showed that  he
    was satisfied that the Sponsor had been a qualified  person  exercising
    treaty rights as a worker during the period 2010 to 2014.  The  refusal
    by the judge had been on the basis that there is  no  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor exercising treaty rights from December 2014 to September  2015.
    It was submitted  however  that  the  judge  had  only  looked  at  the
    Sponsor's claimed self-employment during that period and had overlooked
    evidence that was within the Appellant's bundle that during that period
    there had been income from employment as disclosed  within  the  letter
    from HMRC which had provided the source of income during  the  relevant
    periods, together with the timeline of the Sponsor's employment.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 3. Mr Kotas accepted that it appeared that the judge had  only  looked  at
    self-employment during that period and most if not all of the  findings
    of the judge related to findings on the credibility or otherwise of the
    Sponsor's claimed self-employment.  It was accepted that there had been
    identified evidence of income  from  employment  disclosed  within  the
    bundle.

 4. On the basis of submissions made and having considered matters I  found
    an error of law in this case and by agreement given  the  narrow  issue
    and the evidence available I set aside  that  decision  and  remade  it
    allowing the appeal.  I said that  I  would  provide  a  decision  with
    reasons which I now provide below.

Decision and Reasons

 5. Permission was granted on the basis that arguably the judge had  failed
    to take account of evidence of employment when concluding  the  Sponsor
    failed to demonstrate that she was  exercising  treaty  rights  between
    December 2014 and September 2015.

 6. The Respondent in their earlier refusal  had  refused  the  Appellant's
    application firstly on the basis that the earnings  she  had  disclosed
    did not show a sufficiency of funds to indicate that she was exercising
    treaty rights, and secondly in any event had not shown  any  employment
    or self-employment in the period December 2014 to September 2015.

 7. The judge had concluded at paragraphs 12 to 16 that in the period  from
    2010 to 2014  the  Appellant's  level  of  income  was  such  that,  in
    accordance with the case law of  Begum  [2011]  UKUT  00275  and  Levin
    [1982] 2 CMLR 454 her level of income was not such a small amount  that
    it  could  be  properly  regarded  as  marginal  and  ancillary.   That
    conclusion was open to the judge on the basis of the evidence available
    and the case law and disclosed no error of law.   Indeed  it  does  not
    appear to have been subject to any further challenge by the Respondent.



 8. In terms of the period December  14  to  September  15  the  judge  had
    focused on the Sponsor's claimed self-employment as a cleaner.  He  had
    considered the evidence and concluded that there was  an  insufficiency
    of credible evidence to assert that she was exercising treaty rights as
    a self-employed person.  He gave clear reasons for that finding and  it
    was a finding open to him.  However in an examination of  the  evidence
    which understandably focused on this issue, the judge  overlooked  that
    in the same period the Sponsor  had  also  had  employment.   This  was
    evidenced by the letter from HMRC dated 5th February  2017  and  a  bar
    chart showing her employment during that period.  There does not appear
    to have been any challenge to the veracity of that  employment  or  the
    letter produced by HMRC as being sufficient cogent evidence in  support
    of that claimed employment.  It was also employment that was consistent
    with that she had undertaken in previous years which had been accepted.
     The level of income derived from that employment was of  a  consistent
    level with previous years, found by the judge to indicate  that  whilst
    only a modest amount did indicate that she was exercising treaty rights
    following the principles outlined in the case law.  To some extent that
    may be reinforced by the Respondent having  granted  her  two  previous
    residence visas based on that level of income.

 9. Accordingly the judge inadvertently and understandably failed  to  note
    the employed income in the critical  period  having  focused  upon  the
    claimed self-employment during that period.  That led to him making  an
    error of law sufficiently material that had he noted that  income  from
    employment and given his findings upon the level of  income  being  not
    inconsistent with exercising treaty rights he was bound in  reality  to
    have allowed this appeal.

Notice of Decision

10. I find a material error of law was made by the First-tier Tribunal such
    that I set aside that decision and with the agreement  of  the  parties
    remake that decision and in so doing I allow the appeal for the reasons
    given.

11. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

